
                             1401 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z4; LETTERS

LENGTH: 769 words

HEADLINE: Recovering From Lyme Disease

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   It's hard to describe the emotions I felt upon seeing the Lyme disease story
[Cover, July 14]. It confirms my experience in coping with Lyme.

   My new husband and I bought our "dream house," moved in and found it was
infested with fleas and possibly ticks. I was literally eaten alive and became
seriously ill, manifesting what we now know are Lyme symptoms. It took me three
months to get diagnosed and five additional months before I received the proper
medication. My doctor at that time kept telling me that my illness was due to
depression, stress and even chronic fatigue syndrome. I was also repeatedly
told, "There is no Lyme disease in Virginia."

   But there are compassionate, humane physicians willing to take on the
challenge of this disease. Now, two years later, I am 32 years old and receive
disability benefits because of chronic Lyme complications such as arthritis in
all joints of my body, central nervous system damage, extreme fatigue with
accompanying shortness of breath, poor circulation, migraine headaches, chronic
conjunctivitis, persistent low-grade fever and night sweats.

   I have had two bouts of optic neuritis for which I was hospitalized and
treated with anti-inflammatory medication. I have had persistent and chronic
shoulder pain and have spent thousands of dollars for physical therapy and
rehabilitation. The shoulder is better but still not strong and flexible.
Chronic weakness and fatigue persist. Often, just going to the supermarket is a
big production. I am essentially home-bound.

   I had no idea that my battle for health would be so difficult, take so long
and be so costly, financially as well as emotionally. Barbara Cohn Washington

    Progress in the Global AIDS Effort

   Regarding the article on global AIDS [Health News, July 21], it should be
noted that at the World Health Assembly's meeting in May, government
representatives commended the World Health Organization for its Global Program
on AIDS.

   In the past, critics felt that local AIDS prevention projects were not set up
fast enough to meet the need in countries most affected by AIDS. In 1987, for
example, contributions to the global program totaled $ 33 million but spending
on projects was only $ 17 million. Since Dr. Michael Merson took over the
program in 1990, this has changed. In 1991, contributions totaled $ 87 million
-- and $ 87 million was spent on AIDS, with 70 percent spent locally.

   In October 1990, the Senate Subcommittee on Foreign Operations asked the U.S.
Agency for International Development and WHO "to submit a report . . . on their
progress in accelerating locally based [programs]." The concern about local
activities has been addressed to the apparent satisfaction of the subcommittee,
which increased appropriations for the Global AIDS Program from $ 21 million in
1991 to $ 25 million in 1992. While the General Accounting Office has never
investigated the WHO AIDS program, its recent report on AIDS activities of the
U.S. Agency for International Development also discussed programs handled by
WHO.

   In June, at the regular meeting of the global AIDS program's management
committee, an AIDS Coordination Forum was established to consult with developing
countries, intergovernmental organizations, donors and nongovernmental
organizations working on AIDS. The Forum's Secretariat will be administered by
WHO. The Forum does not in any sense replace WHO. Marjory Dam External Relations
and Information Officer World Health Organization Washington

    Gender-Based Coverage?

   An article about the upcoming departure from Washington of "one of its
high-powered two-career physician couples" [Health News, June 30] contained 13
paragraphs. The career move of the husband, W. French Anderson, is discussed in
the first half of paragraph one and in all of paragraphs six, 10 and 11.

   The remaining nine and a half paragraphs detail the career move of his wife,
Kathryn Anderson. Yet the article is titled "Gene Therapy Pioneer, Surgeon Wife
Leave D.C." Clearly, this article primarily concerns the female Dr. Anderson. A
more appropriate title would have noted the departure of this eminent surgeon
and then of her "gene pioneer husband." Margaret E. Estes Alexandria


   Letters intended for publication must be signed and include the writer's home
address and home and business telephone numbers. Letters may be edited. Although
we are unable to acknowledge all letters, we appreciate the time and value the
viewpoints of those who write. Send letters to Health Section, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071 (FAX: 202-334-4344).

GRAPHIC: PHOTO


                             1402 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 4, 1992, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 440 words

HEADLINE: Coming in next 40 years

BODY:

    Some advances expected in the next 40 years, from Dr. Jeffrey A. Fisher's
Rx2000: Breakthroughs in Health, Medicine, and Longevity by the Year 2000 and
Beyond.

    1994 ''Morning-after'' contraceptive pill prevents pregnancy if taken within
24 hours after intercourse.
1995 A breast ''Pap smear,'' called a ductogram, involves removing washings from
breast ducts to look for abnormal cells at a very early stage.
1997 Highly effective vaccine for Lyme disease approved, recommended for
everyone.

   - The end of dentures. New titanium implants and better computer design allow
for permanent replacement of teeth.

   - High-tech toilets perform urinalysis, measure blood pressure, weight and
fat percentage.
1998 Cataracts prevented by antioxidants. Leading cause of blindness worldwide
declines 75% with distribution of vitamins C, E, beta-carotene.
2001 Birth control pill for males. Regulates level of testosterone, and
therefore sperm production, without affecting libido.
2002 No more wrinkles. Artificial skin, previously used for burn patients, is
now indistinguishable from natural. Used for cosmetic purposes.

   - AIDS epidemic halted. Genetic therapy and ''genetic antibiotics'' decrease
incidence, increase cure 80%.
2005 Baldness treated with genetic therapy. The ultimate treatment, manipulates
gene that regulates baldness enzyme.
2009 At last! Colds can be prevented. Polyvalent vaccine (against most common
cold-causing viruses) prevents 80% of colds.

   - First human successfully cloned. Purpose is for repository of organs for
transplantation, but possible to use to indefinitely extend life.
2012 Artificial limbs perfected to look and function like our own. Combine with
artificial nerves to restore normality to trauma victims.
2014 Parents can now create designer children.  Genetic therapy manipulates
genes for abilities, intelligence in pre-embryos as part of in vitro
fertilization, or gene altering drugs can be given after birth.
2015 Safe substances introduced to enhance creativity, instill confidence,
selectively enhance or blunt all emotions.

   - Prevention for Alzheimer's disease. Drugs prevent expression of
predisposing genes. Combined with already available treatments, they'll wipe out
the condition.

   - Introduction of artificial placenta, combined with in vitro fertilization,
allows reproduction completely outside human body.
2020 Most conditions can now be diagnosed and treated at home with non- invasive
equipment that detects disease at cell level.
2030 Heart disease, cancer wiped out. Incidence, death rate down 99%. Maximum
human life-span increased to 150 years.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHICS; b/w, Marcia Staimer (Drawing; 6)


                             1403 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                August 3, 1992, MONDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 444 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Patient Is First to Get Gene Injection

BYLINE: Dwight E. M. Angell

BODY:


   Even just a few years ago, scientists thought they were years from using
human genes directly in an effort to treat disease.

   But the time has come, and in June a woman dying from skin cancer became the
world's first patient to have a gene injected to treat a deadly disease.

   The goal was to trigger her body's immune system to destroy the cancer, said
doctors at the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor.

   In animal studies, the gene has produced a protein in cancerous cells. The
immune system then decides those cells are foreign and tries to destroy them.

   "For the first time, we have treated a human disease by introducing genetic
material, DNA, directly into the patient," said Dr. Gary Nabel, the research
study's chief investigator.

   A dozen other human gene trials being done around the world involve removing,
modifying and reinjecting genes in some cells of the body. Those trials - for a
variety of diseases - show promise but are more complicated than direct
injection would be.

   The Michigan study eventually will involve 12 melanoma patients. Each must be
thought to have less than a year to live and have cancer that can't be treated
with surgery, radiation or chemotherapy.

   This phase of the study is not aimed at a cure but rather to monitor dosage
and side effects, Nabel said. If it proves safe, a larger trial would be done to
test its effectiveness.

   The 67-year-old woman was injected with genetic material June 10.

   Specifically, Nabel and his colleagues have tried to make the body reject the
tumor like it might a transplanted organ. They injected a gene that's part of
the body's immune system into the tumor. Absorbed by the cancer cells, the gene
will make a protein that will migrate to the cancer cell's surface, where the
patient's immune system will realize it's foreign and mount an attack.

   The immune system wouldn't attack only cells injected with the gene, Nabel
said. As in its attack on the modified cells, the immune system will learn their
surface chemistry and adjust its attack to kill any such cells.

   In the same week that the melanoma treatment began, the university also
started a second human gene therapy trial. The patient was a 29-year-old woman
from Quebec suffering from an extreme form of high cholesterol called familial
hypercholesterolemia.

   The inherited disease prevents the liver from removing so-called "bad"
cholesterol from the body. Heart attacks and strokes are common among teenagers
and even children with the condition.

   In the treatment, part of the woman's liver was removed. Three days later,
genetically altered liver cells were injected into her body.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION; See roll microfilm.; Gannett News Service

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1992


                             1404 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 28, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: J. Craig Venter

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2377 words

HEADLINE: Biologist's Speedy Gene Method Scares Peers But Gains Backer

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   DR. J. CRAIG VENTER is riding high. A group of venture capitalists has staked
him with $70 million for a laboratory that will identify thousands of human
genes a month and enable at least some of them to patented.

   But other researchers are aghast at the possibility that the human genome
could be locked up and owned by private investors, whether they are Dr. Venter's
backers or others. They say they fear a "land grab" for the human genome that
will greatly impede scientific progress and the free exchange of information.

    Adding to the acrimony is the nature of Dr. Venter's gene search. He plucks
fragments of new genes from the human gene set by a shortcut that allows him to
recognize the gene's existence but that usually does not identify its function.
Critics say that the hard work is working out the full structure of a gene and
determining what it does in the body.

   Dr. Venter says that it would be irresponsible not to apply for patents on
the genes. If he simply published his data, that could make the genes part of
the public domain and thus not eligible for patents. Such a move could diminish
the incentive for any company to develop the genes because they would have no
guarantee of exclusive use.

   Wallace Steinberg, chairman of the board of HealthCare Investment Corp.,
which is financing Dr. Venter, said he had suddenly realized that there was an
international race to lock up the human genome. If Americans do not participate,
he said, they will forfeit the race and lose the rights to valuable genes to
Britain, Japan and other countries that are in the race to win. He said the
National Institutes of Health could not afford to invest enough money in Dr.
Venter's enterprise to make it truly competitive.

   "I suddenly said to myself, 'My God -- if this thing doesn't get done in a
substantive way in the United States, that is the end of biotechnology in the
U.S.,' " Mr. Steinberg said.

   The stakes are high, but the issue remains unsettled. Ownership of a gene
that specifies a medically useful protein, like erythropoietin, used to treat
anemia, or tissue plasminogen activator, used to stop heart attacks, are worth
millions of dollars. But patent lawyers disagree about whether gene fragments
can be patented, and the United States Patent and Trademark Office has not yet
issued its opinion.

   In the meantime, Dr. Venter's former employer, the National Institutes of
Health, has applied for patents on nearly 3,000 genes he has found. The British
Government, saying it was retaliating, recently applied for patents on 1,100
genes detected by its scientists.

   Dr. James Watson, the leading biologist who headed the $3 billion Federal
effort to sequence the human genome, recently resigned that post over the issue,
saying he strongly disagreed with the Government's decision to attempt to patent
genes. Amid cries by academic scientists for an international agreement to
prohibit these patents, Dr. Venter's enterprise has raised the possibility of a
gene-finding factory whose interests will be in making money for its backers.

   Dr. Venter left the N.I.H. as of midnight of July 13, taking 30 investigators
-- virtually his entire staff -- with him and essentially taking the N.I.H. out
of the business of spewing out sequences of gene pieces. He will direct a new
venture, the Institute for Genomic Research, in a Germantown, Md., office park
just up Rockville Pike from his old laboratory at the N.I.H. The new institute
will provide all rights to any products it develops to a company, Human Genome
Sciences Inc. That company was formed by the HealthCare Investment Corporation,
a venture-capital firm.

Inspired on a Plane Ride

    Biotechnology companies and scientists are wary of the new venture. Stephen
Raines, who is vice president for intellectual property at Genentech, a
biotechnology concern in South San Francisco, said that the privatization of Dr.
Venter's gene search "will make the controversy more bitter." Mr. Raines
envisioned a sort of toll system for the human genome, with Dr. Venter the
principal toll taker. If patents are granted, he added, Genentech and others
will have to compete, frantically scrambling to patent their own portions of the
genome.

   George Annas, a lawyer and medical ethicist at Boston University, agreed. "We
will have everyone trying to patent the entire human genome," he said. "This is
not science. This is like the Gold Rush. That's why there are no scientists
saying this is a wonderful thing."

   Dr. David Housman, a molecular biologist at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, said: "It's pretty much a can of worms. I think it impacts every one
of us."

   At the center of the rain of criticism is Dr. Venter, a mild-mannered
45-year-old scientist who said he had innocently set the scene for large-scale
gene patenting. It began about two years ago when he developed a fast, cheap and
highly automated way to find pieces of human genes. He said it cost $40,000 to
$50,000 to use older methods to find the sequence of the string of chemicals
that make up a complete gene. But it costs just $20 with his method to find the
sequence of a gene fragment that is large enough to identify the gene, and he
has used the method to find pieces of nearly 10,000 genes. The full human gene
set is thought to consist of about 100,000 genes.

   The innovation came at a time when Dr. Venter, like hundreds of other
scientists, had been working on the Human Genome Project and had become
frustrated by the snail's pace at which he was able to decipher the human
genetic material. Only a fraction of the genome's DNA consists of genes.
Interspersed between and within the DNA sequences that specify genes are many
other DNA segments; some of them help control the activation of genes, but the
function of some of them has yet to be determined. These sequences seriously
interfered with attempts to isolate the genes themselves, Dr. Venter noted.

   An average gene consists of about 1,500 nucleotide base pairs, the chemical
units that make up DNA. Molecular biologists had to undertake a laborious and
circuitous search for genes amid the dauntingly long DNA sequences. From the
project's start in 1988 until now, about 3,000 complete human genes have been
found.

   Dr. Venter said his own two-year search for genes along a 100,000 base-pair
stretch of chromosome 19 had frustrated him with its tedium. "We found that even
when we had big sequences of human chromosomes, on the order of 100,000 base
pairs of DNA, the sequence was, for all practical purposes, uninterpretable," he
said.

   He would scrutinize the DNA sequence, trying to guess where the genes were.
Then he would look inside the cell for signs that he was right. That meant
looking for the genes' mirror images -- called messenger RNA, or mRNA -- that
cells make when the genes are being used.

   One day, on an airplane coming home from a meeting in Tokyo, Dr. Venter had
an inspiration. He suddenly realized that an obvious shortcut could take him
right to the genes themselves.

   The idea was to exploit the mRNA, an intermediary molecule that is made when
genes are being expressed. When a cell is about to use a gene, enzymes inside a
cell map the DNA sequence of the gene into mRNA, which is unstable. Each mRNA
picks up the blueprint of the gene from which it was derived. So by fishing
mRNA's out of cells and examining them, scientists could deduce the sequences of
genes.

   The only difficulty is that mRNA's are short-lived. But there is another
enzyme that can copy the mRNA's back into DNA, forming a stable molecule that
has the blueprint of the original gene. Using these DNA copies, known as cDNA's,
it should be possible to home in on the genes themselves and determine their
sequences, Dr. Venter reasoned.

   He said that others had also had this idea but had dismissed it as
impractical because, they said, some genes would have so few mRNA copies that
they would escape detection. Undeterred, Dr. Venter began going after mRNA's in
earnest, using them to make cDNA's, and determining their sequences. He
automated the work as much as possible, using robots and computers to do jobs
that are often done laboriously by hand in molecular-biology laboratories.

   As part of this effort, he relied on a DNA sequencing machine that can
automatically and almost instantaneously tick off the sequence of the first 300
to 500 nucleotides of a gene. That, depending on the gene, is a tenth to a third
of the total sequence, and it is enough to identify the entire gene. Dr. Venter
would then have his computers search all of the known genes, from yeast to
humans, looking for ones that resembled the fragments he had sequenced. He said
that about 20 to 30 percent of the genes were either identical to known human
genes or were similar enough to genes from other organisms that he could guess
at their functions in people.

   His method, which is heavily automated, was enabling him to find genes at the
rate of 2,000 a month at the time he left the N.I.H. He expects to find about
10,000 a month after he has scaled up his project at the Institute for Genomic
Research.

   After Dr. Venter had detected 350 human genes, he was set to publish his
work. But an N.I.H. lawyer, Reid Adler, intervened. He reasoned that if Dr.
Venter simply published the sequences, he might create a disincentive for
companies to use those genes to develop new drugs. A company might discover the
entire sequence and function of one of Dr. Venter's genes but have its patent
application denied on the grounds that the gene had already been identified by
Dr. Venter and was in the public domain.

   At Mr. Adler's urging, Dr. Venter agreed to apply for patents on the genes he
had identified. "I thought it was just irresponsible to just dump all this stuff
and make it so that the biotech industry and the pharmaceutical industry could
not get patent protection," Dr. Venter said. The patents, if granted, would
belong to the Federal Government.

N.I.H. Defends Patents

    The N.I.H. director, Dr. Bernadine Healy, said the patent application
"protects our options." If patents are granted, the N.I.H. could allow people to
license them at no cost or at nominal cost. Or the N.I.H. could withdraw its
patents or dedicate them to the public. "By filing, we lose absolutely nothing,"
Dr. Healy said. But if the institutes had not filed, a door would be closed. If
the sequences of gene segments were published, the Government would be unable to
go back and file to patent them.

   Richard D. Godown, a lawyer who is president of the Industrial Biotechnology
Association, a Washington organization representing 137 companies, said his
group supported Dr. Healy's action, at least as a temporary measure. For the
longer term, he said, he would like an international agreement saying that these
sequences cannot be patented.

   But the N.I.H.'s move to get patents has appalled some scientists, lawyers
and members of the biotechnology industry.

   Dr. David Botstein, chairman of the genetics department at Stanford
University, said that if the patents were granted, companies that own a library
of gene fragments would be able to play a perverse game of "gotcha," laying
claim to the hard work of scientists after they find out what the genes actually
do.

   But Dr. Healy said that Dr. Venter's discovery had unexpectedly changed the
nature of the rush to identify human genes and that her hand had been forced by
uncertainties in the patent laws. She said she would, of course, like to see Dr.
Venter remain in the Federal Government but that the National Institutes of
Health could not afford to match Mr. Steinberg's offer of $70 million.

   "I think it is a wonderful opportunity" for Dr. Venter, Dr. Healy said. She
added, "I think it is good that we will have companies doing sequencing, just
like Europe and Japan do."

   She said she was not unduly concerned about the prospects of patents. "People
in the private sector have always exercised intellectual-property rights," she
said.

   Mr. Steinberg said that the United States had to compete because it seems to
be in an international race. Without the increased resources that his company
could provide, Mr. Steinberg said, "it is my opinion that the majority of gene
fragments would be discovered outside the United States."

   Before founding HealthCare Ventures, Mr. Steinberg spent 21 years at Johnson
& Johnson, directing strategic planning, venture-capital activities and mergers.
Now, as chairman of the board of what he says is the nation's largest
venture-capital firm in the health-care field, Mr. Steinberg has been wooing the
nation's leading scientists and investing in some of the most promising recent
discoveries in molecular biology.

Other Investments

    He has more than $350 million in capital and has invested, for example, in a
company started by Dr. French Anderson of the National Institutes of Health to
bring gene therapies to market. He has also invested in rights to a gene, known
as P53, that is at the heart of a wide variety of human cancers. The gene, one
of the most important findings in cancer research, was discovered by Dr. Bert
Vogelstein of Johns Hopkins University.

   Mr. Steinberg said he intended to be socially responsible with his investment
in Dr. Venter's work. He said he would have all of the genetic information
uncovered by Dr. Venter published promptly and would collaborate freely with
other companies and with the N.I.H. He pointed out that other countries were
garnering gene fragments but had made no commitment to publish them.

   Like others in the biotechnology industry, Mr. Steinberg said that he would
be happiest if the Patent Office denied patents for gene fragments. But, Mr.
Steinberg argued, if his company took the high ground by not applying for
patents, other countries might successfully do so, irrevocably injuring the
American biotechnology industry.

   That, he said, is "my biggest fear as someone who owns biotechnology
companies." Mr. Steinberg said that "there is a tremendous effort in France,
England and Japan" to find gene fragments. "If this becomes a race and if gene
fragments become proprietary, then it is in the best interests of the U.S. and
entities of the U.S. to file for patents."

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. J. Craig Venter, in his laboratory in Bethesda, Md., heads
a $70 million program to identify human genes and patent some of them. (Marty
Katz for The New York Times) (pg. C1); Dr. Bernadine Healy of the National
Institutes of Health supports gene patent applications. (National Institutes of
Health); Dr. James Watson, who was head of the Human Genome Project, opposes
patenting. (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) (pg. C10)

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1992


                             1405 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 28, 1992 Tuesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1330 words

HEADLINE: Doctor defies illness' odds

BYLINE: SUSAN DUERKSEN, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Watching his older brother die under an oxygen tent at age 7, Eric Goodrich,
then 6, decided he'd prove the doctors wrong and avoid the same fate. Both
brothers were born with cystic fibrosis, a lethal genetic disease whose victims
rarely survived childhood. Now 36, Goodrich has not only shattered the doctors'
predictions by surviving, he's conquered their turf by becoming a doctor
himself.

   Next month he joins the family practice staff at UCSD Medical Center, where
he just completed a grueling three-year residency. Blond and trimly muscular, he
credits exercise, especially weight-lifting, with keeping him alive and healthy.

   That, he said, is a point of view neglected by established medical wisdom. "I
have a unique insight into disease that many doctors don't," Goodrich said.

   "When it comes to exercise and nutritional intervention, doctors are
clueless." In the past decade or so, many physicians have begun recommending
moderate exercise for cystic fibrosis patients, but Goodrich said it is
under-emphasized in favor of symptom-relieving treatment. Medical care for the
disease is improving rapidly.

   With the discovery three years ago of the responsible gene, experts say
something close to a cure may be possible in the next few years.

   But Goodrich said it won't do much good for older patients like himself whose
lungs already are heavily damaged. Prompted by a genetic defect in the way cells
handle fluid, cystic fibrosis causes the buildup of thick mucus that clogs the
lungs and pancreas, leading to infections and tissue damage. It is the most
common of fatal genetic diseases, striking one of about every 2,000 babies born
in the United States. Most now live through childhood, but not much longer.

   The average age of the 500 Americans who died of the disease last year was
20, according to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   When Eric Goodrich was born, the life expectancy was three years. Goodrich
said he's fought the limited expectations of those statistics all his life.
"Everything I've done, people have told me I couldn't do," he said, "whether
it's live to 18, lift weights, go to medical school, get married, have a
family." A crucial defiance He lives in a small house in Mission Beach with his
wife, Pam, and 3-year-old Scott, whom they adopted five months ago, as well as
Cricket the dog and Leo the cat. Pam, an oncology nurse who also plans to enter
medical school, said it's not easy being married to a man with a chronic, fatal
disease. "He always tries to reassure me that he's going to live a normal life
span," she said.

   "His attitude is better than mine.

   I've seen his pulmonary function decrease in the four years we've been
together." Shaking his head, Eric breaks in: "She doesn't realize that people
have been burying me for 35 years." Goodrich began stretching his medical
tethers early.

   Always a "more rambunctious, active, competitive" kid than his brother
Michael when they were growing up in Oakland, Eric now believes his refusal to
sit still may have saved his life. Rather than submit to the twice-daily,
45-minute chest poundings that were routine to loosen the sticky mucus of cystic
fibrosis, he convinced his parents to let him accomplish the same thing by
playing outside. Still, like most everyone with cystic fibrosis, he grew up
scrawny and weak, with a body shape he calls "a potato with toothpicks." He
weighed 115 pounds at age 21, when he took up weight-lifting, against doctors'
advice, in an effort to "change myself to look more normal." Not only did he put
on 60 pounds, he said, but pumping iron has helped clear his chronically
infected lungs and strengthened the chest muscles he needs for effective
coughing. "The thing that really changed my life was when I started lifting
weights," he said.

   "Doctors fail to appreciate how specific a tool it can be." Exercise and hope
Although exercise is increasingly accepted as beneficial for cystic fibrosis
patients, weight-lifting hasn't been specifically tested, said Dr. Ivan Harwood,
director of UCSD's cystic fibrosis center. Harwood said he prescribes moderate
exercise for all his patients, but many are too sick to comply. "Exercise is
particularly good for people with chronic lung infection because it gets you to
cough, clears the lungs," Harwood said.

   "The problem is getting somebody who doesn't feel well to exercise." Dr.
Robert Beall, medical director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, said many of
the 30,000 Americans with the disease can't do anything more strenuous than walk
around the house and should try exercise only under a doctor's guidance.
However, many others swim regularly, and a few even run marathons, he said,
although weight-lifting hasn't been popular. Beall said cystic fibrosis research
now is focused on developing several new treatments, including a mucus-thinning
aerosol spray being tested at UCSD and other centers.

   Goodrich, who has been participating in the experiment for four months, said
the spray eases his lung congestion. But the research attracting the most
excitement is a potential genetic therapy, also in spray form, that has been
tested in animals and could begin human testing next year, Beall said. The
aerosol uses a virus to carry a correct version of the defective CF gene into
cells of the airway.

   If used monthly for life, it could hold the disease at bay, Beall said.
"We're very optimistic about genetic therapy," he said.

   "I think we can change a disease that's always been fatal to a disease that's
not fatal." Taking a different bent But Goodrich said the research fervor,
although very promising for the future, should not eclipse "what can be done for
people here and now." No matter how successful the new treatments, he said, "my
lungs are not going to come back.

   I have the lung function of a 70-year-old." More research is needed, Goodrich
said, on the potential benefits of weight-lifting, which at least could boost
self-esteem and immune function. He acknowledged that working out is
particularly difficult with the shortness of breath and fatigue of cystic
fibrosis.

   All the more reason, he said, for more physician encouragement. "Most doctors
look at statistics and stereotype you, and they don't believe there's much room
to make an impact on diseases within the genetic limitations," he said.

   "I take a different bent than most doctors." Goodrich said his experience
with cystic fibrosis and diabetes, which he developed three years ago as a
consequence of CF's battering his pancreas, may make him a better doctor. "A lot
of doctors have never been sick in their life and don't know what that's like,"
he said.

   "They learn the science of medicine, but they don't really understand
disease.

   The whole relationship between the doctor and patient is very paternalistic,
and that's something I've always fought against." As a family practitioner doing
everything from pediatrics to emergency care, Goodrich said he tries not to
heavy-handedly impose treatments on his patients but to explain the options,
including whatever uncertainty may exist in medical knowledge. Someday, he hopes
to open a camp where people with cystic fibrosis would get medical treatment
along with exercise, weight training and nutrition instruction. For now, he's
recuperating from the stress of his medical training, which nearly broke his
lifelong determination to challenge all limits.

   After several near-collapses, he got a special release from the customary
36-hour shifts of medical residency and arranged to work less than full time
when he becomes a staff physician next month. "Everybody tried to talk me out of
going to medical school -- a lot of people thought it was a prescription for
suicide," he said.

   "I feel so lousy for so long when I'm working hard and not able to exercise,
and it seems impossible that I can come back. "I've come to appreciate that
genetics is pretty powerful.

   But the big thing doctors undersell is the ability of people with a bad
disease to work within those genetic limits and go beyond it."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Doctor and fighter: "Everything I've done, people have
told me I couldn't do," says Dr. Eric Goodrich.; PHOTOBY: Union-Tribune / ROBERT
GAUTHIER

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1406 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                 July 27, 1992, MONDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; MAYO CLINIC HEALTH LETTER; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Variety of Therapies Used Against Cancer

BODY:


   Cancer treatment is constantly evolving. Some of the following methods are
now accepted therapy, while others are under investigation and are experimental.
Doctors often combine the following approaches with chemotherapy and radiation:
Interferons and interleukins. Your body makes these proteins to fight
infections. By injecting an artificial version, doctors hope to trigger the
immune system against cancer.  Colony-stimulating factors. Chemotherapy may
impair your bone marrow, which makes white blood cells. You become more
vulnerable to infection.

   Colony-stimulating factors encourage production of white blood cells. This
lets you tolerate higher doses of chemotherapy, improving your chance for
remission or cure while decreasing the chance for infection.  T cells. T cells
recognize and attack cancer cells. Researchers hope to remove T cells from the
body, stimulate growth and return them in large numbers to fight cancer.  Tumor
necrosis factors. These proteins destroy tumor cells. Your body produces small
amounts naturally. Researchers are looking at ways to make larger amounts.
Monoclonal antibodies. Antibodies are natural proteins that attack "foreign"
substances, including cancer cells. Monoclonal antibodies made in a lab can
focus on specific types of cancer. By attaching themselves to tumor cells, they
may help deliver medications and radiation to fight cancer.  Lasers.
High-intensity light shows potential for treating cancers of the skin, trachea,
lungs, esophagus, stomach, colon, rectum and anus.  Gene therapy. Many tumors
grow because normal genes go awry, changing healthy cells into cancerous ones.
Another reason: Genes that help fight cancer are unable to work properly. With
gene therapy, doctors hope to replace defective genes and encourage growth of
healthy genes.  Hyperthermia. Since the early 1800s, doctors have known that
heat can harm some tumors. Researchers now are using hyperthermia to treat
cancer of the breasts, lymph nodes, skin, eyes and cervix. Still, the value of
hyperthermia is unproven.  Currently it's the basis of some forms of cancer
quackery.

   Reprinted with permission from the Mayo Clinic Health Letter.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1992


                             1407 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     July 25, 1992, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 568 words

HEADLINE: PIONEER GENE THERAPIST, NOTED SURGEON TO JOIN USC;
EDUCATION: DR. W. FRENCH ANDERSON WILL CONTINUE RESEARCH IN L.A. HIS WIFE WILL
ALSO HOLD CHILDRENS HOSPITAL POST.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   In a move that is widely perceived as a coup for USC, a pioneer in the
emerging field of human gene therapy and his wife, a highly regarded pediatric
surgeon, will join the school this fall.

   Dr. W. French Anderson, a molecular biologist who was the first U.S.
scientist to conduct approved gene therapy for the treatment of genetic
disorders, will move his research program to the university's Kenneth J. Norris
Jr. Comprehensive Cancer Center in September.

   Dr. Kathryn D. Anderson, a widely respected pediatric surgeon, will become
surgeon-in-chief and vice president for surgical administration at Childrens
Hospital of Los Angeles, as well as a professor of surgery at USC.

   "In addition to her surgical skills, Kathy Anderson is the type of person who
builds teams and provides visionary leadership," said Dr. Stephen Ryan, dean of
the USC School of Medicine. "We're very pleased to have her -- and as a bonus we
get French Anderson too."

   In September, 1990, French Anderson inaugurated the age of human gene therapy
by treating a 4-year-old girl, who had a rare inherited immune disorder, with
white blood cells that had been taken from her body and genetically altered to
produce a missing enzyme. The girl is now healthy enough to attend kindergarten
and be exposed to normal childhood diseases.

   Anderson's intimacy with the intricacies of the Washington bureaucracy, as
well as his scientific insights, have been widely credited with making human
gene therapy politically feasible. His ability to shepherd his own research
proposals through labyrinthine regulatory procedures helped clear the way for
experiments by other researchers.

   Most colleagues -- and Anderson himself -- had assumed that he would finish
his career at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., where he has
spent the last 27 years. "I'm loyal to NIH," he said. "My intention was always
to die at the bench in my 80s here on the seventh floor" of the NIH's Building
10.

   That situation changed when Children's National Medical Center in Washington,
where Kathryn Anderson has been vice-chairman of surgery for 10 years and acting
chairman for the last year, began searching for a new chairman. The search
committee nominated "three white males" for the post, French Anderson said, and
the center ultimately hired Dr. Marshall Schwartz of UC Davis.

   "Disappointed" by the committee's decision, he said, "I told her to find a
better job and I would go with her. . . . Kathy subordinated her career to mine
for 31 years. It's her turn."

   Coincidentally, Childrens Hospital in Los Angeles -- which is consistently
ranked as one of the top three pediatric hospitals in the country -- had been
searching for a new surgeon-in-chief for more than two years and "Kathy Anderson
was at the top of the list of candidates," Ryan said.

   French Anderson will continue overseeing his NIH treatment program on a
volunteer basis for the next year, he said, and will begin treating new patients
in Los Angeles. He also is working to develop new tools for gene therapy "so
that we can treat millions of people rather than hundreds."

   He said his research at USC will be funded through a "multi-year,
multimillion-dollar" grant from Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md. He
helped found the company, which is using patents he obtained at the NIH, but
because of government regulations he has no financial stake in it.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Dr. W. French Anderson


                             1408 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 19, 1992, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 16; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

HEADLINE: PEOPLE

BODY:

   * Somatix Therapy Corp. announced today the promotions of Mark N. K. Bagnall
to vice president and chief financial officer and Wanda deVlaminck to vice
president of regulatory affairs.

   Bagnall, 35, a certified public accountant, has been a member of the firm's
management team since 1988, most recently serving as treasurer. DeVlaminck
joined the company as senior director of regulatory affairs in 1989. Previous to
that she held similar positions with Cetus Corp., Shell Oil Co. and Cutter
Laboratories.

   The Alameda, Calif.-based firms is a leader in the emerging field of gene
therapy.


                             1409 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 19, 1992, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2022 words

HEADLINE: EXPERTS SEE HOPE, DESPAIR AT AIDS MEETING

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Global AIDS experts begin gathering in Amsterdam today for the opening of the
eighth International Conference on AIDS in a mood buoyed by the pace of
scientific advances, but tempered by the sobering reality that the pandemic is
still raging out of control in many regions of the world.

   In hundreds of papers and other presentations throughout the week, more than
9,000 scientists, clinicians and other experts from 125 countries are expected
to report steady progress in therapies, vaccine development and in understanding
the workings of the human immunodeficiency virus.

   But the news from the developing countries, where AIDS continues to spread
unabated, is expected to be exceedingly grim.

   "The global effort against HIV/AIDS has reached a dangerous impasse," said
Dr. Jonathan Mann of Harvard University's AIDS Institute and chairman of the
international meeting. "A realistic analysis reveals that the gap between the
expanding . . . epidemic and lagging national and international response is
increasing rapidly, leaving the world more vulnerable to the spread of HIV."

   Recently, Mann released a report from the Harvard-based Global AIDS Policy
Coalition that projected 110 million adults would be infected with HIV by the
turn of the century, a figure three times that predicted by the World Health
Organization. Mann is the former director of WHO's AIDS program.

   Now, as many as 2.6 million people worldwide are suffering from AIDS, and
nearly 13 million are infected.

   In the United States, as of June, there have been 230,179 AIDS cases since
the epidemic began in 1981, and 152,153 deaths. About 1 million Americans are
believed to be infected with HIV.

   "The pandemic is moving right along, but the efforts against it are
plateauing, and in some cases declining," Mann said in an interview. "While a
tremendous amount has been accomplished, somehow we have not been able to move
it to the next level -- the one that would reassure us we're bringing it under
control and care for people who need care."

   It is especially frustrating because "we know we have the capacity to control
AIDS (through prevention and education) and care for all affected," he added.

   Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, who heads the U.S. government's AIDS research effort,
agreed that the disease is spreading worldwide at a disturbing rate.

   "If you look at what's happening in Africa and what will happen in Asia, you
have reason to be very pessimistic," he said. "All the signs indicate that the
pandemic is not slowing down at all."

   On the scientific front, however, he and others said the news is much more
encouraging.

   "We're learning an incredible amount. . . . It's a very exciting and rapidly
evolving field," said Fauci, who is director of the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

   Since the first international AIDS meeting was held in Atlanta in 1985, the
annual conference has evolved as the most important global forum for the
exchange of knowledge about the deadly disease.

   Nevertheless, it has undergone some rocky times, particularly this past year
when its sponsor, Harvard University, was prompted to move the meeting from
Boston -- where it had been slated to take place -- to a country without
restrictive immigration rules against HIV-infected travelers.

   "I think the conference will be looking at the immigration issue, but not
just at the United States in isolation," said Dr. Mervyn F. Silverman, president
of the American Foundation for AIDS Research. "We are not standing alone as the
only black sheep in the bunch. But we should be more enlightened, based on what
we know (about AIDS transmission), and considering the history of civil rights
in our country."

   The policy, which forbids entry into the United States by HIV-infected
individuals, was imposed by Congress in 1987. Lawmakers amended the law, giving
the secretary of health and human services the authority to decide what medical
conditions should bar travelers and immigrants from coming into the country. The
Bush Administration was poised to remove AIDS from the list, but backed down
after heavy political pressure from conservatives.

   Unless the U.S. policy changes, it is unlikely that any international AIDS
meeting will be held in the United States. The conference is scheduled for
Berlin next year and Japan in 1994. After 1994, the meetings will take place
every other year.

   This year's meeting has already yielded some intriguing results. On Saturday,
in a pre-conference session sponsored by the American Medical Assn., UCLA
researchers released the first international comparison of physicians' attitudes
toward treating AIDS patients. The study found "significantly higher" levels of
reluctance among medical residents in the United States than in France or
Canada, two other countries with a considerable AIDS caseload. The study will
appear in the July 22 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Assn.

   Dr. Martin F. Shapiro, associate professor of medicine at the UCLA School of
Medicine and the lead author of the study, said cultural norms and public
perceptions of the epidemic "may profoundly affect physicians' responses to it."

   Furthermore, the study showed that Americans were far more likely to view
caring for AIDS patients as "dangerous." French physicians expressed the least
reluctance to care for homosexual men, intravenous drug users and other AIDS
patients, compared to Americans, who expressed the most.

   The study was conducted with researchers from the University of Michigan in
Ann Arbor, the Assn. for the Prevention of AIDS and the Regional Center for
Information and Prevention of AIDS, both in Paris.

   Researchers also reported Saturday that a contraceptive sponge containing the
common spermicide nonoxynol-9 proved ineffective in preventing the transmission
of HIV in women at high risk for AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.

   The spermicide, which has shown some evidence of inhibiting HIV infection in
the laboratory, showed no protective effect against HIV in a placebo-controlled
study of HIV-negative prostitutes conducted by researchers at the University of
Washington. Forty-five percent of the nonoxynol-9 group and 36% of the placebo
group became infected, the researchers said. This study will appear in the same
issue of JAMA.

   Researchers said that use of the sponge, with its high dose of spermicide,
was also associated with a more than threefold increase in genital irritation
and ulcers among the women -- conditions which may increase the danger of HIV
transmission.

   In an accompanying editorial, JAMA called for additional studies of vaginal
spermicides for reducing the chances of HIV transmission, but said that "in the
meantime, we should redouble our efforts to facilitate condom use among men and
women at risk."

   Other areas expected to receive attention at this week's meeting:

   * Vaccines. There are about 15 experimental HIV vaccines being tested in
humans, including preventive and therapeutic vaccines. Dr. Robert Redfield of
Walter Reed Army Hospital and Dr. Fred Valentine of New York University Medical
Center are expected to discuss the results of their studies.

   Also, Dr. Abdelizsiz Benjouad of the Institut Pasteur in Paris and Dr.
Run-Hou Lee of Harvard are scheduled to present research involving the
development of a vaccine that involves the removal of sugar from the HIV
molecule, a process that may be important in the quest to develop a vaccine.

   Dr. June Osborn, a virologist who chairs the National Commission on AIDS, is
scheduled to give a talk speculating on "what we would be able to do with a
vaccine if we had one -- and the answer is, 'not much,' " she said.

   "Many think about a vaccine as something that -- when it comes -- we can all
relax," she said. "The truth is, a vaccine will never be able to bring under
total control an epidemic of this nature."

   * Early stages of infection. Fauci plans to discuss the growing knowledge of
what happens to the virus during the earliest stages after infection, when it is
difficult to detect HIV in the blood. His research shows that considerable viral
replication occurs during that time, particularly in the body's lymph nodes.

   The work is likely to raise questions about whether treatment with antiviral
agents at this point could have an impact on the rate at which individuals
become sick. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases is
planning to begin a placebo-controlled study soon to determine whether AZT given
in an extremely early stage can slow viral replication and extend the time that
individuals remain free of symptoms. The greatest difficulty will be in
identifying people at that extremely early stage of infection.

   * AZT. There have been several conflicting studies in recent months over the
risks and benefits of using AZT and combination therapy to treat individuals who
are infected but do not show symptoms. Several presentations are scheduled to
clarify the issues.

   * Gene therapy. This is a new area of exploration, in which white blood cells
are genetically altered to increase their ability to combat HIV and interfere
with its replication.

   * New classes of drugs, such as protease and TAT inhibitors, which bind to
key proteins manufactured by the virus and, it is hoped, will interrupt the
process of viral replication.

   * Funding. AIDS activists and people with HIV are expected to be highly
visible during the meeting, and are scheduled to release a report analyzing AIDS
spending at the National Institutes of Health. It was prepared by Mark
Harrington and Greg Gonsalves, members of the Treatment Action Group.

   * The definition of AIDS, and whether a single standard should be adopted
worldwide. This is an issue that is being debated in the United States; it is
considered extremely important because in industrialized nations it is often the
basis for determining health benefits and care, particularly for women with HIV.
Conversely, some evidence is expected to be presented that, outside the United
States and Europe, those defined as having AIDS receive less care.

   * Women and HIV. Conference organizers have scheduled about 20 sessions to
discuss various aspects of AIDS and women, feeling that the topic has been
neglected. Several studies are expected to show that effective preventive and
educational programs for women must deal with issues of power, particularly
those involving non-consenting sex.

Doctors' Survey

    In the first international comparison of physicians' attitudes toward
treating AIDS patients, UCLA researchers found "significantly higher" levels of
reluctance among medical residents in the United States than in either France or
Canada.

    The survey was conducted among internal medicine and family practice
residents in three regions of France, all 10 Canadian provinces, and 10 American
states, including the three (California, New York and New Jersey) with the
nation's highest rates of AIDS.
 QUESTION: Percentage strongly agreeing it is unethical to refuse to provide
care:
                                         U.S.  CANADA  FRANCE
Because patient might have AIDS            56%     87%     64%
Because of patient's sexual orientation    69%     78%     88%

QUESTION: Percentage who, if given a choice, would not take care of:
                                  U.S.  CANADA  FRANCE
Patients with AIDS                  23%     14%      4%
Homosexual patients with AIDS       23%     16%      5%
Intravenous drug users with AIDS    42%     26%      7%
Homosexual men                      11%      6%      2%
Intravenous drug users              41%     22%      9%

QUESTION: Percentage who believe caring for AIDS patients is dangerous:
U.S.  CANADA  FRANCE
  37%     21%     24%

QUESTION: Percentage who had an HIV-infected patient previously refused care by
a surgeon:
U.S.  CANADA  FRANCE
  39%     13%      8%

QUESTION: Percentage believing that their training in AIDS ambulatory care was
deficient:
U.S.  CANADA  FRANCE
  58%     76%     62%

QUESTION: Percentage who feel clinically competent to provide usual/primary care
for AIDS patients:
U.S.  CANADA  FRANCE
  68%     40%     34%

SOURCE: UCLA

GRAPHIC: Table, Doctors' Survey


                             1410 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 July 19, 1992, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: AIDS STRAIN MAY BE UNDETECTABLE 11 PATIENTS DEVELOPED DISEASE WITHOUT
TESTING; POSITIVE FOR VIRUS

BODY:


   NEW YORK - At least 11 cases of people who developed AIDS without testing
positive for the virus may indicate that an undetectable strain has emerged,
Newsweek reports.  Six of the HIV-negative patients are American, and their
cases are under study by the national Centers for Disease Control, the magazine
said in its July 27 issue. It didn't specify where the other patients came from.
Newsweek cited a recently published abstract by CDC epidemiologist Thomas Spira
for its information on the American patients. The magazine didn't say where the
abstract was published.  Newsweek reported that three of the six Americans
received blood transfusions - two of them after blood banks started screening
for HIV.  Of the remaining three, one has used intravenous drugs and one is a
health-care worker.  All six of the American patients have full cases of AIDS,
but none of them test positive for either HIV-1 or HIV-2, the two viruses known
to cause AIDS, the magazine said.  ''We don't have indications that this is a
widespread problem,'' said Dr.  Harold Jaffe, acting director of HIV-AIDS at the
CDC. ''But we're taking the evidence seriously. . . . If a new agent were
identified, developing a blood test would be critical.'' The report on the
possible new strain came as global AIDS experts gathered in Amsterdam on Sunday
for the opening of the eighth International Conference on AIDS.  Areas expected
to receive attention include: Early stages of infection. Dr. Anthony S. Fauci
plans to discuss the growing knowledge of what happens to the virus during the
earliest stages after infection, when HIV is difficult to detect. His research
shows that considerable viral replication occurs during that time.  The work is
likely to raise interesting questions about whether treatment with antiviral
agents at this point could have an impact on the rate at which individuals
become sick.  AZT. There have been several conflicting studies in recent months
over the risks and benefits of using AZT and combination therapy to treat
individuals who are infected but do not show symptoms.  Gene therapy. This is a
new area of exploration, in which white blood cells are genetically altered to
increase their ability to combat HIV and interfere with its replication.  New
classes of drugs, such as protease and TAT inhibitors, which bind to key
proteins manufactured by the virus and, researchers hope, will interrupt the
process of viral replication.  Several reports on AIDS were made public
Saturday. Among the findings: The AIDS virus is spreading faster than scientists
worldwide can control it, and the poor are becoming the main victims, even in
rich countries such as the United States.  A widely available medical
preparation - immunoglobulin - may help children with the AIDS virus resist
infection, said Dr. Lynne Mofenson of the U.S.  National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1993


                             1411 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     JULY 18, 1992, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1020 words

HEADLINE: World Scientists Gather For AIDS Conference

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

DATELINE: Amsterdam

BODY:

    Nearly 10,000 scientists and health workers from 133 nations began arriving
here yesterday amid profound concerns that the global AIDS epidemic is escaping
every effort to contain it and that even now, its ultimate effect cannot be
predicted.

   In vivid contrast to seven previous global AIDS meetings, however --
including the tumultuous one in San Francisco two years ago -- this Eighth
International Conference on AIDS, which begins tomorrow and continues through
Friday, is remarkable on at least three counts:

   First, although the numbers are not yet in, delegates are coming from more
countries in the developing world than ever before.  Although many of them have
been reluctant to admit that AIDS is striking their people brutally, they now
offer hard data on their efforts to combat the disease and on innovative efforts
to prevent it in Africa, Asia and Latin America.

   Second, the conference will reveal in unprecedented detail how swiftly the
epidemic is striking women of childbearing age in many parts of the world
through heterosexual intercourse -- a phenomenon that even threatens to reverse
population growth in some badly hit nations.

   Third and more hopefully -- at least for the West -- this conference has seen
an extraordinary level of participation by the highly sophisticated activists of
the ''AIDS community,'' whose leaders have helped plan the sessions and brought
their own sense of militant urgency into every aspect of the program.

   The meeting was originally scheduled to be held in Boston under the
co-sponsorship of Harvard University's AIDS Institute and the International AIDS
Society.

   MOVE TO HOLLAND

   The refusal of the U.S. government to abandon its rigid exclusion rules
discriminating against AIDS-infected participants led the conference leaders to
move the sessions to Holland, where more liberal medical policies prevail --
policies supported even by President Bush's own highest medical experts.

   In an interview, Dr. June Osborne, the pediatrician and epidemiologist who is
the outspoken chairman of the president's U.S.  AIDS Commission, said:

   ''At this meeting, we'll become more and more aware of the continued if
painful unfolding of the disaster worldwide, and the experiences of other
countries will give us an awareness of its dynamics in women and children.

   ''For a long time, our earlier studies in the United States focused largely
on white males, but now the accelerating reports of AIDS spreading through
entire populations should give us a better understanding of the problems that
face us in the United States.''

   SCIENTIFIC REPORTS

   Dr. Jonathan Mann of Harvard, the former U.N. AIDS chief and principal
organizer of this year's Amsterdam meeting, holds out hope that the meeting will
produce significant reports of medical and scientific progress.

   Already, his staff has noted, 15 vaccines against the AIDS virus are in
clinical trials -- some designed to prevent the virus from infecting cells of
the human immune system, others designed to limit viral reproduction in patients
who are already infected but whose faltering immune systems may be goaded into
recovery.

   Progress is also raising hopes among scientists for new gene therapy
techniques developed by a Harvard team led by Dr. Max Essex that might throw the
reproductive ability of the AIDS virus into disarray. And in another attempt to
kill the virus, French researchers will be reporting on their development of
toxic molecules that may selectively kill HIV- infected cells.

   ECONOMIC COSTS

   Aside from the science and the focus on the human toll of AIDS, the epidemic
has its crushing economic costs as well. African and Asian delegates will report
on the inability of their already strained economies to provide care for the
sick, or even to sterilize needles for their immunization campaigns among
children.

   As Dr. Mathilde Krim of the American Foundation for AIDS Research said, in
the United States alone, AIDS cost $ 3.5 billion last year just in medical care
-- ''but $ 55 billion in potential productivity.''

   The AIDS conference opens officially tomorrow with major reports from
international delegates. Throughout the week, scores of ''satellite meetings''
will gather specialized researchers to exchange late results. An array of
''mini-courses'' will offer vital information for new AIDS workers --
particularly those from the developing nations that the epidemic is striking
most viciously.

   INTERNATIONAL AIDS CONFERENCE

   About 10,000 delegates will attend the five-day Eighth International
Conference on AIDS (a), which opens in Amsterdam tomorrow.

   .

   MAIN ISSUES ON THE AGENDA

   The Pandemic

   Diseases, HIV (b) transmission, factors like nutrition and lifestyle in AIDS,
definition of AIDS, long term survivors.

   Prevention

   Barriers to condom acceptance, educating young people, needle-exchange
programs for drug abusers.

   Therapy

   Priorities, AIDS and cancer, alternative medicine

   Social Issues

   Developing countries, international mobility, discrimination, living with
HIV/AIDS, AIDS acitivism

   CHART:

 ADULTS INFECTED WITH HIV
 1995    17.5 million (projected)
 1992    11.8 million
 .
 WORLDWIDE HIV CASES,
 (in thousands)
 Latin America            1,407
 North America            1,495
 Caribbean                  474
 Western Europe           1,186
 Eastern Europe              44
 Southeast Mediterranean     59
 Sub Saharan Africa      11,449
 Southeast Asia           1,220
 Northeastern Asia           80
 Australia/Oceania           40
 EC:
 World Health Organization Statistics
 *  1 million deaths worldwide have been caused by AIDS so far.
 *  Up to 12 million people are currently carrying the virus.
 *  More than three people are infected with HIV every minute.
 .
 (a) Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
 (b) Human immunodeficiency virus
 Sources: World Health Organization, Harvard University
 REUTERS/ASSOCIATED PRESS/CHRONICLE GRAPHI

GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE END,REUTERS, ASSOCIATED PRESS, CHRONICLE GRAPHIC


                             1412 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 18, 1992 Saturday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1345 words

HEADLINE: Special Sisters;
The sharing, caring `friends' are fighting to breathe easy

BYLINE: LEONARD NOVARRO, LEONARD NOVARRO is a San Diego-based free-lance writer.

BODY:

   Alexis and Sharlee Ross of Encinitas are sisters who share a disease and the
knowledge that death can be a breath away. Sharlee, 13, and Alexis, 11, were
born with cystic fibrosis, a genetic lung disease that is always fatal. The
disorder causes a thick, sticky mucus to clog the lungs, creating breathing
difficulties, infections, extensive damage and scarring and, eventually,
suffocation. Alexis, or Lexi as she is known to family and friends, is in need
of a double-lung transplant.

   If a donor is found, she will be the youngest CF patient in Southern
California to undergo such surgery. In September, she and her mother, Collette,
39, will be outfitted with beepers, and the waiting begins. In 1989, researchers
isolated the defective gene that causes cystic fibrosis and in 1990 were able to
correct defective CF cells grown in the laboratory by adding normal genes.

   According to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, a form of gene therapy to
reverse the devastation of the disease could be as close as two years away.
While Sharlee may be helped by such therapy, Lexi's lungs are too scarred from
years of stress to benefit from it. "Lexi knows she is dying," said her mother.

   "She has said, `I'm not afraid to live with my heavenly father, but I'm going
to miss you so much.' " Lexi's decline began in November, when it became
increasingly difficult for her to walk the one block to her school-bus stop in
Encinitas. By January, she was taking a portable oxygen tank to her sixth-grade
class at Mission Estancia Elementary School.

   Then, in mid-June, the coughing increased and streaks of blood showed up in
her mucus. "Her fingernails were blue, her skin was gray.

   I knew I had to get her back to the hospital," said her mother. Medication,
round-the-clock oxygen and intensive therapy afforded Lexi a reprieve.

   She was allowed to leave Kaiser Permanente Medical Center on Zion Avenue in
San Diego for a few hours on June 30 to attend her sixth-grade graduation.

   The next day she was released from the hospital. Small support system
Earlier, she and Sharlee reflected on their suffering. "We can open up to each
other because we know what each other is going through," said Lexi. "Sometimes I
watch my friends.

   I just . . . ," she pauses.

   "I don't think it's fair.

   But I'm happy for them they don't have the disease." Often, they are told by
classmates that they are fortunate not to have to take physical training at
school. "They'll say, `You're lucky.

   You don't have to run,'" said Sharlee.

   "But I want to run." Added Lexi: "I sit on the curb while they're playing or
running and I watch.

   I just watch.

   It would be a dream for me to play like that." Both believe they were meant
to be together, meant to be sisters.

   "We were sent here for a reason.

   Everything was meant to happen for a reason," Sharlee said. No one believes
that more than their mother.

   "To know these two kids is the greatest privilege I will ever have," said
Collette Ross, who has three older children. "They taught me unity.

   They made me see the empathy my other children have for people with special
needs.

   I have seen the effect they have had on people's lives, and they have taught
me how an extended family can be drawn together through a common need." Students
at Lexi's school have set up a trust fund at San Diego Trust & Savings in
Encinitas to help pay ever-mounting medical expenses and the cost of the
double-lung transplant, and the community has begun responding to their
letter-writing campaign to raise funds. Because Lexi's a child, her donor will
have to be equally small. "There is hope," said Ross.

   "But, honestly, it's a pretty slim hope." While the life expectancy of some
CF patients is as high as 30 years, "a lot of these patients are never going to
see 20 or less," said Dr. Ivan Harwood, one of Lexi's doctors and the director
of the Cystic Fibrosis Center in San Diego. It is estimated that 50 percent of
all transplant candidates die waiting. In addition, because the lung is such a
fragile organ, "there are 10 hearts for every lung available," said Harwood.

   "If someone has a bad accident or is brain dead, the lungs are the first
organs to become unusable." "There's a small window of opportunity," said Ross,
"but she has to be strong enough to live through it."

   As she sees it, for both sisters to have survived thus far is in itself a
miracle. A persistent cough To all appearances, Sharlee was born normal.

   But sometime during her first year she developed a persistent cough.

   Ross thought she was doing the right thing by administering cough syrup, but
the hacking grew worse and mucus kept building up. Finally, seven months
pregnant with Lexi, she took Sharlee to a family doctor who administered a
somewhat unusual test.

   He put one of the child's feet in his mouth. And wrote down the letters "CF."
"Children with CF have a salty taste to them," said Ross.

   "I went home and looked up `cystic fibrosis.' It was sobering." When the
results of a sweat chloride test to diagnose the disease came back positive, "I
became unglued," she said.

   "For the next two months I prayed nothing was wrong with the other child."
Three days after Lexi was born, she, too, tested positive. Then, a year and a
half later, Collette Ross' marriage broke up. The years that followed were
"absolutely horrible," she related.

   "I stayed home.

   I kept telling myself: `How could this happen to me?

   What did I do to deserve this?' But something else was telling me I was meant
to have these two daughters." Two of many victims Approximately 30,000 infants,
children and young adults nationwide have cystic fibrosis, the most common of
all lethal newborn genetic disorders. According to the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation, the disease causes more childhood deaths than multiple sclerosis,
muscular dystrophy and diabetes combined. One in 20 adults carries the defective
gene but, until recently, there was no blood test to determine its presence.

   The test is still being improved. A newborn doesn't inherit the symptoms
unless both parents pass on the gene, and a child's suffering may vary from
being barely able to breathe to leading an almost-normal life except for bouts
of body-racking coughs.

   The mucus also interferes with digestion by preventing enzymes from flowing
to the small intestine from the pancreas. "I would say, `C'mon, we're going to
clap now,'" said Ross, explaining how she typically dealt with a severe attack.

   "Then, I would turn them over on my lap and hit them on the lungs to dislodge
the mucus.

   Of course, they would cry.

   And I would tell them: `I'm hurting you because I love you.'" While Sharlee's
future is a question mark, her body has been fighting back. In fact, her lungs
have expanded.

   Because she hasn't sustained nearly the damage to her lungs that her younger
sister has, if she can survive the next two or three years, she will be a
candidate for gene therapy. "I think I'll make it," she said.

   "I don't think it (death) will happen.

   I know it won't." United in life When at home, the sisters sleep together,
often holding hands through the night.

   They keep journals and write to each other, sharing their joys and
disappointments. On April 26, 1989, Sharlee made this entry: "I have a wonderful
dream, that I someday will be cured from this awful disease I have and also my
best friend too, that's my sister Lexi. "My sister is the only one who knows how
I feel at times.

   She makes me feel a lot better.

   I know she is my little sister but to me she can sometimes be the most
kindest, caringest, understandingest big sister there ever was!" Sharlee has
often experienced guilt because her younger sister is sicker than she is. At
times they would be walking up the stairs to the bedroom together but Lexi would
stop because breathing became so difficult.

   Lexi would turn to her mother, pleading for help, but Sharlee wouldn't allow
it. Instead, Sharlee would scold her by saying, "No, Lexi, you have to keep
trying.

   You can't give up." "Sharlee is frustrated," said Ross.

   "She realizes Lexi is slipping.

   She says to herself, `I can't lose my sister, my friend.' "If Lexi dies, she
knows she will."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1,2. Family fight: Collette Ross helps daughters
Alexis, in background with inhaler, and Sharlee cope with cystic fibrosis.;
PHOTOBY: 1,2. Union-Tribune / GERALD McCLARD

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1413 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 10, 1992, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 4; Column 4; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE HUMAN IMMUNOTHERAPY:  CELL TRANSPLANTS PREVENT INFECTION IN
TEST

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   In a study that may have implications in AIDS treatment, Washington
researchers have found that transplanted immune cells can provide protection
against an often-deadly viral infection in patients whose immune systems cannot
protect them.

   Preliminary results with the technique show that it can protect bone-marrow
transplant patients against infections by cytomegalovirus, which can cause
lethal pneumonia.

   Additional trials will begin this summer to test the technique on AIDS
patients with lymphoma, said Dr. Stanley Riddell, an immunologist at the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.

   Riddell and his colleagues report today in the journal Science that they have
perfected techniques to isolate specialized white blood cells from donors, grow
large numbers in the laboratory and safely inject them into patients.

   In the AIDS-lymphoma patients, who will also receive bone marrow transplants,
they hope that the white blood cells will prevent the AIDS virus from infecting
the transplanted marrow cells.

   Their work is "clearly one of the very important advances in the field of
human immunotherapy over the last 30 years," said Dr. Drew Pardoll, an
immunologist at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. He said the
work holds the potential of protection not only against a broad variety of viral
infections, but also against cancer.

   "It's a very new and different approach in the human arena," Pardoll added.
"The more approaches that you have, the better the chance that a combination of
approaches will yield results that are clinically significant."

   The approach adopted by Riddell, Dr. Phillip D. Greenberg, an immunologist at
the University of Washington, and their colleagues, has been studied for 10
years in mice and shown to be very effective.

   In the animal studies, the researchers isolated from healthy animals white
blood cells -- called killer T cells or CD8 cells -- that were targeted against
cytomegalovirus (CMV) and other viruses. When these cells were propagated in the
laboratory and infused into animals with a defective immune system, the cells
protected the animals when they were exposed to the viruses.

   But the problem was that human CD8 cells directed against a specific virus
are hard to grow in the laboratory. Moreover, they have a strong tendency to
lose their ability to recognize the target virus or be inactive when they are
injected into animals.

   But Hutchinson molecular biologist Kathe S. Watanabe developed techniques for
growing the cells that overcame both problems.

   The Washington group has treated five patients who received bone marrow
transplants as a treatment for leukemia. Typically, about half of such patients
become infected with CMV, which can cause a variety of complications.

   For each patient, the team extracted CD8 cells from a compatible donor and
grew large quantities in the laboratory over a period of six to 12 weeks. The
patients received large doses of the cells in each of the first four weeks after
their transplants.

   Blood tests then showed that the patients had a strong immune response
against CMV that persisted for weeks after the infusion -- long enough to allow
the implanted bone marrow to begin functioning as an effective immune system.
None of the patients developed CMV infections.

   The team plans to treat several more patients to determine if the technique
provides protection against infection. Riddell cautioned that the technique is
too complicated to be widely used.

   Meanwhile, they are growing anti-HIV CD8 cells to treat an AIDS patient who
will undergo a bone marrow transplant as therapy for lymphoma. Typically, the
HIV infection spreads after such a transplant because the immune system is
impaired. The Washington team hopes that the CD8 cells will keep the virus in
check until the bone marrow begins functioning.


                             1414 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 8, 1992, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 61

LENGTH: 889 words

HEADLINE: Orphan drug status granted Genzyme cystic fibrosis plan

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp. received orphan drug designation yesterday for its proposed
gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, its second for a treatment of the deadly
disease.

   The company said that if both treatments prove as successful as it
anticipates, annual sales could reach $ 300 million to $ 600 million.

   "We're still a long way off, but we are the only ones treating the underlying
disease, not the symptoms," said Alison Taunton-Rigby, senior vice president of
biotherapeutics at the Cambridge company.

   Genzyme officials said that the proposed cystic fibrosis drugs, which would
be inhaled by patients at least once a month for the rest of their lives, could
be one of the company's biggest revenue producers.

   The estimated 30,000 cystic fibrosis patients in the United States currently
pay $ 10,000 to $ 20,000 a year for medical treatment; there are another 30,000
patients in Europe. Genzyme officials estimate that their proposed drugs would
cost about $ 10,000 per patient.

   Genzyme's stock gained 3/8 to 50 1/2 in NASDAQ trading despite a decline in
many drug stocks.

   The biotechnology company is no stranger to orphan drug designation, which is
the Food and Drug Administration's way of providing incentives to manufacturers
to develop and market drugs for rare diseases and conditions affecting fewer
than 200,000 persons.

   With yesterday's approval, Genzyme has six orphan drug designations,
including two for Ceredase, the company's drug to treat Gaucher's disease, a
rare disorder that enlarges the spleen in about 6,000 people worldwide.

   Ceredase sales have made Genzyme one of the nation's largest and most
profitable biotechnology companies. This year Ceredase sales are expected to
reach $ 95 million and climb to as much as $ 130 million next year, according to
Genzyme officials. Ceredase accounts for nearly one-half of the company's
product revenue.

   Genzyme has been working since 1989 on a protein replacement therapy for
cystic fibrosis, a fatal genetic disease caused by mucous-filled lungs, which
makes it difficult to breathe. The disesase is caused by a mutation in a gene
responsible for determining the molecular structure of a membrane protein that
lines the airways leading to the lungs. That missing protein - the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator protein, or CFTR - causes a water
imbalance in the cells and the formation of a thick mucous that cannot be purged
from the lungs.

   Genzyme claims to have found a replacement for this missing protein that
would be taken by the patient. It is the same kind of treatment used to treat
other genetic diseases, including Gaucher's disease, dwarfism and emphysema.

   In addition, the company is developing a gene therapy that would transfer the
gene for CFTR into cells from a cystic fibrosis patient in the laboratory. Then
the improved cells would be put back into the patient. Genzyme received an
orphan drug designation yesterday for the gene therapy treatment, after it
secured one for cystic fibrosis protein replacement.

   Still, for all the promise, Genzyme's cystic fibrosis drugs are still years
away. Taunton-Rigby said the company is still in the research phase and will not
start clinical trials for at least another year, with potential FDA approvals
not until 1995 or 1997.

   "Both the gene therapy and the protein replacement should correct the
underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis," she said.

   To fund the research and clinical testing the company has formed two separate
research and development companies, which have raised nearly $ 85 million in
public stock offerings. If the research is successful, Genzyme will buy back the
stock in the second development company, called Neozyme II Corp.

   Ultimately, the cost of developing both cystic fibrosis treatments will cost
between $ 100 million and $ 200 million - much more than the $ 70 million cost
of developing Ceredase, which also includes some of the costs of a new
manufacturing plant now under construction in Allston, company officials said.

   Genzyme is not alone in developing drugs to treat cystic fibrosis under the
Orphan Drug Act. Three other companies are also developing therapies - Glaxo
Pharmaceuticals, Genentech Corp. and Synergen Inc. - according to the
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, a Washington-based trade group.

   Genzyme officials acknowledge the competition but claim they are treating
symptoms, not the disease's genetic foundation.

   "No one is doing what we are doing and we have the strongest patent
position," said Taunton-Rigby.

 Genzyme's orphans

    Genzyme Corp. drugs on the market or under development that have received
"orphan drug" status.
ILLNESS DRUG FDA EST.  EST. US

    APPROVED STATUS PATIENT POP. ANNUAL SALES
Gaucher's disease Ceredase available 3,000 1992: $ 95 mil.

    Recombinant Phase III 1993: $ 130 mil.
Severe burns Vianain Phase I 80,000 $ 100 million*

    enzyme
Thyroid Thyrogen Phase III 11,000 $ 75 million* cancer hormone
Cystic CFTR- Research 30,000 $ 300 million* Fibrosis protein

    replacement
 CFTR Research

    gene therapy SOURCE: Genzyme Corp.  Globe staff chart / Neil C. Pinchin

GRAPHIC: PHOTO CHART, ALISON TAUNTON-RIGBY "Still a long way off"

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1992


                             1415 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1992 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                             July 8, 1992 Wednesday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: FDA gives Genzyme green light;
Genzyme given marketing rights

BYLINE: DAVID CALLAWAY

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. yesterday announced it received a key government designation
for a cystic fibrosis treatment that could expedite the drug's debut.

   The Cambridge biotechnolgy firm said the Food and Drug Administration gave
Orphan Drug designation to its Cystic Fibrosis Gene Therapy, designed to treat
more than 30,000 Americans who suffer from the deadly human genetic disorder.

   The designation gives Genzyme exclusive marketing rights to the product for
seven years after it hits the market. But more importantly, it requires the FDA
to give ex-

   tra attention to speed the treatment through the clinical trial process.

   "The most important thing right now is the help that we'll get in product
development," said Alison Taunton-Rigby, senior vice president of
biotherapeutics at Genzyme. "They have to put it to the top of their priority
list."

   News of the orphan drug designation caused investors to push Genzyme's stock
up 50 cents per share yesterday to $50.25 on the over-the-counter market.

   This is the second time Genzyme has received orphan drug designation for a
cystic fibrosis treatment. The first treatment seeks to replace a protein whose
absence leads to cystic fibrosis, while the latest treatment seeks to insert a
"correct" gene that will manufacture the protein.

   Both treatments must go through lengthy clinical trials before Genzyme
applies for marketing approval.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1416 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 July 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 203 words

HEADLINE: Executive Changes

BODY:


    APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNATIONAL INC., East Millstone, N.J., appointed John
H. Timoney senior vice president and Robert F. Amundsen chief financial officer.


 EL PASO NATURAL GAS CO., El Paso, appointed John W. Somerhalder 2d senior vice
president of operations and engineering.

 FLEET BANK OF MASSACHUSETTS, Boston, named Walter E. Mercer executive vice
president of its commercial real estate division.

 INTERNATIONAL SPECIALTY PRODUCTS INC., Wayne, N.J., a unit of GAF Corp. and a
multinational maker of specialty chemical products, named Alan Z. Senter
executive vice president and chief financial officer.

 MAIL BOXES ETC., San Diego, a unit of Mail Boxes Etc. U.S.A. Inc., named Gary
S. Grahn vice president of finance and administration and chief financial
officer.

 MATTEL INC., El Segundo, Calif., named Louis Gioia Jr. senior vice president of
marketing for boys' toys.

 SOMATIX THERAPY CORP., Alameda, Calif., a biotechnology company specializing in
gene therapy, named Mark N. K. Bagnall vice president and chief financial
officer.

 VISA U.S.A., San Francisco, the credit card company, appointed Richard H.
Hagadorn senior vice president of credit products.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1992


                             1417 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 7, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
Executive Changes

BODY:


   CELINE U.S.A., New York, a unit of Celine Inc., an apparel and accessories
retailer, appointed James Schneider executive vice president.

BIODYNAMICS INTERNATIONAL INC., Tampa, Fla., a medical products supplier, named
Thomas A. Martin vice president of finance and chief financial officer.


   DANEK GROUP INC., Memphis, a maker of surgical implants, named Laurence Y.
Fairey executive vice president.

NATIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR CORP., Santa Clara, Calif., named John J. McElroy vice
president of strategic market development for its Communications and Computing
Group.

NATIONAL TRANSACTION NETWORK INC., Hudson, Mass., appointed Jeffrey B. Finestone
president and chief executive officer.

RIGHT MANAGEMENT CONSULTANTS INC., Philadelphia, appointed Richard J. Pinola
president and chief executive officer.

SOMATIX THERAPY CORP., Alameda, Calif., a gene therapy concern, named Edward
Lanphier to the new post of executive vice president of commercial development.

TOSHIBA AMERICA INC., New York, a unit of the Toshiba Corporation, named Taizo
Nishimuro to the new post of vice chairman. It also named him chairman of
Toshiba America Entertainment Inc.

VALIANT I.M.C.  Piscataway, N.J., a unit of Weldotron Corp., which makes
packaging machinery, named Sheldon Goldstein president and chief operating
officer.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1992


                             1418 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                    July 7, 1992, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE NOTES

BODY:


   Troubled Jupiter probe: Leaders of the Galileo mission to Jupiter apparently
have given up hope of opening the probe's jammed main antenna.  Project leader
William J. O'Neil came up with an alternative plan that would involve employing
a smaller, low-gain antenna to enable 70 percent of the mission to be
accompished.  From December 1995, the probe is set to drift for two years
through Jupiter's domain and that of its moons. Galileo was launched from the
Atlantis space shuttle in 1989.  Overall, just 2,400 instead of 20,000 pictures
are due to be transmitted.  Of these, 450 will be of sufficiently sharp quality
to measure up to those that would have been expected from an intact main
antenna.  Yet the picture quality will still be 1,000 times better than those
taken in the two Voyager probes, which sent a whole host of data and pictures
back from Jupiter during the 1970s.  Since Galileo is also set to be steered
nearer to Jupiter - whose mass is 318 times that of the Earth - and its four
main moons, experts can promise delivery of impressive pictures despite the
technical problems.  The Jupiter probe has already registered some success with
its maneuvers around Venus and the Earth.  Last year, it became the first
spacecraft to visit one of the small planets known as asteroids that orbit the
sun mainly in a belt between Mars and Jupiter. The probe came within 960 miles
of the asteroid Gaspra 951 and took 150 photographs that, together with other
data, should be transmitted back via the smaller antenna when it next approaches
Earth in December. - Deutsche Presse Agentur .  Tiny gene key to cancer growth?:
New studies of a tiny gene that seems to play a central role in cancer have
revealed some metabolic missteps that apparently lead to tumor growth,
scientists reported Wednesday.  The studies are focusing on a single gene,
called p53, that, when damaged, seems to lose control of the growth process,
allowing rapid cell division to begin. Uncontrolled cell division is the
hallmark of cancer.  The gene seems to be a cancer-suppressor gene, an agent
that normally keeps the rate of cell division under control. When the gene is
damaged, or when its protein material makes becomes inactivated, the result
appears to be the wildfire growth of cancer.  Aberrant p53 gene activity is now
the most common abnormality seen in a wide variety of cancers.  The new results
were published in the British journal Nature recently by molecular biologist
Carol Prives at Columbia University in New York City and Dr. Bert Vogelstein at
the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore.  - Newsday .  Mouse cells
to treat cancer: A proposed brain-cancer treatment that would involve the first
implants of genetically altered, live mouse cells into human patients has been
approved by the National Institutes of Health advisory committee on gene
therapy.  The Food and Drug Administration must still rule on the experiment,
because it involves genetically altered biological material, but researchers
hope to get started by the end of the summer.  The treatment is an amalgamation
of chemotherapy and gene modification aimed at making brain cancer cells
susceptible to an antibiotic that normally would not kill human cells.
Antibiotics work by destroying foreign biological organisms.  The first patients
would be people whose brain tumors have recurred after surgery and radiation
treatment - a situation in which no conventional therapy is effective and that
is universally fatal within a few weeks to several months.  The researchers are
Kenneth Culver and Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute and Edward
Oldfield and Zvi Ram, neurosurgeons with the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke.  In the experiment, with the patient under general
anesthesia, Oldfield and his colleagues would use a computer-guided needle to
penetrate the brain tumor and inject mouse cells that manufacture a disabled
retrovirus carrying the herpes gene.  Retroviruses attack cells and incorporate
their genetic material into the cells. They are well suited for this experiment
because they attack only cells that are replicating, such as the tumor cells.
The normal neural cells of the brain would be unaffected, the researchers said,
because they no longer divide.  - The Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1993


                             1419 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 6, 1992 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1230 words

HEADLINE: Gene-mapping project takes human race to unexplored territory

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

DATELINE: PASADENA

BODY:

   PASADENA -- The human species is poised on the eve of being able to take its
own evolution in hand in dramatic ways and needs to be thinking about what that
could mean, a prominent geneticist says. A map of all the human genes now being
assembled should reveal information that will allow scientists to boost
intelligence and memory, ease mental illness and slow aging, says Leroy Hood, a
California Institute of Technology gene researcher who is involved in the
project. In fact, sometime in the distant future, there may be human descendants
who have been engineered with such enhanced qualities that they may regard
humans the way we regard chimpanzees: clever, interesting creatures that share
some similar characteristics but that are somehow fundamentally different, Hood
says. The effort to identify the estimated 50,000 to 100,000 human genes, which
is known as the human genome project, will open the door to such possibilities.
"What we'll have is an encyclopedia on how to construct a human," Hood said in
an interview.

   The changes that knowledge will make possible are so fundamental that Hood
believes the time has come for people to begin considering how far they are
willing to go in using the technology. "What society has to do is decide whether
they want to explore and take advantage of the technological opportunities that
will be there," Hood says. Hood, 53, was instrumental in pushing for the human
genome program, and he serves on two advisory boards that guide it.

   He also has helped to develop many of the technologies being used for
identifying and understanding genes. The mapping, expected to be completed in
the first decade of the next century at a expense of about $3 billion, will show
the location of genes on the 23 chromosomes inside cells, and it will document
the chemicals that comprise them. The age of genetic intervention has already
begun in much smaller ways that are dramatic in themselves.

   Doctors at the National Institutes of Health are experimenting with putting
copies of genes into patients to supply a missing biological product to correct
an immune system disease and a virulent skin cancer.

   Most scientists believe that treatment of disease will be one of the earliest
consequences of the gene mapping project. Once doctors know where all the
individual genes are on the chromosomes and the sequence of the chemicals that
comprise them, they can begin to explore how the genes function, individually
and together.

   Inherited maladies, such as muscular dystrophy or Huntington's disease, and
cancers may be among the first sorts treated by replacing absent or
malfunctioning genes with working copies. Later, more complex systems relying on
many genes might be understood, including mental illnesses such as
schizophrenia, or degenerative brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease.

   Genes for a range of characteristics including eye color, longevity, memory
or other aspects of intelligence, or even a propensity for heart disease, will
be identified, too, Hood predicts. Small chemical variations in the same gene
can lead to the variations seen between people, whether it is a hereditary
propensity for disease or qualities such as musical ability or intelligence.

   Scientists could study individuals and families to find the variations within
a particular gene that are responsible for the enhanced quality desired, Hood
says. "Once we do understand it, and I have no doubt we can come to understand
it in time, then the question is, `Should we actively use it?' " Hood says.
"That's a question society has to sit down and think about the pluses and
minuses of.

   And to be able to do that, we have to have a society that knows enough
science to be able to think about these things and not be manipulated by
demagogues that are fearful of what the technology is going to be able to do."
Hood, like other scientists, believes the treatment of disease by genetic
therapies will be the most readily accepted use of the new information. Heart
disease, Alzheimer's and diabetes might fall into this category.

   Hood believes the 21st century, in fact, will be recognized as the century of
preventive medicine. Living people could be treated -- with gene therapy or
other medicines that are developed because of the genetic map -- when tests
after birth reveal a genetic susceptibility. If the therapeutic genes were to be
put into a fertilized human egg shortly after conception, the changes would
become part of that person's genetic inheritance and could be passed on to
offspring. Society may decide in some cases that such interventions, which
scientists call germ-line therapy, are advantageous to make in all embryos, Hood
says. Implanting genes to reduce the risk of heart disease would be one example,
he says.

   But this approach has yet to be perfected. Hood wonders, though, what the
societal decision might be if it were known, for example, that four particular
genes affect the aging process and that with these genes, people might live 10
years longer in good health.

   The same question could be raised about genes affecting intelligence. "It's
engineers engineering themselves," Hood says.

   "It isn't fooling around with the environment; it is fooling around with us.
"It has an enormous relevance and poignancy.

   It's this fundamental question of, `What is man, and what should he be?'
That's what we're talking about." It might be 25 or 50 years before such
widespread genetic treatments in people become practical, Hood says, and even
generations before alterations to embryos could be made to dramatically enhance
qualities such as memory. In fact, it is difficult to predict the pace at which
the work might proceed, he says. Hood says he does not know what will or should
be done.

   He doubts there would be much support for a "shopping list" of germ-line
interventions that achieve "cosmetic" choices, such as eye color. He believes
his discussion of the future may be controversial because many people feel
uncomfortable with the possibilities the genetic technologies will pose. "I
think they don't know how to handle them, and they don't like to think about
these things," Hood says. "A possible conclusion is that we don't want to touch
anything that deals in a really fundamental sense with the essence of man, such
as intelligence." In any case, there may be limits to how much can be understood
about such a complex quality as intelligence, he says, adding that it still is
too early to predict. Nonetheless, germ-line therapy represents one way by which
human evolution could be influenced, Hood says. "In humans, evolution is dead
because of modern medicine," Hood says, explaining that medical science allows
people with genetic vulnerabilities, who might otherwise have died, to survive
and reproduce, passing on their genes. "If we are to evolve, you could breed
selectively or you can do this genetic engineering," Hood says.

   "In both ways you could fundamentally change what human beings are all
about." He wonders whether, because of our own genetic intervention, there will
be a future "species of primates that has greatly enhanced human capacities."
"If there is, just as we can look back on these other animals and say from the
point of view of the things we value that we've changed in a significant and
positive sense, maybe they could, too. "These are just enormously interesting
intellectual and social questions."

GRAPHIC: CAPTIONS: Leroy Hood: "What we'll have is an encyclopedia on how to
construct a human." (A-4); PHOTOBY: CALTECH PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1420 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      July 6, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F3; WASHBIZ

LENGTH: 175 words

HEADLINE: GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sharon Walsh, Sandra Sugawara, Alex Pham, Maryann Haggerty

BODY:

   News that W. French Anderson was leaving his post at the National Institutes
of Health and moving to California prompted inquiries to Genetic Therapy Inc. of
Gaithersburg. Genetic Therapy was founded in 1986 to develop and commercialize
human gene therapy work by Anderson and other scientists. Largely because of
Anderson's pioneering efforts, the company has been an early leader in the
still-infant field.

   Anderson has collaborated with Genetic Therapy on programs in a broad range
of areas including cancer, genetic disease, blood disorders, AIDS and
cardiovascular disease. Anderson and Genetic Therapy officials issued a joint
statement saying they expect to continue their relationship.

   Anderson is moving to California because his wife, Kathryn D. Anderson, has
been named chief of surgery and vice president for surgical administration at
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, a teaching hospital for the University of
Southern California School of Medicine. Anderson is negotiating to start a gene
therapy program at the medical school.


                             1421 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      July 6, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F26

LENGTH: 1379 words

HEADLINE: The Ups and (Mostly) Downs of Local Stocks

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Well, you can't win 'em all. Investors in Washington area stocks will have to
take comfort from the big gains they made in 1991. Because 1992 hasn't had much
to offeryet. In January, February and March, regional stocks moved up and down a
lot, but eventually went nowhere. In April, May and June, most stocks just gave
up and moved down.

   When 1992 began, the Washington Business stock average stood at $ 19.61.
Three months later, on March 31, the gyrating average was at $ 19.81. Not much
gain there. The second quarter was tougher. When trading closed on June 30, the
Washington Business average had dropped to $ 17.76, a loss of 10.4 percent.

   The results were in line with the performance of the broad market during the
first half of the year. The Dow Jones industrial average gained 4.7 percent. But
the Dow was pretty much alone. Almost all the major averages finished in
negative territory.

   The Nasdaq composite, which includes many small stocks, lost 3.9 percent in
the first half. Without bank stocks, Nasdaq industrials lost 10 percent. So much
for the heavily touted return of small stocks.

   Meanwhile, the New York Stock Exchange composite was off 2.2 percent for the
first half, the Standard & Poor's 500 was down 2.2 percent, the American Stock
Exchange index fell 4 percent and the Wilshire 5000 dropped 2.7 percent, making
the bad news virtually unanimous.

   In the Washington region, bank and thrift stocks continued to rally.

   Here are the stocks, trading at $ 2 or more, that turned in the best
performances during the first half of 1992. The first number is the price on
Dec. 31, 1991. The second number is the price on June 30, 1992.

   First Citizens Financial Corp. of Silver Spring -- ($ 1 to $ 4.75, up 375
percent). Parent of Citizens Saving Bank, the company reported an 18 cents a
share profit in the first quarter of 1992, compared with a 1 cent a share profit
a year earlier. The thrift also reported a drop in troubled loans.


   Data Measurement Corp. of Gaithersburg -- ($ 1.25 to $ 3.38, up 170 percent).
The company, which makes computerized industrial measuring systems, is returning
to profitability after a period of losses.


   CFS Financial Corp. of Fairfax -- ($ 3.50 to $ 8, up 128.6 percent). CFS,
parent of Continental Federal Savings Bank, has seen its profits improve and
says it will try to sell its company.


   MNC Financial Inc. of Baltimore -- ($ 4.88 to $ 10.75, up 120.3 percent). MNC
is the parent of Maryland National and American Security Banks. Three
out-of-state banks reportedly were looking at the battered MNC as an acquisition
candidate.


   USF&G Corp. of Baltimore -- ($ 7.25 to $ 14.25, up 96.6 percent.) A
multi-line insurance company, USF&G is selling unrelated businesses and
beginning to see a turnaround in its profits.


   OW Office Warehouse Inc. of Virginia Beach -- ($ 5.75 to $ 10.88, up 89.2
percent). This chain of 46 office supply stores has agreed to be acquired by
rival Office Max Inc. for $ 11 a share.


   Columbia First Bank of Arlington -- ($ 6.75 to $ 12.75, up 88.9 percent). The
thrift has been working its way of its troubled loan problems and is enjoying a
string of profitable quarters.


   Jupiter Industries Inc. of Chevy Chase -- ($ 7.13 to 13.38, up 87.7 percent).
Formerly Greater Washington Investors Inc., Jupiter plans to buy the custom
fabrics division of West Point-Pepperell Inc. for about $ 35 million.

   Riggs National Corp. of Washington -- ($ 4.25 to $ 7.63, up 79.5 percent).
This gain in the stock price was all recorded in the first quarter. Riggs shares
were flat in the second quarter.


   Universal Security Instruments Inc. of Owings Mills, Md. -- ($ 1.63 to $
2.88, up 76.7 percent). Universal, which makes telephones, answering machines
and smoke detectors, received new orders from Builders Square, a unit of K mart
Corp.


   Signet Banking Corp. of Richmond -- ($ 23 to $ 39.50, up 71.7 percent).
Signet has reported strong first-quarter earnings and an improvement in its
credit quality.


   Crestar Financial Corp. of Richmond -- ($ 17.75 to $ 30, up 69 percent).
Crestar recently acquired $ 2.6 billion in deposits, $ 11 million in consumer
loans and 22 branches of Perpetual Savings Bank.


   RAC Mortgage Investment Corp. of Columbia, Md. -- ($ 10.50 to $ 17.75, up 69
percent). A real estate investment trust, RAC recently became operationally
independent from Ryland Acceptance Corp., a subsidiary of home builder Ryland
Group.


   Infodata Systems Inc. of Falls Church -- ($ 1.50 to $ 2.50, up 66.7 percent).
Early this year, Infodata said it would shift its strategic focus to
applications-based software similar to EarthLaw, a package designed to track
environmental regulations.


   Rowe Furniture Corp. of Salem, Va. -- ($ 3.63 to $ 5.63, up 55.1 percent).
Sales have been growing and profits improving. Investors who were betting
against the stock have been retreating.

   Here are the stocks, trading at $ 2 or more, that turned in the poorest
performances during the first half of the year. The first number is the price on
Dec. 31, 1991 and the second number is the price on June 30, 1992.


   General Kinetics Inc. of Herndon -- ($ 5.75 to $ 2.13, down 63 percent.) The
company builds fax machines that are secure against electronic eavesdropping.
The company recently reported a $ 1.2 million third-quarter loss because of
production problems and delayed shipments.


   General Physics Corp. of Columbia, Md. -- ($ 15.75 to 6.38, down 59.5
percent.) The company provides services to electric utilities and to Department
of Energy nuclear facilities. The company said profits have been hurt by delays
in contract awards.


   MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg -- ($ 43.75 to $ 19, down 56.6 percent.) The
company works on vaccines for AIDS and other infectious diseases. Biotech stocks
are out of favor with investors.


   Crop Genetics International Corp. of Hanover, Md. -- ($ 11 to $ 5, down 54.5
percent). Crop Genetics, which develops bug-fighting plant viruses, will get $
3.75 million from DuPont Co. but has to raise money to build a manufacturing
facility.


   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg -- ($ 15.25 to $ 7.25, down 52.5
percent). The firm's specialty is using genes to repair or revamp human cells,
but its products are still experimental. The firm lost $ 1.8 million in the
first quarter.


   Oncor Inc. of Gaithersburg -- ($ 9.38 to $ 5.25, down 44 percent.) A February
stock offering raised $ 33 million and the company began clinical trials for DNA
probes used in diagnosing cancer and genetic diseases. But losses continue.


   AES Corp. of Arlington -- ($ 34.25 to $ 19.25, down 43.8 percent.) AES has
been hurt by publicity about AES employees falsifying data at an Oklahoma power
plant.


   Government Technology Services Inc. of Chantilly -- ($ 13.25 to $ 7.50, down
43.4 percent). The company sells computers to federal and state agencies. Profit
margins are being squeezed by competition.


   Radiation Systems Inc. of Sterling -- ($ 19 to $ 11, down 42.1 percent.)
Although sales and profits are up, the backlog at this antenna systems
manufacturer is down because of the recession.


   Systems Center Inc. of Reston -- ($ 15.38 to $ 9, down 41.5 percent). A
computer company, Systems Center said it expects a significant operating loss
for the second quarter.

   Vitalink Pharmacy Services Inc. of Silver Spring -- ($ 17 to $ 10.75, down
36.8 percent). The company recently was spun off from Manor Care Inc. of Silver
Spring, which operates nursing homes.


   Insituform East Inc. of Landover -- ($ 5.63 to $ 3.63, down 35.5 percent).
The firm, which repairs sewer pipes, said sales and profits fell because the
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission, its biggest customer, had been
deferring work.


   Hanger Orthopedic Group Inc. of Bethesda -- ($ 10.25 to $ 6.63), down 35.3
percent.) Hanger is an expanding provider of orthopedic devices with a limited
record of profitability.


   Alpha 1 Biomedicals Inc. of Washington -- ($ 14.25 to $ 9.50, down 33.3
percent). The firm reported losses as it works on an AIDS vaccine and a drug for
hepatitis B.


   WorldCorp. Inc. of Herndon -- ($ 10.75 to $ 7.38, down 31.3 percent). This
operator of cargo and charter air services reported a $ 6.2 million loss for the
first quarter. endquad


                             1422 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     June 30, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z8

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Pioneer, Surgeon Wife Leave D.C.

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The Washington medical community is soon to lose to Los Angeles one of its
high-powered two-career physician couples. W.  French Anderson, who was on the
scientific team that pioneered the use of gene therapy at the National
Institutes of Health, is negotiating an agreement to start a gene therapy
program at the University of Southern California School of Medicine. He says the
West Coast move is to accommodate the career step of his wife, Kathryn D.
Anderson, who is leaving her post next month as acting chairman of the
department of surgery at Children's National Medical Center in Washington.

   In October, she will become chief of surgery and vice president for surgical
administration at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, a teaching hospital for the
University of Southern California School of Medicine and one of the largest
pediatric hospitals in the United States. She will also have a USC faculty
title.

   Kathryn Anderson will become one in only a handful of women chiefs-of-surgery
in the country. She was passed over for the position of chairman at the
Washington pediatric hospital, where she was vice chairman for 10 years before
becoming acting chairman a year ago.

   The new chairman at Children's National Medical Center in Washington will be
Marshall Schwartz, from the University of California at Davis, where he was
chief of the division of pediatric surgery.

   Anderson has a reputation as a technically gifted surgeon and fine teacher
who is adept at finding creative surgical solutions to difficult pediatric
cases. She declined through her office to comment on the change of jobs until
after the Los Angeles Hospital announces the appointment, expected in a few
weeks.

   French Anderson said he is sorry to be leaving the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute of NIH, where he had intended to finish his career, having
worked there for 27 years. "Nothing could have gotten me out of NIH short of my
wife's leaving Washington," he said. "NIH has all kinds of problems: The
salaries are low, the regulations stifling, but it is still the greatest place
in the world to do biomedical research, and I never would have left."

   But, he said, "Kathy has subordinated her career to mine for 30 years. She's
never looked at another position though she's had offers all the time. I have
been immovable. Now she's going to have one of the top jobs in the country." The
couple celebrated their 31st wedding anniversary last week.

   French Anderson said he was "very disappointed" his wife was not on the list
of final candidates for the Washington surgeon-in-chief job "since she would
appear to be eminently qualified except for gender."

   Asked why Anderson was not chosen for the top position, Barbara Cire,
spokeswoman for Children's National Medical Center in Washington said, "A
national search was undertaken for the chairman. The discussion is privileged,
and we really can't comment on personnel decisions."

   In September 1990, French Anderson inaugurated the era of gene therapy by
treating a 4-year-old girl, who had a rare inherited immunological disorder,
with infusions of genetically altered white blood cells. She is now healthy
enough to be attending kindergarten and to risk exposure to normal childhood
diseases.

   Bernadine Healy, director of NIH, called French Anderson's departure "a
terrible loss to our community and the federal lab of the NIH in Bethesda
scientifically, in terms of leadership, mentorship of young people and also for
the hope he gave patients."

   Emphasizing that she did not know the details of the Washington hospital's
decision not to promote Kathryn Anderson, Healy said, "On a personal level, I
can't help but question whether this is part of that all-too-prevalent syndrome
of the best women never making it above deputy. That's where the real glass
ceiling is. There still is a very long way between the No. 1 and the No. 2
spot."

   The selection of Kathryn Anderson by the Los Angeles hospital, "probably the
most distinguished children's hospital in the world, is the ultimate peer
review," said Healy. "Once again, California is leading the pack."


                             1423 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                 June 22, 1992, MONDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; RESEARCH; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 725 words

BODY:
 RISKING FRACTURES Commonly used pain-killers may increase the risk of hip
fractures among elderly people. A study of 4,500 elderly people who suffered hip
fractures showed that taking pain-killers increased the risk of a break by 60
percent. Those who had just started taking the medications had a 120 percent
increased risk. Doctors commonly prescribe pain-killers such as Darvon, Tylenol
3 or codeine alone, or in combination with aspirin or acetaminophen for elderly
people, according to researcher Dr. Ronald I. Shorr of the Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine in Nashville. Shorr said the findings do not indicate that
doctors overprescribe pain-killers for the elderly. "In fact, many patients with
pain are undertreated," he said. Doctors should caution elderly people who take
pain-killers and their caregivers that they may have difficulty in walking, and
may be prone to confusion and falls, Shorr said.  REPEAT PAP SMEARS Women who
have Pap smears that reveal slightly abnormal cervical cells may be able to
avoid an uncomfortable and expensive diagnostic follow-up test, according to a
study by British gynecologists. Instead, they can get follow-up Pap smears,
which can detect whether the cervical abnormality is becoming cancerous, without
the high cost and discomfort of the diagnostic procedure, called colposcopy, the
doctors concluded. The British scientists, from six research institutions and
hospitals, recommend that instead of immediately going for a colposcopy, women
with abnormal Pap smears should return for two repeat smears at six-month
intervals.  NEW ASTHMA ADVICE A new study adds to evidence that people with
moderate asthma should be treated with anti-inflammatory drugs such as inhaled
steroids, rather than bronchodilators. Doctors hope that increased use of
inhaled steroids will slow the recent sharp rise in asthma-related deaths and
hospitalizations. Some experts think that using bronchodilators called
beta-agonists are contributing to the rise. Researchers do not know whether
people who use beta-agonists may be at increased risk of death from asthma
because their asthma is severe, or because the medication itself adversely
affects organs including the heart. In the new study, a computer-simulated model
of the lung revealed that airway constriction caused by muscle tightening is
unlikely to cause shortness of breath and wheezing unless the airways also are
inflamed. The study is published in the June issue of the American Review of
Respiratory Disease.  CHOLESTEROL HELP Scientists have begun experimenting with
a new type of gene therapy that may lower deadly cholesterol levels in people
with an inherited disease.  A 29-year-old Canadian woman with the disease
received an injection of her own liver cells that had been exposed to a harmless
virus carrying the gene for mopping up "bad" low-density lipoprotein, or LDL,
cholesterol.  Researchers at the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann
Arbor hope the therapy will lower the woman's levels of the artery-clogging
substance. The woman is the first of three patients to be treated with the new
therapy. She suffers from familial hypercholesterolemia, which raises a person's
cholesterol to dangerously high levels because the liver cannot remove LDL from
the blood. People with the disease have inherited two copies of an abnormal gene
that cannot break down LDL cholesterol.  HEALING WINTER BLAHS University of
Washington scientists have some encouraging news for people who are happy in the
summer but blue in the winter. The researchers may have found a new, easier way
to treat the winter blues with a low-intensity light that simulates the dawn,
according to a preliminary study released at a meeting of the Association of
Professional Sleep Societies. Pulses of high-intensity light are a well-known
treatment for the winter blues, which is called seasonal affective disorder, or
SAD. The treatment usually requires a person with SAD to sit for two hours in
front of a bulky light box that emits light 10 times as bright as most indoor
lighting. With the new treatment, a low-intensity light gradually increases in
intensity while the person is asleep.  SAD patients typically have trouble
getting out of bed in the morning, gain weight, and become depressed and
lethargic in the fall and winter.

GRAPHIC: Medical Tribune News Service

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1992


                             1424 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 21, 1992, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: News in biotech;
FAST TRACK / INSIDE BUSINESS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Congress is moving to amend the Orphan Drug Act that provides companies with
incentives to develop drugs for rare diseases with a virtual monopoly for seven
years. The House, under Sens. Nancy Kassebaum (R-Kansas) and Howard Metzenbaum
(D-Ohio) want to withdraw orphan status from drugs that exceed $ 200 million in
sales. Currently there is no sales limit.  US Rep. Gary Studds (D-Mass.) has
introduced similar legislation in the House and it is being evaluated by the
Committee on Energy and Commerce. So far the biotech community is divided, with
the larger companies, such as Genzyme, Biogen and Amgen, opposed to any changes
while smaller firms, such as ImmunoGen, claim the amendments are necessary. If
the proposed amendments are adopted, Genzyme's Ceredase, a drug treatment for
Gaucher's disease, would not qualify since its sales over a seven-year period
are expected to exceed $ 200 million . . .  To treat people with high
cholesterol, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge has licensed commercial
rights to the gene for the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor from the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. LDL receptors are considered
the key to removing excess cholesterol from the blood, say company officials.
Using its proposed gene therapy technology, the company wants to treat people
with high blood cholesterol by having them go to a doctor who will extract a
small tissue sample. After being sent to the TKT's laboratory, the patient's
cells would be genetically engineered to produce LDL receptors. The modified
cells would be returned to the doctor, who would inject them under the patient's
skin so the body could naturally produce the LDL receptors that remove excess
cholesterol . . .  EcoScience Corp. of Worcester, a developer of a promising
biopesticide that controls cockroach growth, has paid $ 700,000 to Roussel Bio
Corp., to buy back all technology and marketing rights. Instead, the company
will market the product, a match-box sized chamber that contains a patented
microorganism that over time kills nests of roaches, the company claims.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1992


                             1425 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                 June 18, 1992, Thursday, INTERNATIONAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 44 words

HEADLINE: Aids treatment endorsed

BODY:

Aids treatment endorsed ...   A Food and Drug Administration advisory

committee has recommended that the FDA allow Viagene, Inc., a San Diego-based
biopharmaceutical company, to begin human testing of a HIV treatment using gene
therapy.


                             1426 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                             June 12, 1992, Friday

SECTION: LIVING; Section F; Page 3

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: Anti-herpes drug for brain cancer

BYLINE: By Amanda Husted STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In experiments with rats, scientists have cured a brain cancer by injecting
it with a gene that makes the tumor cells sensitive to a drug used to treat
herpes.

   The technique involves the direct transfer into cancer cells of a herpes
virus gene that is sensitive to an antiviral drug, researchers said in a study
published in the journal Science. Then, doses of the drug ganciclovir kill the
cancer cells, but leave normal brain cells alone.

   A team of National Cancer Institute scientists led by Edward H. Oldfield, a
neurosurgeon, are applying to the Food and Drug Administration for approval to
conduct experiments on human brain cancer patients. The proposal has been
approved by a committee of the National Institutes of Health, which must first
OK all human gene therapy trials.

   Human experiments could start late this summer on 20 patients whose brain
tumors have recurred. In those cases, there's little doctors can do with
conventional therapy.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1992


                             1427 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                 June 12, 1992, FRIDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 290 words

HEADLINE: New genetic therapy to be tested on brain tumors

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II

BODY:


   Government scientists have developed an unusual form of gene therapy to treat
inoperable brain tumors and plan to begin human trials this summer.

   The new approach, which has cured brain tumors in rats, takes advantage of
the fact that brain cells do not normally multiply and tumor cells multiply
rapidly.

   Researchers at the National Cancer Institute injected the tumors with mouse
cells containing a specially modified virus that infects only dividing cells.
The virus also carries the gene for a protein that makes the tumor cells
susceptible to treatment with the anti-viral drug gancyclovir.

   Oncologist Kenneth Culver and his colleagues report in the journal Science
that 80 percent of rats treated by this approach were cured of their cancers and
the remaining 20 percent had only a few residual tumor cells.

   "It's like putting bull's-eyes in tumors and shooting them," said Nelson
Wivel, director of the National Institutes of Health's office of recombinant DNA
activities.

   "It's a very innovative approach to brain tumors . . . that could have
significant impact if we are able to follow up on it," NCI head Samuel Broder
said. "We need to emphasize that this is not yet a cure for brain tumors in
human beings, but it really is very novel."

   About 35,000 Americans develop brain tumors each year, and most of them die.
"We don't save many of these patients with current treatment, so we need a new
treatment that will help them," said NCI neurosurgeon Zvi Ram, one of the
researchers who will head the clinical trials.

   The technique may have much broader impact, Culver said in a phone interview.
The team has cured liver cancers in rats with the technique and is looking at
pancreas and stomach tumors.

GRAPHIC: Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1992


                             1428 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 12, 1992, Friday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 320 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy promising for brain tumors

BYLINE: Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Government scientists have developed an unusual
new form of gene therapy to treat inoperable brain tumors and plan
to begin human trials this summer.

   The new approach, which has cured brain tumors in rats, takes
advantage of the fact that brain cells do not normally divide and
multiply, while tumor cells multiply rapidly.

   Researchers at the National Cancer Institute injected the
tumors with mouse cells containing a specially modified virus that
infects only dividing cells.  The virus also carries the gene for a
protein that makes the tumor cells susceptible to treatment with
the anti-viral drug gancyclovir.

   Oncologist Kenneth Culver and his colleagues report in
today's edition of the journal Science that 80 percent of rats
treated by this approach were cured of their cancers and that the
remaining 20 percent had only a few residual tumor cells.

   ""It's like putting bull's-eyes in the tumors and shooting
them,'' said Nelson Wivel of the National Institutes of Health.

   ""It's a very innovative approach to brain tumors that could
have significant impact if we are able to follow up on it,'' NCI
head Samuel Broder said.  ""We need to emphasize that this is not
yet a cure for brain tumors in human beings, but it really is very
novel. ''

   About 35,000 Americans develop brain tumors each year and the
majority of them die.  ""We don't save many of these patients with
current treatment, so we need a new treatment that will help
them,'' said NCI neurosurgeon Zvi Ram.

   The technique may have much broader impact, Culver said.  The
team has already cured liver cancers in rats with the technique and
is now looking at pancreas and stomach tumors.

   ""The whole idea is to develop a therapy that could be easily
administered and used around the world, even in the poorest
countries,'' Culver said.  ""It was quite thrilling when we saw the
dramatic results. ''

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1992


                             1429 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      June 12, 1992, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 29; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 750 words

HEADLINE: TREATMENT CURES BRAIN TUMORS IN RATS;
MEDICINE: THE THERAPY WILL BE TESTED ON HUMAN CANCER PATIENTS THIS YEAR. A
SPECIALLY MODIFIED RETROVIRUS INSERTS ITS GENES INTO DNA AND DESTROYS ONLY
MALIGNANT CELLS.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   Government scientists have developed an unusual new form of gene therapy to
treat inoperable brain tumors and plan to begin human trials this summer.

   The new approach, which has cured brain tumors in rats, takes advantage of
the fact that brain cells do not normally divide and multiply, while tumor cells
multiply rapidly.

   Researchers at the National Cancer Institute injected the tumors with mouse
cells containing a specially modified virus that infects only dividing cells.
The virus also carries the gene for a protein that makes the tumor cells
susceptible to treatment with the antiviral drug ganciclovir.

   Oncologist Kenneth Culver and his colleagues report today in the journal
Science that 80% of rats treated by this approach were cured of their cancers
and that the remaining 20% had only a few residual tumor cells.

   "It's like putting bull's eyes in the tumors and shooting them," said Nelson
Wivel, director of the National Institutes of Health office of recombinant DNA
activities.

   "It's a very innovative approach to brain tumors . . . that could have
significant impact if we are able to follow up on it," said NCI head Samuel
Broder. "We need to emphasize that this is not yet a cure for brain tumors in
human beings, but it really is very novel."

   About 35,000 Americans develop brain tumors each year and the majority of
them die of the cancer. "We don't save many of these patients with current
treatment, so we need a new treatment that will help them," said cancer
institute neurosurgeon Zvi Ram, one of the researchers who will head the
clinical trials.

   The technique may have much broader impact, Culver said in a telephone
interview. The team has already cured liver cancers in rats with the technique
and is now looking at pancreas and stomach tumors.

   "The whole idea is to develop a therapy that could be easily administered and
used around the world, even in the poorest countries," Culver said. "It was
quite thrilling when we saw the dramatic results."

   Thirteen clinical trials of gene therapy are under way and several more are
scheduled to begin this year. In all other gene therapy trials that involve
viruses, target cells are removed from the body, treated with a virus that is
unable to infect other cells and then injected back into the body.

   In this case, however, surgeons are unable to remove tumor cells without
damaging the brain, so they must rely on the ability of the virus to infect the
tumor cells within the brain, maximizing the destructive effect of the therapy.

   Opponents of gene therapy have argued that modified viruses could infect
cells other than those they are targeting, producing severe side effects. But it
is unlikely that any of the injected mouse cells will be able to pass through
the blood-brain barrier to infect cells elsewhere in the body, Culver said. And
if a few of the mouse cells should escape the brain, he added, the patient's
immune system should destroy them quickly.

   Culver said the team has seen no evidence of such unwanted infections in any
of the animals studied.

   The virus Culver employs is called a retrovirus because it has the ability to
insert its genes into the DNA -- deoxyribonucleic acid, the genetic blueprint of
life -- of the infected cell. In addition to its ability to kill dividing cells,
the virus has been armed with a gene that activates the antiviral drug
ganciclovir. Normally, ganciclovir has a very limited ability to kill cells. But
the protein produced by the gene converts it into a different form that is much
more toxic. Because the conversion is carried out inside the tumor cells, the
toxic form does not attack healthy cells.

   Culver and his colleagues also observed an unexpected effect of the therapy
that they call the "bystander effect." Not all of the tumor cells are infected
by the retrovirus. But for reasons that are still unknown, uninfected tumor
cells also become more susceptible to the killing effects of ganciclovir after
the treatment.

   Ram and NCI neurosurgeon Edward H. Oldfield received permission from the
National Institutes of Health last week to begin the clinical trials in the next
few months. They must also obtain approval from the Food and Drug
Administration, but such approval seems likely, they said.

   They plan to begin with three patients who have life expectancies of less
than 3 months. If the retrovirus and the cells do not cause any significant side
effects in these three patients, the trial will be expanded to 20 patients.


                             1430 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  June 12, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International     A3-11

SHAKY START TO BUSH'S TRIP

   President Bush's trip to the Earth Summit in Brazil took a harrowing turn in
Panama as gunshots and tear gas were fired nearby, forcing him to make a hasty
exit before he could address a rally.  A1

   Resentment against the United States lingers in Panama.  A11

LEADERS ARRIVE AT EARTH SUMMIT

   A multibillion-dollar aid package to help save the developing world's
environmental resources was taking shape as heads of state began arriving for
the Earth Summit in Brazil. Officials said Washington's contribution was likely
to be small.  A10

   U.S. delegation suffers from internal divisions and low morale.  A10

   Powerbrokers from India, Malaysia, Singapore and Germany.  A10

YELTSIN'S BALANCING ACT

   President Yeltsin said he would soon lift some major barriers to
privatization. But he declared that he would not permit the West to dictate
economic policy to Russia -- even if this meant delays in Western aid.  A3

U.N. TEAM REACHES SARAJEVO

   In a last-ditch effort to head off a major human disaster in the Bosnian
capital, a United Nations negotiating team arrived in Sarajevo to resume efforts
to open the airport to relief shipments.  A6

   The United States ponders a humanitarian aid role for its troops.  A6

LIMITED OFFER FROM CHINA

   The Beijing Government invited Chinese living abroad to return "to serve the
construction of the motherland." But it hinted that it might bar Chinese
students from returning if they oppose Communism.  A7

4 MORE EXECUTIONS IN IRAN

   Four people were executed in the Iranian city of Shiraz for "sabotage" during
riots there in April, the Teheran Government said.  A8

LETDOWN FOR M.I.A. INVESTIGATORS

   A Vietnamese film maker was recently brought to the United States because he
said he had information about Americans unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.
Officials say he failed to produce useful material and is now seeking asylum.
A7

GYPSIES UNDER SIEGE IN ROMANIA

   Valea Pietrelor Journal: A tiny gypsy community becomes the fifth in Romania
to be driven out by angry, torch-wielding neighbors.  A4

German and British doubts about a treaty on European union.  A9
Lech Walesa denies he collaborated with Communist secret police.  A9
Cuba's leader greets U.S. businessmen with capitalist hints.  A8

National     A12-15, B8-10, D17-18

BUDGET AMENDMENT DEFEATED

   The proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget
failed by nine votes to win the two-thirds majority needed in the House.  A1

   Man in the News: Charles W. Stenholm. B8

   The House roll call.  B8

   Text of the amendment.  B8

PEROT ON TAXES

   In a two-hour national television appearance, Ross Perot said he would
"absolutely not" raise taxes except in the case of "an incredible emergency,"
and even then only with "clearance" from the people. He said it would
nonetheless be possible to cut the Federal deficit.  A1

   Excerpts from Perot's remarks on a range of issues.  A14

   Two candidates on "Today," and two very disparate appearances.  A14

   Cuomo said Perot could be President but Clinton should be.  A15

   Quayle was cheered at the Right to Life convention.  A15

MAJOR GAIN BY ASTRONOMERS

   Evidence that planetary systems resembling the young solar system may exist
in nearby parts of the galaxy was reported by four teams of astronomers working
independently.  A1

   NASA offered reassurances about Galileo's mission to Jupiter.  D17

INFANT-FORMULA CHARGES

   The F.T.C. accused the three leading makers of infant formula of price-fixing
in a Government program for poor women and children.  A1

BILL SOUGHT BY LABOR DIES

   The Senate killed a bill that would have prohibited employers from hiring
permanent replacements for striking workers.  A13

   A Senate panel backed benefits for the long-term jobless.  A13

HONORARIUMS DROP IN HOUSE

   Annual financial disclosure forms show a sharp decline in speaking fees to
House members last year. That drop followed adoption of a rule that prevents
them from keeping the fees.  D18

CASINOS FOR NEW ORLEANS

   The Lousiana Senate gave final legislative approval to a bill that would
allow New Orleans to join Nevada and Atlantic City as a gambling mecca.  A12

ADVANCE IN GENE THERAPY

   A type of gene therapy unlike any tried before has proved highly successful
in treating brain tumors in laboratory rodents.  D17

GAIN REPORTED IN AIDS RESEARCH

   In a development that could greatly assist research on AIDS vaccines,
scientists have discovered an animal that can be infected with the AIDS virus
and that then becomes ill, just as people do.  D17

Law Page   B20
A woman whose marriage made history 25 years ago recalls the past.
A matter of honor. The weapon: the law.

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

STUDENTS' SCORES DROP

   After two years of rebounding academic results in the New York City school
system, reading and mathematics scores dropped sharply this spring, many of the
city's superintendents say.  A1

INQUIRY IN SHOOTING

   A Newark teen-ager who was critically shot early Tuesday was wounded one
minute before the Police Department formally learned that the car he had been
driving had been stolen, the authorities said.  A1

Business     Digest, D1

Weekend   C1-25
Celebrating Stephen Sondheim.  C3
Japan bestows arts awards.  C3
For Children C12
Theater: "Richard III." C1
Film: "Housesitter."C1
Music: Otis Clay and Ann Peebles performing.  C3
Restaurants C16
Art: Lovis Corinth.  C20
Word and Image: Two British mysteries.  C21

Obituaries   D20
Cathy E. Bennett, an authority on jury selection.
Nicholas Guy Anton; invented a cancer detecting device.

Sports   B12-18
Baseball: Mets' millions for mediocrity.  B13
Baseball owners approve sale of Mariners.  B13
Hockey: Ziegler resigns as N.H.L. president.  B13

Editorials/Op-Ed  A24-25
Editorials A24
The courage to bend in Rio.
Folly defeated, by nine votes.
Topics: What a rose is.

Letters A24
A. M. Rosenthal: Once more unto the breach.  A25
Leslie H. Gelb: "Macedonia" for Greece.  A25
Richard Nixon: Yeltsin needs us. We need Yeltsin.  A25

GRAPHIC: Photo: Quayle took his campaign to an anti-abortion group. (Reuters)
A15

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1992


                             1431 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  June 12, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Report Novel Therapy for Brain Tumors

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   A type of gene therapy unlike any tried before has proved highly successful
in treating brain tumors in laboratory rodents, scientists have found.

   So outstanding are the results from the experimental animals that the
researchers have received permission from a Federal regulatory panel to try the
new method in human patients. They hope to begin clinical trials in August.

    The novel therapy could offer the first real hope for treating brain
malignancies, which otherwise are nearly always fatal and which conventional
cancer treatments like surgery, radiation and chemotherapy fail to thwart.But
the researchers caution that what works in rodents may do absolutely nothing in
human beings.

   "I think this project has a truly novel twist, and it's something significant
and very exciting," said Dr. Samuel Broder, head of the National Cancer
Institute in Bethesda, Md. "Can anybody promise it will work in human beings? Of
course not."

   The idea for the gene therapy was developed at the institute by Dr. Kenneth
W. Culver and Dr. R. Michael Blaese, who are collaborating with the
neurosurgeons Dr. Edward H. Oldfield and Dr. Zvi Ram of the National Institute
of Neurologic Disorders and Stroke in Bethesda. Their results from animal
studies appear today in the journal Science.

   The team has received the unanimous approval of the Federal Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee to perform the trials in 20 human patients. The scientists
are awaiting permission from the Food and Drug Administration before beginning
the test.

   In the new approach, researchers will inject genetically altered mouse skin
cells into a patient's brain tumor.  These cells have been designed to serve as
viral factories, able to release steady pulses of harmless viruses into the
surrounding tumor mass, where they can infect the malignant cells.  Each of the
little viral particles carries a copy of a gene from a herpes virus, a gene that
produces an enzyme called thymidine kinase.

   In theory, the presence of the herpes enzyme will make the infected tumor
cells susceptible to a potent anti-herpes drug called ganciclovir. The patient
will be given ganciclovir a week after the altered mouse cells have been
inserted into the tumor mass.

   If humans respond to the treatment as the laboratory rodents did, the tumor
mass, newly suspectible to the herpes drug, could dwindle and even disappear
within weeks after the ganciclovir is administered.

   And because the delivery viruses can only infiltrate dividing cells, they
should enter the rapidly growing cancer cells without infecting normal brain
tissue, which does not divide.  Thus, the normal brain tissue should not be
harmed.

   As bizarre and roundabout as the method sounds on first hearing, its success
in the laboratory has been dramatic. In one experiment, when researchers
injected altered mouse cells into 14 rats afflicted with brain cancer, the brain
tumors vanished completely in 11 animals and regressed significantly in the
other three.

   "When my student first starting working on this, he couldn't believe the way
the tumors would just disappear," said Dr. Culver, who conceived the scheme two
years ago. "I was overjoyed to see it myself."

Radical Departure

    But his colleague, Dr. Ram, is more reserved in his appraisal of the
technique. "We can predict nothing about it for humans," he said. "We'll be
satisfied to show it's feasible to get any biological effect at all."

   In most of the other gene therapy experiments tried so far, researchers have
treated hereditary disorders and cancer by removing cells from the body,
installing new genes into those cells and then reintroducing the altered cells
into the patient. Dr. Culver collaborated on the most well-known gene therapy
experiment, an effort to treat children suffering from a severe inherited immune
disorder by manipulating their blood cells.

   But the new method for brain cancer departs radically from previous efforts.
Rather than altering and returning a patient's own cells into the bloodstream,
mouse skin cells will be used as the genetic factories because the viruses that
carry the critical herpes gene grow extremely well in the rodent cells.

   Scientists do not anticipate that the patients will react badly to the
presence of the rodent cells in their brains.  For the most part, the brain is
shielded from the warrior immune cells that would expel inserted mouse tissue
from other spots in the body. Nevertheless, the mouse cells are expected to be
eliminated from the body over time, but not before their effectiveness has been
demonstrated or disproved.

   Most encouraging to the scientists, the evidence from the animal experiments
indicates that the ganciclovir treatment kills many more tumor cells than are
infected by the viruses bearing the herpes gene. For unknown reasons, the
treatment has a so-called bystander effect, in which cancer cells surrounding
the infected cells respond to the herpes drug, perhaps because as they
proliferate wildly, they take up toxins from the infected cells and then die
themselves.

   "We may not understand it, but the bystander effect is one of the unexpected
beauties of the therapy," Dr. Broder said.

GRAPHIC: Diagram:"Genetic Artillery Against Brain Cancer"

    Scientists are trying a roundabout gene therapy approach to fight a brain
tumor because ordinary chemotherapy drugs cannot penetrate the blood-brain
barrier. The bizarre approach, successfullly tried in rodents, turns altered
animal cells into factories for viral particles that deliver an enzyme to make
cancer cells vulnerable to an anti-herpes drug.

    A harmless retro-virus carrying a herpes gene is inserted into mouse cells.
The cells are injected into the tumor, where they produce viruses that infect
only cancer cells.

    The drug ganciclovir attacks tumor cells containing the herpes gene.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1992


                             1432 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      June 12, 1992, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 256 words

HEADLINE: Gene trick pits virus vs. tumors

BYLINE: Kim Painter

BODY:

    A technique that kills brain tumors in rats shows promise for treating
otherwise incurable brain cancer in humans.

   Researchers at the National Institutes of Health used the gene-therapy
technique to cure 11 of 14 rats, says a report in today's issue of Science.

   They're so encouraged that they plan to start human trials by late summer.

   The premise: Doctors insert a gene from a herpes virus into a tumor, then use
an anti-herpes drug to destroy the tumor.

   ''Essentially, what we've done is change a tumor genetically, so that it's
like a herpes virus,'' says Dr. Kenneth Culver, National Cancer Institute.

   How researchers did it:

   - In the lab, they got mouse cells to produce a harmless virus that seeks out
only dividing, growing cells. Healthy brain cells, unlike cells elsewhere in the
body, don't divide - but cancerous brain cells do.

   - Inside that virus, they put a gene from a herpes virus.

   - Then they injected the doctored cells into the rat tumors and waited a few
days for the virus to deliver the herpes gene to cancer cells.

   - Finally, they gave the rats a drug called ganciclovir - which went after
the tumors as if they were herpes infections.

   Surgeons at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke are
awaiting approval to try the technique on 20 people with brain cancer who have
no other hope.

   But, says Dr. Zvi Ram, who worked on the rat study and will work on human
trials, ''We have no way of predicting how effective this will be.  We don't
want to create false hope.''


                             1433 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               June 10, 1992, WEDNESDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: Woman gets gene injection to treat deadly skin cancer

BYLINE: Thomas Maugh II

BODY:


   For the first time, physicians have directly inserted a gene into a patient
in an attempt to cure a disease, University of Michigan researchers announced
Tuesday.

   The researchers injected the gene, encased in small globules of fat, directly
into the tumor of a 67-year-old woman with metastatic melanoma, the most deadly
form of skin cancer, in hopes that the added gene would stimulate the immune
system to attack tumor cells. Though the researchers hope the condition of the
woman, the first of 12 patients to be treated, will improve, the procedure is
now being tested primarily for safety.

   Previous attempts at gene therapy have involved modification of cells removed
from the body followed by reinjection, a procedure some believe to be safer. But
many researchers believe that the future of gene therapy lies in "direct
injection" techniques.

   If such "techniques are effective, they would provide a much simpler and less
costly alternative" to modifying cells outside the body, said geneticist A.
Dusty Miller of the Fred Hutchison Cancer Center in Seattle.

   "We have begun to use DNA as a drug," said Michigan molecular geneticist Gary
J. Nabel, who conceived the melanoma treatment. DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid,
is the genetic blueprint of life.

   Nabel's approach to cancer treatment is to "mimic the process of organ
rejection that occurs in transplants," he said. In transplant rejection, the
body targets proteins, called transplantation antigens, on the surface of cells
in the new organ, causing the immune system to attack it.

   Most cancer cells do not bear such antigens on their surface, but Nabel has
developed a way to put them there. Of the 13 human trials of gene therapy now in
progress worldwide, his is the only one that does not use a virus to insert the
added gene into cells.

   Rather, Nabel and his colleagues take the gene for a transplantation antigen
called HLA-B7 and encapsulate it in fat particles called liposomes. When the
liposomes are injected into the tumor, they bind to the surface membranes of the
tumor cells and carry the HLA-B7 genes into the interior of the cells.

   Genetic machinery within the cells produces the antigens, which migrate back
to the cellular membrane, where they are recognized and attacked by the body's
immune system. In the process of attacking these cells, Nabel said, "the body
also learns to recognize tumor cells that haven't been modified" and attacks
them as well.

GRAPHIC: Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1992


                             1434 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     June 10, 1992, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS INJECT GENES IN 2 FIGHTS AGAINST DISEASE;
HUMAN GENETICS: THE TESTS AGAINST A DEADLY CANCER AND CHOLESTEROL MAY REFINE
TECHNIQUE FOR DNA THERAPY.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   In the latest advance in the genetics revolution, physicians have directly
inserted a gene into humans in an attempt to cure a deadly disease, University
of Michigan researchers announced Tuesday.

   The researchers injected the gene, encased in small globules of fat, directly
into the tumor of a 67-year-old woman with metastatic melanoma, the most deadly
form of skin cancer, in hopes that the added gene would stimulate the immune
system to attack tumor cells. Although the researchers hope that the condition
of the woman, the first of 12 patients to be treated, will be improved, the
procedure is now being tested primarily for safety.

   Previous attempts at gene therapy have involved modification of cells removed
from the body followed by re-injection, a procedure some believe to be safer.
But many researchers believe that the future of gene therapy lies in "direct
injection" techniques.

   If such techniques are effective, "they would provide a much simpler and less
costly alternative" to modifying cells outside the body, said geneticist A.
Dusty Miller of the Fred Hutchison Cancer Center in Seattle.

   Only when direct-injection techniques are perfected, said molecular biologist
W. French Anderson of the National Cancer Institute, will gene therapy "have a
major impact on the health care of our population."

   A second group at the University of Michigan also announced Tuesday that it
has begun gene therapy for an inherited form of high cholesterol that sharply
increases the risk of heart disease. The effort, in which liver cells were
modified outside the body and re-injected into a 29-year-old Canadian woman,
marks only the second time in the United States that a disease other than cancer
has been treated with gene therapy.

   The two efforts are part of a variety of human gene therapy experiments that
are under way or scheduled to begin this year as the once-controversial approach
to treatment gains wider acceptance. "We have begun to use DNA as a drug," said
Michigan molecular geneticist Gary J. Nabel, who conceived the melanoma
treatment. DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is the genetic blueprint of life.

   The experiments offer the hope that eventually any doctor will be able to use
gene therapy in the office to treat a wide variety of life-threatening diseases.

   Nabel's approach to cancer treatment is to "mimic the process of organ
rejection that occurs in transplants," he said. In transplant rejection, the
body targets proteins, called transplantation antigens, on the surface of cells
in the new organ, causing the immune system to attack it.

   Most cancer cells do not bear such antigens on their surface, but Nabel has
developed a way to put them there. Of the 13 human trials of gene therapy now in
progress worldwide, Nabel's is the only one that does not use a virus to insert
the added gene into cells.

   Rather, Nabel and his colleagues take the gene for a transplantation antigen
called HLA-B7 and encapsulate it in fat particles called liposomes. When the
liposomes are injected into the tumor, they bind to the surface membranes of the
tumor cells and carry the HLA-B7 genes into the interior of the cells.

   Genetic machinery within the cells produces the antigens, which travel to the
cellular membrane, where they are recognized and attacked by the body's immune
system. In the process of attacking these cells, Nabel said, "the body also
learns to recognize tumor cells that haven't been modified" and attacks them as
well.

   Studies in animals have shown that the technique produces a sharp reduction
in tumor size and numbers.

   Nabel and his colleagues will treat 12 patients in their trial of the
technique. Like the first woman, whose identity is being kept confidential, all
have metastatic melanoma, which kills 6,700 Americans each year. Although the
technique could be used for other types of cancer, melanoma was chosen because
the skin tumors are readily accessible and no invasive medical procedures are
necessary.

   Those selected to participate in the trials have a life expectancy of less
than one year and will not benefit from further standard treatment, such as
surgery, chemotherapy or radiation.

   Nabel cautioned that the first trials are designed only to show safety of the
technique and to determine the proper dosage of the gene. "There is a
possibility that the tumors will respond, but it is unlikely," he said, because
the doses will be relatively small. "If these patients are OK after the
treatment, then we will become more aggressive" in attacking the tumor.

   Many ethicists have been concerned about attempts to genetically modify cells
within the human body because of the risks that the viruses normally used in
such attempts might modify other cells as well, causing severe side effects. The
use of liposomes, plus their direct injection into the tumors, sharply reduces
the risk of other cells being inadvertently modified, Nabel said.

   A small risk remains nonetheless, he added, and one of the goals of the
trials is to look for such inadvertent modifications.

   The procedure was conducted on the Michigan woman last Thursday. She
tolerated the injection well, Nabel said, and was discharged from the hospital
over the weekend.

   The second clinical trial involves patients with a rare genetic disorder
called familial hypercholesterolemia. Patients with the disease have an abnormal
gene that is the blueprint for a liver-cell protein called an LDL receptor. LDL,
or low-density lipoprotein, is the so-called "bad" form of cholesterol. The
receptor allows the liver to remove LDL from the bloodstream before it builds up
to life-threatening levels.

   About one in every 500 Americans has one abnormal LDL receptor gene, which
causes elevated levels of cholesterol and heart attacks. About one in every
million has two defective genes, having received one from each parent, which
allows cholesterol to build up at a very early age. One-third of children who
inherit two bad genes have heart attacks by age 10. This group, with two
defective genes, is being treated by University of Michigan molecular geneticist
James Wilson and his colleagues. The two other patients to be treated have not
been chosen, but probably will be adults.

   Last Friday, surgeon Steven Raper removed about 15% of the Canadian woman's
liver, simultaneously inserting a catheter into an artery leading into the
liver. The liver cells were taken into a laboratory and treated with a specially
modified virus that inserted a healthy gene for the LDL receptor into their DNA.

   On Monday, about 1 billion modified cells were infused into the woman's liver
through the catheter. Research in rabbits indicates that the cells will lodge in
the liver and begin producing the receptor. That research suggests that having a
healthy receptor on as few as 5% of the liver cells leads to a significant
reduction in blood cholesterol levels.

   Wilson has permission to attempt the procedure in two other patients, who are
now being selected.

Gene Therapy of Malignant Melanoma

   Using a new approach to human gene therapy, Michigan researchers hope to get
the body to reject tumors in the same manner that it rejects transplanted
organs.

   1.  The gene for a transplantation antigen (a protein that marks the cells as
being foreign) is encased in fat globules and injected directly into the tumor.

   2.  Inside the tumor cells, the gene produces the marker protein, which
accumulates on the surface of the tumor cells.

   3. The marker protein makes the immune system think that the tumor is a
foreign object.  Antibodies recognize the marker protein and attack the cancer
cell

   4. Cell dies.

GRAPHIC: Drawing, Gene Therapy of Malignant Melanoma / Los Angeles Times


                             1435 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      June 9, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z7

LENGTH: 801 words

HEADLINE: Scientists to Fight Brain Tumor With Altered Mouse Cells;
Genetic Transfer in the Body Would Get the Antibiotic to the Target

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A proposed brain cancer treatment that would involve the first implants of
genetically altered, live mouse cells into human patients received approval last
week from the National Institutes of Health advisory committee on gene therapy.

   The Food and Drug Administration must still rule on the experiment because it
involves genetically altered biological material, but researchers hope to get
started by the end of the summer.

   The treatment is an amalgamation of chemotherapy and gene modification aimed
at making brain cancer cells susceptible to an antibiotic that normally would
not kill human cells. Antibiotics work by destroying foreign biological
organisms.

   The first patients would be people whose brain tumors have recurred after
surgery and radiation treatment -- a situation in which no conventional therapy
is effective and that is universally fatal within a few weeks to several months.

   The researchers are Kenneth Culver and Michael Blaese of the National Cancer
Institute and Edward Oldfield and Zvi Ram, neurosurgeons with the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

   In the experiment, with the patient under general anesthesia, Oldfield and
his colleagues would use a computer-guided needle to penetrate the brain tumor
and inject mouse cells that manufacture a disabled retrovirus carrying the
herpes gene. Retroviruses attack cells and incorporate their genetic material
into the cells. They are well suited for this experiment because they attack
only cells that are replicating, such as the tumor cells. The normal neural
cells of the brain would be unaffected, the researchers said, because they no
longer divide.

   After being infected by the retroviruses, the tumor cells would manufacture
an enzyme, known as herpes-thymidine kinase, making them vulnerable to an
antibiotic called ganciclovir that researchers hope will then destroy the cancer
cells and shrink the tumor. Intravenous treatment with the antibiotic would also
kill the original mouse cells.

   In applying to the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) for
permission to try the experiment, the researchers submitted results of
experiments with mice and rats, devised by Culver at NCI, showing the therapy
shrinks brain tumors, in part through an unexplained "bystander" effect.

   Tumor cells that don't have the herpes gene are killed as well when
neighboring infected cells go down.

   The audacious strategy -- because it uses a direct injection -- gets around
the blood-brain barrier, a physiological barrier that prevents many compounds
circulating in the body from entering the brain, thus rendering conventional
chemotherapy largely ineffective for brain tumors.

   Also, said Oldfield, "this is obviously regional therapy that we're talking
about. Brain tumors tend not to metastasize; they tend to harm the patient by
local and regional growth."

   This proposal differs from previous gene therapy experiments in which cells
were removed from a patient, genetically altered in the lab through the use of a
retrovirus, and then returned to the patient's body. Instead, the team would let
the retrovirus do its infective work continuously within the body itself, until
it is rejected by the body's immune system or stopped by the ganciclovir.

   The researchers do not expect an allergic reaction to the live mouse cells
and predict the body will reject them within two weeks. Patients who have had
brain surgery are normally given steroids to reduce swelling, said Blaese, a
drug that is effective in reducing allergic reactions.

   Ganciclovir is a relatively new antibiotic, approved by the FDA in June 1989
for the treatment in AIDS patients of cytomegalovirus, a variety of herpes virus
that can affect the eyes. The drug has the ability to cross the blood-brain
barrier.

   Culver has been involved in gene therapy at NCI since the first trials there
in 1990 to correct a rare immune system disorder, called ADA deficiency, in two
little girls. He said he was motivated to invent the novel brain tumor strategy,
in which the gene alteration takes place in the body, by a desire to eventually
make all kinds of gene therapy available to people in developing countries.

   He said he felt fustrated during a visit to Santo Domingo to help set up a
church and medical center, when he realized that the multi-million dollar
laboratory version of gene therapy would never reach children like those he was
meeting.

   "We needed something that could be done simply," he said. That brought him to
the idea "of doing the gene transfer inside the body, in the tumor as it grows."
The brain was chosen as the first tumor on which to attempt the herpes gene
transfer "because there would be less toxicity since the brain cells don't
proliferate."

   Experiments with mice began in January 1991.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, PROPOSED BRAIN TUMOR TREATMENT, JOHN ANDERSON


                             1436 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      June 8, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F3

LENGTH: 39 words

HEADLINE: Correction

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Last week's Insider Transactions column mischaracterized one deal. The 1.05
million shares of common stock in Genetic Therapy Inc. held by The Everest Trust
were distributed to the three individual grantors of the trust, not sold.?


                             1437 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 7, 1992 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: Fighting cancer is new business in new San Diego

BYLINE: Neil Morgan

BODY:

   About 9,000 men and women leading the fight against cancer convened in San
Diego recently.

   They were medical and research people from all over the world, here to attend
a conference of the Society of Clinical Oncology. Cancer has become big business
-- around the world and in San Diego.

   It is now the leading cause of death among women and a close second among
men, after cardiovascular disease. If any San Diegans had failed to notice, the
conference beneath the sails of our Convention Center was evidence that this
city is already well-known around the globe as a center of medical research. One
speaker, Steven Rosenberg, flew in from Bethesda, Md., where he is chief of
surgery at the National Cancer Institute.

   A tall, unassuming man, he is currently -- in the jargon of TV talk show
arrangers -- a very hot item.

   He is part of the team that just conducted the first human gene transfer. On
his evening in San Diego, he went for dinner to the hillside home of friends,
Maureen and Renato Dulbecco.

   Dulbecco, a Nobel laureate, is president of Salk Institute; the two men have
appeared together on scientific panels across Europe and the United States.
Gazing out along the La Jolla shoreline, past the lower campus of UCSD and the
Salk campus, Rosenberg paid homage to the setting. "I don't see how you San
Diego people get so much work done," he said.

   "Any time I see a view like this, I assume I'm on vacation." What Rosenberg
and his colleagues have done is to begin a long research program, hoping to show
that the body's immune system can be the weapon to destroy cancer. "We're only
starting.

   In terms of sophistication," he said, "we're where chemotherapy was 30 years
ago." Already a cancer surgeon, Rosenberg became a researcher to pursue the use
of designer cells to vanquish cancer.

   For years, experiments with animals have been promising.

   As a result, immunotherapy for cancer is about to join more traditional
methods of therapy. In the first experiment with a human, he and his colleagues
infused tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) into 10 terminally ill cancer
victims. They hope it will lead to gene therapy as a standard treatment for
cancer. Rosenberg says TIL is unique because cells are specific to the tumor.

   Drawn from the patient's body and reinfused, they attack only the patient's
melanoma, ignoring healthy cells. "There is still a long way to go," Science
magazine noted, "but Rosenberg is a patient man." Closely related research is
going forward in San Diego's biotech community and research institutions. At
Scripps Clinic and Research Institute this past week, the chemist Wolfgang
Wrasidlo briefed visitors on the Green Cancer Center's exciting efforts to
convert designer molecules into drugs to combat cancer. There are four
potentially valuable cancer drugs being screened now at Scripps, a remarkable
number for any research institution.

   Within the past year, cancer patients from 42 states and seven nations have
journeyed to Scripps for experimental drug trials. The most recent excitement at
Scripps involves the new drug 2-CdA. In reporting results with 144 patients with
hairy cell leukemia, Dr. Lawrence Piro told the visiting oncologists that 85
percent of the Scripps patients underwent complete remission. In another part of
the conference program, cancer fighters heard from Dr. Robert Sobol, a
researcher at UCSD and the San Diego Regional Cancer Center.

   He talked of San Diego-based efforts in gene therapy to attack cancers of the
kidney, colon and lymph system.

   His research is going forward with Ivor Royston and Habib Fakhrai of the
Cancer Center and Theodore Friedman of UCSD. They hope to seek federal approval
later this year for tests on humans. At Scripps, the excitement of cancer
research extends to school-age summer interns. One managed to express the joy of
pure science when she wrote her thank-you letter to those who had directed her
during weeks at Scripps. "I looked into the microscope," she wrote, "and saw
something that had never been seen before.

   Here I was, on the other side of the textbook." Neil Morgan's column appears
Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1438 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                 June 1, 1992, MONDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer vaccine seen in future

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:
Breast cancer researchers conceivably could produce both a blood test to detect
the disease and a vaccine to prevent it in the next few decades, National Cancer
Institute chief Dr. Samuel Broder said.

   Broder told the advisory Special Commission on Breast Cancer in Bethesda,
Md., last week that new techniques in gene therapy and molecular biology will
enable scientists to gain ground on the disease.

   "This would have been science fiction in another era, but studies on some of
these already have begun," he said. "This is not an easy problem. It cannot be
solved with quick fixes. It requires commitment in the long term."

   About 175,000 women annually get breast cancer in the United States, and
45,000 die.

   The commission will issue a report next year on what members believe are the
most promising research avenues and on how to increase awareness of the disease.

   Dr. Louise Brinton, an NCI epidemiologist, said research is needed to find
the cause behind the 3 percent to 4 percent annual increase in the rate of
breast cancer.

   Some researchers speculate that the rate isn't rising, but better detection
methods are finding more tumors, Brinton said.

   Others have suggested that birth control pills are responsible for part of
the rise, she said.

   Dr. Peter Greenwald, director of the NCI's cancer prevention and control
division, said that previous research has shown that eating a high-fat diet,
being overweight and being sedentary appear to be related to breast cancer risk.

   For example, the Japanese have less than one-third the rate of breast cancer
compared with Americans, he said. Japanese traditionally consume very little
fat, although their consumption of fat has risen and their breast cancer rates
also have risen, he said.

GRAPHIC: Medical Tribune News Service

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1992


                             1439 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      June 1, 1992, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; In brief; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: In brief

BYLINE: Compiled from Chronicle wire reports

BODY:

   Saving heart patients

   A new technique for implanting automatic defibrillators to
save patients at risk of heart failure apparently is cheaper and
more effective than standard technology, researchers report.

   As first developed, automatic defibrillators were implanted
by surgeons who opened their patients' chests to install electronic
devices with wires attached directly to the heart muscle.  If the
patient's heart started to beat out of control, the device applied
an electric shock to restore normal rhythm.

   Using the new technique, doctors avoid full surgery by
threading lead wires through blood vessels leading to the heart.

   The device itself is implanted under the skin of the abdomen.

   In a worldwide comparison of 434 patients receiving standard
open chest implantation with 317 patients undergoing the new
technique, ""the results were very striking,'' Dr. Sanjeev Saksena
of the New Jersey Medical School reported to the North American
Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology.

   ""With the traditional technique, 5.5 percent of patients
died within 30 days of surgery.  Deaths related to surgery were
reduced to 0.3 percent with the new technique,'' Saksena said.

   ""Equally significant, at one year after surgery, 96.4
percent of patients implanted with the new technique were still
alive, compared to 85.4 percent of patients implanted during open
heart surgery. ''

   Obesity's "magic bullet'?

   Investigators at the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism may have stumbled upon a ""magic bullet'' against
obesity.

   Led by Claire Fraser, the researchers located a receptor on
rat cells that appears to determine how efficiently the cells
remove or store fat.  Rats that are genetically obese have few of
these receptors.

   If the gene for this receptor can be found, it may be
possible to use gene therapy to add more receptors that would flush
fat out of cells, allowing people to lose weight without much
effort.

   Giving control to workers

   Giving workers individual control of their lighting,
temperature, sound and other office environment factors may be a
surer way to boost productivity than buying the latest computer
technology.

   In what may be the first solid evidence, Researchers from
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in New York report a 2 percent
increase in office productivity tied directly to giving employees
control of their environment.

   Researchers focused on 118 employees, studying their
productivity in an old facility, then in a new one equipped with
environmentally responsive work stations.  They found productivity
jumped an average of 15 percent, said Walter Kroner, director of
Rensselaer's center for architectural research.

   A key to victory

   Testosterone, the male hormone associated with assertiveness,
may be linked to winning competitive contests, some researchers
suggest.

   ""In many competitive activities, ranging from tennis to
chess, testosterone levels rise with victory and fall with
defeat,'' said Alan Booth, a researcher at Pennsylvania State
University.

   ""Our studies of tennis players revealed consistently large
increases in testosterone before matches, as if players' bodies
anticipated the coming contest and adopted a competitive stance,''
Booth said.

   ""Heightened testosterone reinforces the will to dominate,
which facilitates winning.  After the matches, testosterone levels
rose even higher for winners, especially when they were in an
excellent mood and felt pleased with their performances. ''

   On the other hand, losers experienced a drop in testosterone,
Booth said.  He suggested that such trends may shed light on how
competitors get locked into winning or losing streaks.


LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1992


                             1440 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                May 30, 1992, SATURDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: Genes - not stress - tied to premature graying

BODY:


   If your hair turns gray before its time, blame your genes and not your kids
or your job.

   A genetic defect that causes a type of mouse to grow hairs pigmented only at
the tip may hold the key to why some people prematurely go gray, a researcher in
Scotland said.

   Gray hair normally is a sign of aging that occurs after the death of cells
carrying pigment to hair.

   Ian Jackson of the Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit in Edinburgh
thinks a defective gene in the mouse strain causes the pigment-carrying cells to
commit cell suicide. A similar mutant gene may be found in humans with premature
graying, Jackson reported in the journal Nature Genetics.

   Jackson said, "We know that a normal copy of this gene does exist in humans,
but we don't know if a mutant copy exists."

   People determined to keep their prematurely hair gray looking blond,
brunette, red, or black will have to continue to use hair dye, Jackson said,
because even if scientists find a mutant gene, they would not be able to fix the
problem using gene therapy.

   "It would not be the case of adding a normal gene to replace a missing or
defective one," Jackson explained. "In this case, a gene has become capable of
performing a new function: causing the cells to commit a type of suicide because
it causes the cell to lose pigment, which in turn causes cell death."

GRAPHIC: Medical Tribune News Service

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992


                             1441 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  May 28, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 7367 words

HEADLINE: A Record for Short Sales Outstanding on Nasdaq

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

BODY:

   Between mid-April and mid-May, for the second straight month, the number of
shares sold short and not yet covered in over-the-counter trading hit a record,
the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.

   The figure, which represents trading that took place by May 8 and was settled
by May 15, was 388.2 million shares. That is 3.7 percent higher than the 374.3
million shares reported last month, and 9.4 percent more than the 354.8 million
mid-March figure, still the fifth highest.

    While this month's 3.7 percent increase is less striking than the 5 percent
reported last week for the same period by the New York Stock Exchange and
American Stock Exchange, it adds credence to many analysts' conviction that
professional short-sellers are back with a vengeance after enduring many months
of heavy losses.

   The over-the-counter statistics for the last three months also suggest that
short-sellers, traders who try to ferret out overvalued stocks that they think
are ripe for a fall, believe the over-the-counter market may have further to
sink. The Nasdaq composite index is down 1.5 percent for the year, and 10.5
percent lower than the all-time high it hit on Feb. 2.

   "Most of the short guys I watch are at least 80 to 90 percent invested and
some are 120 percent invested," said Harry Strunk, a consultant who tracks
professional short-sellers.

   In particular, traders seem to be betting against the bigger over-the-counter
stocks. Short interest for 2,583 securities included in the N.A.S.D.'s national
market system was 358.4 million, up 4.4 percent, while the short interest for
the remaining 1,133 over-the-counter stocks was 29.8 million, down 4.4 percent.

   Traders who held their ground in Centocor, a favorite of the biotech bears,
won big this month. Although the short interest position of 5.2 million shares
represented a 27.9 percent decline from last month, Centocor, which has had
trouble getting regulatory approval for its septic-shock drug, remains the
second-largest short position in over-the-counter trading. The stock, which hit
a high of $60.25 for the year in January, fell 64.7 percent between mid-April
and mid-May, closing yesterday at $11.75.

   One company whose short interest zoomed 60.9 percent this month to 1.2
million shares was Tokos Medical, a maker of devices that women with high-risk
pregnancies can use to monitor their conditions. Although the usefulness of the
company's products was challenged last fall by a group of obstetricians in the
New England Journal of Medicine, the stock remained a strong performer through
last December, when it hit $46.25. More recently, it has retreated to $32.50,
yesterday's close.


Largest Increases

Security Name                          05/15/92     04/15/92       Change

Meridian Bncp Inc                     2,022,431       10,113    2,012,318
T2 Medical Inc                        4,062,628    2,532,546    1,530,082   T
Washington Energy Co                  1,561,973       71,995    1,489,978   T
Digital Prods Cp                      1,102,720      123,484      979,236   T
Immune Response Cp                    1,782,110      882,523      899,587   T
Seahawk Deep Ocean                      927,728       30,250      897,478
50-Off Stores Inc                     2,560,464    1,669,395      891,069   T
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg                   3,770,987    2,912,664      858,323   T
Legent Cp                             1,445,305      638,677      806,628   T
Nordstrom Inc                         1,652,498      968,929      683,569   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     3,435,144    2,757,280      677,864   T
Royal Appliance Mfg                     932,714      387,113      545,601   T
Dresdner Bk Sp ADR                      702,960      168,050      534,910
Site Based Media Inc                    625,234       95,102      530,132
Greenwich Pharm Inc                   2,470,076    1,963,440      506,636   T
Apple Computer Inc                    1,588,283    1,084,261      504,022   T
Intergraph Cp                           834,554      339,002      495,552   T
Picturetel Cp                         1,203,923      764,590      439,333   T
Summit Tech Inc                       2,332,133    1,893,393      438,740   T
Tokos Med Cp Del                      1,154,572      717,452      437,120   T
Biomedical Waste Sys                    424,921        7,280      417,641
Comp USA Inc                          1,864,047    1,451,632      412,415   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  3,944,143    3,559,955      384,188   T
Michael Foods Inc                     2,495,590    2,125,541      370,049   T
Groundwater Tech Inc                    645,529      279,471      366,058   T
                                        Largest
                                      Decreases
Security Name                          05/15/92     04/15/92       Change
Centocor Inc                          5,226,100    7,250,655   -2,024,555   T
Highline Inds Inc                     2,009,118    3,416,368   -1,407,250
Tele Commun Inc A                     4,337,246    5,471,571   -1,134,325   T
Telefonos de Mexico                   1,041,960    2,006,716     -964,756
Compression Lab Inc                   3,228,785    4,107,676     -878,891   T
Cisco Sys Inc                         5,827,453    6,599,727     -772,274   T
Advanced Enviro A                       165,218      883,502     -718,284
CCC Franchising Cp                       67,450      634,706     -567,256   T
Quarterdeck Office                      213,491      735,867     -522,376   T
Aldus Cp                                398,751      883,937     -485,186   T
Medco Containmnt                        981,414    1,433,182     -451,768   T
Price Co the                          2,050,071    2,500,954     -450,883   T
US Healthcare Inc                     1,480,376    1,869,578     -389,202   T
Autodesk Inc                            474,977      860,616     -385,639   T
XOMA Cp                               3,147,092    3,524,321     -377,229   T
Landmark Graphic Cp                     121,936      497,159     -375,223   T
Valley National Cp                      624,225      995,919     -371,694   T
Intel Cp                                498,394      861,767     -363,373   T
Boca Raton Cap New                        3,000      366,136     -363,136
Old Kent Fin Cp                         123,037      481,580     -358,543   T
+ Dell Computer Cp                    4,398,352    4,746,673     -348,321   T
MIPS Computer                           598,307      937,619     -339,312   T
Videotelecom Cp                           9,401      346,565     -337,164   T
Immunomedics Inc                        420,874      752,075     -331,201   T
Vital Signs Inc                          12,216      332,807     -320,591   T

Largest Cover Rations

Security Name                          05/15/92    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Healthcare Svcs Gp                    2,352,717       60,853           39   T
Fastenal Co                           2,214,071       62,567           35   T
Presstek Inc                            726,059       25,046           29   T
Medicine Shoppe Intl                  1,485,978       53,548           28   T
Cellular Inc                            737,973       27,622           27   T
C.I.S. Tech Inc                       1,071,131       43,280           25   T
Copytele Inc                          2,339,074       96,269           24   T
York Research Cp                      3,503,522      146,475           24   T
Rouse Co                              2,538,347      109,088           23   T
Burnup & Sims Inc                       579,882       27,236           21   T
TW Holdings Inc                       1,696,419       80,802           21   T
Advanta Cl-B                          1,102,529       56,095           20   T
Midlantic Cp                          4,902,229      247,125           20   T
Savannah Foods Inds                     812,575       41,561           20   T
SGI International                     1,799,832       98,400           18
Dibrell Brothers Inc                  1,559,340       88,182           18   T
Jones Intercable A                      467,526       26,476           18   T
Boston Tech Inc                         708,741       41,407           17   T
Intl Mobile Mach Cp                   3,281,495      198,848           17   T
Pac Rim Hldg Cp                         575,922       33,500           17   T
Westwood One Inc                      1,160,960       67,321           17   T
Michael Foods Inc                     2,495,590      152,891           16   T
Pentair Inc                             503,430       32,057           16   T
Highline Inds Inc                     2,009,118      132,220           15
Cardinal Distr                        1,704,981      112,893           15   T

Largest Positions

Security Name                          05/15/92     04/15/92       Change

Cisco Sys Inc                         5,827,453    6,599,727     -772,274   T
Centocor Inc                          5,226,100    7,250,655   -2,024,555   T
Midlantic Cp                          4,902,229    4,878,162       24,067   T
+Dell Computer Cp                     4,398,352    4,746,673     -348,321   T
Tele Commun Inc A                     4,337,246    5,471,571   -1,134,325   T
T2 Medical Inc                        4,062,628    2,532,546    1,530,082   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  3,944,143    3,559,955      384,188   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                  3,885,521    4,031,559     -146,038   T
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg                   3,770,987    2,912,664      858,323   T
Aura Systems Inc                      3,544,470    3,277,121      267,349   T
York Research Cp                      3,503,522    3,573,743      -70,221   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     3,435,144    2,757,280      677,864   T
Intl Mobile Mach Cp                   3,281,495    2,987,015      294,480   T
Compression Lab Inc                   3,228,785    4,107,676     -878,891   T
XOMA Cp                               3,147,092    3,524,321     -377,229   T
Quantum Cp                            3,086,187    2,726,073      360,114   T
Videocart Inc                         2,828,074    2,851,377      -23,303   T
Electronic Arts Inc                   2,809,362    2,723,465       85,897   T
Staples Inc                           2,775,383    2,792,575      -17,192   T
Amer Power Convers                    2,616,246    2,456,846      159,400   T
Scimed Life Sys Inc                   2,597,437    2,259,429      338,008   T
50-Off Stores Inc                     2,560,464    1,669,395      891,069   T
Rouse Co                              2,538,347    2,558,712      -20,365   T
Michael Foods Inc                     2,495,590    2,125,541      370,049   T
Reuters Hldg ADR                      2,470,433    2,379,966       90,467   T

National Market

Security Name                            05/15/92       04/15/92

3Com Cp                                   178,419         68,754
50-Off Stores Inc                       2,560,464      1,669,395
ADAC Laboratories                          16,602         87,215
ADC Telecommun Inc                        341,552        557,666
Advanta Cl-A                            1,062,576      1,122,684
Advanta Cl-B                            1,102,529           N.L.
ADVO Inc                                   73,268         30,883
AES Cp (The)                              568,720        406,460
AGCO Cp                                    22,723           N.L.
ARIX Cp                                    35,204          2,515
ASK Computer Sys                           83,698        104,164
AST Research Inc                        1,744,989      1,894,030
Action Auto Rental                         19,275            130
Adaptec Inc                               268,838        223,580
Adobe Systems Inc                       3,435,144      2,757,280
Advan Interventional                      282,580        325,396
Advanced Logic Res                        103,618        129,197
Advanced Polymer Sys                      177,785        142,393
Advanced Tissue Cl A                      564,016        366,454
Advantage Promo Tech                      301,593        263,325
Affymax N V                               145,426         98,460
Agouron Pharm Inc                         171,881        191,034
Aldus Cp                                  398,751        883,937
Alexander Baldwin                          27,253         55,476
Alias Research Inc                        628,968        597,320
Alkermes Inc                              220,632        168,606
All For A Dollar Inc                       61,502           N.L.
Alliance Pharm Cp                       1,087,257      1,122,349
Alteon Inc                                331,369        326,881
Altera Cp                                  89,744         36,704
Amer Biodyne Inc                           45,012         70,557
Amer Biogenetic Cl A                      142,885         84,326
Amer Business Info                        155,078        122,000
Amer Claims Evaluat                        87,234        125,569
Amer Dental Laser                         421,195        353,166
Amer Film Tech Inc                        400,582        395,288
Amer Greetings Cp A                        61,988         93,807
Amer Health Svcs                           73,740         49,738
Amer Intl Pet Cp                          188,764         83,268
Amer Management Sys                        15,641         39,107
Amer Power Convers                      2,616,246      2,456,846
Amer Software Inc A                        97,729         20,122
Amer Superconductor                        93,167         45,301
Amer Travellers Cp                         65,802         35,016
Amer TV Commun Cp A                         3,793         37,109
Amgen                                   1,999,020      1,702,876
Amtech Cp                                 258,693        327,553
Amylin Pharma Inc                         261,484        247,039
Anaren Microwave Inc                        1,919         25,915
Apogee Entrpr Inc                          54,297         76,385
Apple Computer Inc                      1,588,283      1,084,261
Applebee's Intl Inc                       248,467        124,908
+Applied Bioscience                       113,640         89,112
Applied Biosystems                         58,149         37,358
Applied Immune Sci                        365,479        239,338
Applied Materials                         968,677        661,067
Arkansas Freightways                       26,553         46,534
Armstrong Pharmaceut                       33,478          7,223
Artel Commun Cp                           117,757         92,266
Artisoft Inc                              276,514        197,347
Assoc Banc Cp                              54,272        203,601
Atlantic SE Airlines                        9,323         86,306
Atmel Cp                                   34,807         14,255
Au Bon Pain Cl A                          646,504        377,741
Aura Systems Inc                        3,544,470      3,277,121
Autocam Cp                                 25,296          2,646
Autodesk Inc                              474,977        860,616
Automated Sec ADR                         542,237        538,215
Aztar Cp                                   46,696         68,400
BBT Finl Cp                               862,053        816,827
BI Inc                                     45,918         78,758
BLOC Dev Cp                               289,875        301,870
BMC Software Inc                          873,189        653,783
Babbage's Inc                             285,922        193,187
Back Bay Restaurant                        55,200            698
Bally Gaming Intl                          35,799         77,540
BayBanks Inc                              337,788        486,253
BE Avionics Inc                            98,420         74,563
Bertucci's Inc                            139,269         57,421
Big B Inc                                  27,378          2,838
Big O Tires Inc                           100,835         27,855
Bindley Wstn Ind                           40,481        188,025
Bio Tech Gen Cp                           217,645        320,655
Biochem Pharm Inc                         112,000         35,300
Biogen Inc                              1,056,914        790,745
Biomagnetic Tech Inc                      237,525         55,753
Biomet Inc                              1,250,516      1,189,332
Biomira Inc                               182,098        336,755
+Biospecifics Tech Cp                      46,400         67,400
Biotechnica Intl Inc                       27,091          7,904
Birtcher Med Sys Inc                       94,007         44,961
Boatmen's Bancshares                      781,111        533,961
+Bob Evans Farms Inc                      170,871        195,508
Borland Intl Inc                        1,589,021      1,495,649
Boston Five Bancorp                        85,011         61,593
Boston Tech Inc                           708,741        720,331
Bridgford Foods Cp                         44,626         20,480
Broderbund Software                        78,921         29,595
Brooktree Cp                               64,757         41,113
Bruno's Inc                             1,872,197      1,948,707
Buffets Inc                             2,062,383      1,796,372
Burnup & Sims Inc                         579,882        589,545
Buttrey Food & Drug                         3,193         24,734
CCC Franchising Cp                         67,450        634,706
C.I.S. Technologies                     1,071,131      1,065,744
CNB Bancshares Inc                         59,943         31,047
Cor Therapeutics                          179,254        155,877
Cabot Medical Cp                          688,503        796,798
Cadbury Schweppe ADR                       60,493         10,314
Cal Micro Device Wts                       24,850           N.L.
Cal Microwave Inc                         123,927        174,640
Calgene Inc                             1,213,525      1,216,152
Cambex Cp                                 689,919        780,631
Cambridge Biotech Cp                      378,403        560,400
Cambridge Neurosci                        167,111        199,421
Canandaigua Wine A                         60,167           N.L.
Candela Laser Cp                           35,501         70,003
Cardinal Distr                          1,704,981      1,698,399
Carenetwork Inc                             2,945        117,500
Carver Cp                                  19,829            761
Casey's Gen Stores                        280,066        281,966
Catherines Stores Cp                       26,632         77,390
Cel Sci Cp                                328,582        234,260
Cellpro Inc                                48,611         79,263
Cellular Inc                              737,973        749,994
Centerbank                                244,131        133,963
Centex Telemanagemnt                    1,576,613      1,285,225
Centocor Inc                            5,226,100      7,250,655
Central Fidelity Bks                       16,940         59,871
Cephalon Inc                              184,461        275,682
Cerner Cp                                  32,710         11,529
Charming Shoppes Inc                      238,906        273,563
Charter One Finl Inc                      195,350         91,127
Checkers Drive-In                         541,897        413,360
Chemdesign Cp                              48,031         21,970
Chipcom Cp                                126,414        150,603
Chips & Tech Inc                          274,761        470,863
Chipsoft Inc Cl A                          47,552         11,917
Chiron Cp                                 854,010        958,479
Choice Drug Sys                            24,684         57,319
Cimflex Teknowledge                        18,984         93,648
Circon Cp                                 821,143        914,199
Cirrus Logic Inc                          194,259        340,299
Cisco Sys Inc                           5,827,453      6,599,727
Citfed Bncp Inc                            21,415            965
Clearly Canadian Bev                      966,031        974,689
Clothestime Inc the                        22,697         71,933
Cognex Cp                                 151,633        204,883
Collagen Cp                               879,374        836,992
Colorado Natl Bkshs                        25,563          4,772
Columbia Hospital Cp                      651,239        362,220
Comcast Cp A                              429,444        330,724
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                    3,885,521      4,031,559
Commerce Clearing A                       100,761        121,299
Commun Entertainment                        6,308         34,492
Comp USA Inc                            1,864,047      1,451,632
Compression Lab Inc                     3,228,785      4,107,676
Computer Prod Inc                         682,974        907,410
Comshare Inc                               70,780         49,798
Concord Camera Cp                         882,178        643,099
Concord EFS Inc.                           51,376         81,429
Consilium Inc                             238,937        248,854
Constellation Bncp                        153,560        198,648
Consul Restaurant Cp                       48,320         23,666
+Cooker Restaurant Cp                     202,824        209,758
Coors Adolph Co B                         243,695        204,575
Copytele Inc                            2,339,074      2,025,852
Cordis Cp                                 144,745        276,442
Corestates Fin Cp                         467,082        203,521
Corrections Cp Amer                       160,400        178,750
Cosmetic Center A                          67,080             50
Costco Wholesale Cp                       980,624      1,019,072
Coventry Cp                               528,628        368,451
Covington Dev Gp                           79,926         51,157
Cracker Barrel Old                      1,378,835      1,441,513
Cray Comp Cp                              573,148        724,212
Crestar Finl Cp                           123,602        294,882
Crop Genetic Intl Cp                      252,391        242,028
Crown Resources Cp                        259,359        227,415
Cullen Frost Bkrs                           6,865         59,368
Curative Tech Inc                         305,396        335,284
Cytogen Cp                              1,862,969      1,785,176
Cytrx Cp                                  284,971        257,786
DNA Plant Tech Cp                         882,892        558,850
DNX Cp                                     30,698         75,400
DSC Commun Cp                             545,949        617,571
Damark Intl Inc Cl-A                       44,727          3,716
Danek Gp Inc                              470,239        513,742
Dataflex Cp                                31,867         53,112
Datascope Cp                            1,877,948      1,887,125
+Dell Computer Cp                       4,398,352      4,746,673
Dento Med Inds Inc                         46,987          3,997
Deprenyl Research                         425,090        155,436
Designs Inc                                16,219         69,441
Dibrell Brothers Inc                    1,559,340      1,627,607
Digital Microwave Cp                      325,982        337,523
Digital Prods Cp                        1,102,720        123,484
Digital Prods Wts A                           175        152,049
Digital Prods Wts B                         1,190         48,290
+Dollar General Cp                        434,596        373,836
Dominion Bkshs                            170,433        129,897
Dreyers Grand Ice                         461,865        244,611
Drug Emporium                             371,689        395,046
Durr Fillauer Med                          35,743        111,574
+ECI Telecom Ltd                           27,979         51,172
Emcon                                      85,276         52,110
ERO Inc                                     4,643         32,979
Executo N E                                87,923        134,707
Ezcorp Cl-A                                79,504         42,172
Ecogen Inc                                947,398        862,226
Ecoscience Cp                              21,201          1,294
Egghead Inc                               426,859        527,270
El Paso Electric Co                       764,455        780,345
Electronic Arts Inc                     2,809,362      2,723,465
Embrex Inc                                 34,791          8,858
Emisphere Tech Inc                        259,494        157,543
Employers Casualty                         93,420            200
Emulex Cp                                  10,011         31,060
Enclean Inc                               284,396        379,711
Endosonics Cp                             105,702        258,974
Enzon Inc                                 439,528        512,530
Everex Systems Inc                         47,134         72,028
Exabyte Cp                                123,183         86,803
Executive Telecard                        428,618        430,479
Exide Electronics Gp                        2,075         26,026
FHP Intl Cp                               111,496        286,454
Fastenal Co                             2,214,071      2,189,026
Fidelity Medical Inc                       56,208         85,368
+Fifth Third Bncp                         384,971        494,583
Filene's Basement Cp                       54,391        116,590
First Commerce Cp La                      141,317        108,228
First Cons Fin Cp                          86,386        123,208
First Hawaiian Inc                        148,313        182,029
First Saving Bk FSB                        10,677         35,746
First Tenn Natl Cp                        229,629         76,405
First Western Bncp                         26,336         53,449
Fleer Cp                                  438,577        610,371
Fleet Call Inc Cl-A                        98,609         61,843
Food Lion Inc Cl A                        867,612        850,121
Food Lion Inc Cl B                        635,597        446,415
Forest Oil Cp                             511,296        367,651
Fourth Financial Cp                       104,942        133,215
Frame Tech Cp                             109,530         32,642
Fred Meyer Inc                                452         75,747
Fremont Gen Cp                            184,211         85,894
GV Medical Inc                             77,926         48,562
Galey & Lord Inc                           39,925           N.L.
Gantos Inc                                261,399        262,552
Genelabs Tech Inc                         170,125        265,056
Genetic Therapy Inc                         5,827         58,500
Genetics Inst Dep Sh                      545,056        608,921
Gensia Pharm Inc                          975,008        881,322
Gentex Cp                                 309,890        199,780
Genzyme Cp                              1,484,823      1,183,475
Genzyme Cp Wts 94                           5,072         23,995
Geraghty Miller Inc                        17,222         35,584
+Geriatric Med Ctrs                        18,839         37,631
Gibson Greetings Inc                       58,028        212,599
Giddings Lewis Inc                        370,078        248,845
Gilead Sciences Inc                        80,277        113,386
Glycomed Inc                              251,853        119,110
Good Guys Inc the                         220,454        448,462
Goulds Pumps Inc                           58,849         81,486
Grand Casinos Inc                         315,401        124,943
Granite Construction                      113,381         25,695
Grant Tensor Geophys                       89,284        190,086
Great Amer Commun Co                      781,836        720,622
Great Amer Recreatio                       96,822         50,500
Great Lakes Bncp                           48,345         94,134
Greater N Y Sav Bk                         28,480         60,003
Greenwich Pharm Inc                     2,470,076      1,963,440
Groundwater Tech Inc                      645,529        279,471
HMO America Inc                         1,416,467      1,636,421
Handex Environmental                        4,738         87,726
Hanover Insurance Co                        1,475         26,753
Harper Group Inc                           35,828          7,559
Hauser Chem Research                       72,554         53,051
Hawthorne Financial                       205,997        205,874
Health Images Inc                         299,763        355,544
+Health Mgmt Assoc A                      204,208        239,752
Healthcare Compare                        821,278        740,471
Healthcare Svcs Gp                      2,352,717      2,406,238
Healthdyne Inc                          1,100,912        938,298
Healthinfusion Inc                         46,226          4,964
Heart Tech Inc                            441,534        192,479
Hechinger Co Cl A                       1,297,441      1,312,259
Helen of Troy Cp                           99,650         39,275
Helix Biocore Inc                          40,407         18,497
Herbalife Intl Inc                        163,438         35,192
Home Nutritional                          131,726         88,813
Howard Svgs Bank NJ                       954,470        870,278
ICF Intl Inc Cl A                          49,468         69,428
ICOS Cp                                   786,907        978,128
Idexx Labs Inc                             91,668         54,490
IHOP Cp                                   938,332        765,298
Image Entertainment                        65,484        109,873
Immune Response Cp                      1,782,110        882,523
Immunex Cp                                636,943        469,210
Immunex Cp Wts                             64,200         15,159
Immunogen Inc                              82,204        120,556
Immunomedics Inc                          420,874        752,075
Imperial Bancorp                          585,094        653,106
Infinity Broadcast A                        9,114         31,518
Info Resources Inc                        560,210        273,996
Informix Cp                               174,571        136,860
Inmac Cp                                    2,087         20,387
Insituform Gp Ltd                          21,457            440
Insituform No Amer A                      318,668        386,918
Integra Fin Cp                            109,513         65,675
Integrated Devic Tec                      570,416        604,088
Integrated Waste Svc                      401,358        411,998
Intel Cp                                  498,394        861,767
Intelligent Elec                        1,771,547      2,053,171
Intercargo Cp                                 918         23,100
Interface Inc A                         1,039,925        792,208
Interferon Sciences                        56,045         85,590
Intergraph Cp                             834,554        339,002
Interneuron Pharm                         113,721        135,053
Intervoice Inc                            289,990        155,596
Intl Cablecasting                         622,356        508,531
Intl Dairy Queen A                        438,121        402,613
Intl Microelectronic                        4,004         37,514
Intl Mobile Mach Cp                     3,281,495      2,987,015
Invacare Cp                               278,082         93,322
Isis Pharm Inc                            370,850        365,069
Isomedix Inc                               53,557         25,292
JB Hunt Trans Svcs                        239,582        259,421
JB Restaurants Inc                          1,000         25,948
J Baker Inc                               675,068        638,330
JJ Snack Foods                             36,928         67,983
Jones Intercable A                        467,526        753,921
+Justin Industries                        200,885         14,452
KLA Instruments                           116,105        143,417
Kelley Oil Cp                             102,109         80,942
Kelly Services Cl A                       228,120        235,236
Kendall Square Resch                       18,401        101,145
Kentucky Central A                      1,718,401      1,525,168
Kirschner Medical Cp                      241,537        232,958
Knowledgeware Inc                         111,722        151,822
Komag Inc                                 367,844        243,946
Kopin Cp                                   20,650           N.L.
LDDS Comm Cl A                            204,343        192,589
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                     2,191,798      2,218,182
Landmark Graphic Cp                       121,936        497,159
Lannet Data Comm Ord                      128,887          8,631
Lasermaster Tech Inc                      424,156        417,868
Laserscope                                333,507        280,618
Lawson Products Inc                       178,616        135,815
+Lechters Inc                             572,858        642,236
Legent Cp                               1,445,305        638,677
Leisure Concepts Inc                        4,108         22,778
Liberty Media A                           233,545        234,014
Life Technologies                          29,898         49,521
Lifecore Biomedical                       304,667        441,914
LIN Broadcasting Cp                       282,963        312,347
Linear Technology Cp                      137,718         40,840
Liposome Co Inc                           768,299        797,601
Liposome Tech Inc                         398,074        424,599
Little Switzerland                        283,061        375,314
Loewen Group Inc                          438,606        438,250
Lone Star Steakhouse                      496,077        142,248
Longhorn Steaks Inc                       134,854         19,660
Lotus Development Cp                      664,058        705,516
MCI Comm Cp                             1,061,572      1,028,071
MGI Pharma Inc                             54,731         24,671
MIPS Computer                             598,307        937,619
Macmillan Bloedel                       2,355,197      2,171,825
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg                     3,770,987      2,912,664
+Mail Boxes Etc                         1,451,160      1,302,126
Manufactures Natl Cp                        8,349         26,837
Marcam Cp                                 277,694        287,596
Marsh Supermarkets B                       23,118         53,283
Matrix Pharmace Inc                        27,269         66,221
Matrix Service Co                         115,332        174,850
Maxicare Hlth New                         242,167        255,378
Maxtor Cp                                 238,903        145,051
McCaw Cellular A                          457,970        553,777
Medco Containmnt                          981,414      1,433,182
Medical Action Inds                       127,875         90,785
Medical Imaging                           313,120        338,087
Medical Marketing Gp                      443,133        414,436
Medicine Shoppe Intl                    1,485,978      1,394,572
Medicis Pharm Cl A                        584,879        461,227
Medimmune Inc                             494,596        457,366
Mentor Cp the                             997,586      1,047,660
Mentor Graphics Cp                        545,585        428,818
Mercantile Bncpn Inc                      112,838        200,666
Meridian Bncp Inc                       2,022,431         10,113
Meris Labs Inc                            212,120        202,818
Merisel Inc                               218,823        203,174
Merit Medical Sys                           7,060         37,163
Meritor Savings Bank                      735,409        727,785
Mesa Airlines Inc                         298,168        269,744
Metricom Inc                               84,285           N.L.
Miami Subs Cp                             383,105        373,675
Michael Foods Inc                       2,495,590      2,125,541
Micro Healthsys Inc                       522,108        508,670
Microcom Inc                              140,923        177,462
Microdyne Cp                               20,606         70,240
+Micrografx Inc                           235,474        175,543
Micropolis Cp                              53,108         81,395
Microsoft Cp                            1,331,263      1,301,148
Mid Atlantic Medical                      432,518        441,664
Midlantic Cp                            4,902,229      4,878,162
Midwesco Filter                               194         87,307
Miller Herman Inc                         372,538        215,046
Millicom Inc                              356,612        355,213
Modine Mfg Co                              49,199          3,310
Moleculon Inc                              20,384          1,860
Molex Inc                                 325,872        329,353
Morningstar Gp Inc                         30,555           N.L.
Multibank Fin Cp                           28,779          8,882
Multimedia Inc                            231,159        236,848
Mylex Cp                                  182,680        231,375
NESB Cp                                   119,468         92,255
NS Bancorp Inc                             63,852         90,514
Nycal Cp                                   62,928         32,801
Natec Resources Inc                       233,248        212,136
Natl Data Cp                              262,031        234,539
Nature's Bounty Inc                        34,530         12,209
Nellcor Inc                                66,579        113,639
Neorx Cp                                  935,509        991,255
Network General Cp                        460,554        506,569
Network Systems Cp                        591,968        385,894
Neutrogena Cp                             369,554        348,605
Newbridge Netwks Cp                       118,719         86,549
Nordstrom Inc                           1,652,498        968,929
North Star Universal                      495,660        461,961
Northeast Bncp                            168,285        127,650
Northern Tr Cp                             85,574         47,822
Northern Tr Dep Shrs                       33,862          3,792
Nova Pharm Cp                             376,073        350,479
Novell Inc                              1,172,630      1,128,043
Novellus Systems Inc                       96,845        237,856
Noven Pharmaceutical                      115,847         64,119
Nu-West Inds Inc                          388,843        380,865
Nucorp Inc Delaware                       143,869        229,253
Nuvision Inc                                3,647        184,297
Nview Cp                                  337,255        351,750
Octel Commun Cp                           320,156        334,105
Ohio Bncp Youngstown                       54,341         26,179
Old Kent Fin Cp                           123,037        481,580
Old Stone Cp                              467,719        478,353
On the Border Cafes                        25,000           N.L.
Onbancorp Inc                              78,081          5,033
Oncogene Science Inc                       63,342         37,441
Oracle Systems Cp                         744,145        477,471
Orbital Sciences Cp                        58,884         32,279
Oshkosh B Gosh Cl A                       402,459        360,856
Osteotech Inc                              27,154          6,705
Outback Steakhouse                        831,551        485,534
Outlook Graphics Cp                        27,965          9,694
Platinum Tech                             328,606        351,054
Pac Rim Hldg Cp                           575,922        619,423
Pacific Dunlop ADR                        614,436        599,845
Pacificare Health                         263,375        191,680
Parametric Tech Cp                      1,644,773      1,912,489
Pentair Inc                               503,430        445,970
Penwest Ltd                               232,283        235,341
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                       437,420        429,096
Pharmaceutical Mktg                       100,875         58,780
Pharmacy Mgmt Svc                         437,312        461,345
Phoenix Re Cp                              27,792          1,228
Phoenix Tech Ltd                           94,863         76,365
Phycor Inc                                244,510         93,857
Picturetel Cp                           1,203,923        764,590
Pioneer Hi Bred Intl                       44,641         24,333
Plenum Publishing Cp                      225,180        225,356
Possis Cp                                 294,043        307,301
Premier Anesthesia                         92,893         72,520
Premiere Radio Ntwks                       41,250           N.L.
Presidential Life Cp                      338,556        444,845
Presstek Inc                              726,059        747,273
Preston Cp                                 42,904         65,539
Price Co the                            2,050,071      2,500,954
Pride Pet Svcs Inc                          2,097         25,025
Procyte Cp                                 34,498          8,231
Providential Cp                            31,923         12,100
Puritan Bennett Cp                        381,778        377,253
Pyramid Technology                        522,494        517,625
Qualcomm Inc                              126,786         81,101
QVC Network Inc                           179,937        253,746
Quality Food Centers                      169,926        109,335
Quantum Cp                              3,086,187      2,726,073
Quantum Hlth Res Inc                       56,145         75,802
Quarterdeck Office                        213,491        735,867
Quiksilver Inc                            216,532        297,490
RPM Inc                                   813,983        759,416
Radiation Care Inc                        227,359        105,360
Rally's Inc                               639,608        507,007
Ramsay-HMO Inc.                            71,562         44,381
Rasterops                                  50,624        199,709
Ratners Gp ADR                            366,741        293,003
Read-Rite Cp                               38,342         59,505
Regeneron Pharmaceut                      201,918        236,912
Rentrak Cp                                388,270        378,897
Repap Enterprises Cp                      215,355        331,223
Repligen Cp                               333,922        387,086
Repossession Auct Wt                          500         21,625
Repossession Auction                       53,635          1,935
Republic Bancorp Inc                       55,658         11,577
Republic Waste Inds                       137,798        106,097
Research Industries                       896,421        850,564
Retix                                     136,262         39,321
Reuters Hldg ADR                        2,470,433      2,379,966
Ribi Immunochem                           281,157        236,168
Riggs Natl Cp the                         383,550        390,086
Roadway Services Inc                      505,484        386,857
Roberts Pharm Cp                          458,347        347,105
Roses Stores Inc                          281,146        289,359
Roses Stores Inc B                        188,385        208,067
Ross Systems Inc                            7,226         33,580
Rouse Co                                2,538,347      2,558,712
Royal Appliance Mfg                       932,714        387,113
Safeco Cp                                 269,162        174,961
Sanborn Inc                                11,937         65,608
SCI Systems Inc                           790,510        878,060
Safetytek Cp                                  932         20,200
Satellite Tech Mgmt                         7,778        256,660
Savannah Foods Inds                       812,575        818,863
Sayett Gp Inc Wts                          30,635            290
Schuler Homes Inc                          92,035         26,300
Schulman A Inc                             28,642         56,310
Sciclone Pharma Inc                        88,078         48,620
Scimed Life Sys Inc                     2,597,437      2,259,429
Scios Inc                                 134,370        241,646
Scitex Cp                                 617,838        703,243
Score Board Inc the                       707,762        397,760
Scotts Co Cl-A                            111,988         55,253
Seagate Tech                              660,814        410,243
Sequent Computer Sys                      492,073        610,321
Sequoia Sys Inc                         1,083,936      1,158,923
Seragen Inc                                 5,551         41,774
Serv Tech Inc                              20,715          2,088
Service Fracturing                         96,980          6,472
Shared Medical Sys                        128,274         92,011
Sholodge Inc                                4,810         23,242
Showbiz Pizza Time                        129,969         93,113
Sierra On Line Inc                        347,467        405,636
Sierra Tucson Cos                         545,490        758,649
Silicon Valley Bncsh                      430,466        430,832
Simpson Inds Inc                           17,575        110,484
Simula Inc                                 56,845           N.L.
Smithfield Foods Inc                       43,613         62,927
Society Cp                                299,847        311,843
Software Publishing                       119,412        163,647
Software Toolwks Inc                      589,318        584,742
Somatix Therapy Cp                        162,976        140,702
Somatogen Inc                             572,807        551,232
Sonic Cp                                  419,497        308,877
Southwest Cafes Inc                        25,442          4,181
Spartan Motors Inc                        282,293        294,592
Spear Fin Svcs Inc                          1,088         76,162
Spectranetics Cp the                      289,126        260,777
Spectrum Info Tech                        303,405        201,152
Sphinx Pharma Cp                           33,733        120,009
Sportstown Inc                             24,375           N.L.
St Jude Medical Inc                       704,723        761,075
Stac Electronics                           85,479           N.L.
Standard Microsystem                       42,636         12,264
Staples Inc                             2,775,383      2,792,575
Star Banc Cp                               50,695         29,247
Star States Cp                            328,276        335,370
State Street Boston                       903,626        759,081
Structural Dynamics                     1,502,644      1,179,431
Stryker Cp                                763,793        973,330
Sumitomo Bank of Ca                       204,250        211,665
Summit Bncp                                29,226        129,520
Summit Care Cp                                 50         45,800
Summit Tech Inc                         2,332,133      1,893,393
Sun Microsystems Inc                    3,944,143      3,559,955
Sungard Data Systems                      365,082        478,354
Sunrise Tech Inc                          837,748        692,191
Surgical Care Affil                     1,324,092      1,089,324
Surgical Laser Tech                       331,027        342,270
Sybase Inc                                278,144        279,773
Symantec Cp                               356,160        375,552
Syncor Intl Cp Del                          7,222         69,856
Synergen Inc                            1,807,358      2,028,204
Synetic Inc                               207,819        212,540
Synopsys Inc                              209,183        152,186
Synoptics Commun Inc                    1,078,248        935,833
System Software                           682,522        419,514
Systemed Inc                              565,931        503,525
Systemix Inc                              108,266         82,247
T Cell Sciences Inc                       302,898        316,462
Tetra Tech Inc                             50,313        208,814
TJ Intl Inc                               140,997        159,439
TSI Cp                                    176,672        222,285
TW Holdings Inc                         1,696,419      1,610,419
T2 Medical Inc                          4,062,628      2,532,546
Takecare Inc                              323,762        317,489
Tandon Cp                                 113,647         74,568
Tandy Brands Access                        48,837         71,801
Tanknology Environ                         26,951         85,470
Tech Solutions Co                          89,470         39,015
Tele Commun Inc A                       4,337,246      5,471,571
Telemundo Gp Inc                              635         27,377
Telios Pharma Inc                           6,556         25,813
Telxon Cp                                 676,341        600,814
The Buckle Inc                             30,830           N.L.
The Men's Wearhouse                        38,400           N.L.
Thousand Trails Inc                       222,238        237,046
Tokos Med Cp Del                        1,154,572        717,452
Topps Co Inc the                          747,971        595,009
Total Pharm Care Inc                       57,431         35,743
Triad Systems Cp                           26,120          2,645
Trimble Navigation                      1,392,079      1,448,788
Trimedyne Inc                             497,028        499,970
Tseng Labs Inc                            272,546        223,336
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A                    1,565,682      1,648,953
US Bancorp Oregon                         295,405        286,620
US Facilities Cp                           84,634        119,013
US Healthcare Inc                       1,480,376      1,869,578
UST Cp                                    270,539        304,003
Unilab Cp                                 135,805         55,409
Union Bk                                  267,540        287,384
United Gaming Inc                          26,887         47,266
United N M Fin Cp                         136,509         64,010
United Newspaper ADR                      115,200            326
Universal Intl Inc                         35,858         17,115
Valley National Cp                        624,225        995,919
Valmont Inds Inc                           17,593         93,836
Value Health Inc                          222,463         97,176
Vanguard Cellular A                       269,165        232,093
Ventritex Inc                             152,500        183,733
Verifone Inc                              458,761        517,827
Vermont Fin Svcs Cp                        18,730         60,801
Vestar Inc                                856,377        595,687
Vicor Cp                                  602,941        609,331
Video Lottery Tech                        526,682        482,052
Videocart Inc                           2,828,074      2,851,377
Videotelecom Cp                             9,401        346,565
Vidmark Inc                                34,322          9,357
Viratek Inc                               378,456        371,058
Vital Signs Inc                            12,216        332,807
Vitesse Semiconducto                       60,708        135,307
WPP Gp ADR                                794,099        934,784
Walbro Cp                                  44,842         22,032
Walker Interactive                         28,058          9,552
Washington Energy Co                    1,561,973         71,995
Washington Mut Sv Bk                    1,284,358      1,110,445
Weitek Cp                                 174,902        216,651
Wellfleet Commun Inc                      774,496        843,283
Westmark Intl Inc                         279,250        535,786
Westwood One Inc                        1,160,960      1,216,922
Wetterau Inc                              529,409        619,175
Wicat Systems Inc                         105,948          9,192
Willamette Inds Inc                       101,750         82,432
Williams-Sonoma Inc                       318,194        320,650
Worthington Foods                          93,037           N.L.
Worthington Inds Inc                      105,599        138,540
XOMA Cp                                 3,147,092      3,524,321
Xicor Inc                                  44,507          3,472
Xilinx Inc                                523,564        391,540
Xyplex Inc                                  3,753         43,291
Yellow Freight Del                        309,076        348,326
York Research Cp                        3,503,522      3,573,743
Zebra Tech Cp Cl-A                        147,805        205,960
Zeos Intl Ltd                           1,112,444        805,726
Zitel Cp                                   31,112         58,167
Zoom Telephonics Inc                      227,959        245,859

Other Nasdaq

Security Name                            05/15/92       04/15/92

Adelphia Commun Cp A                      226,251        220,402
Advanced Enviro A                         165,218        883,502
Advanced Nmr Sys Inc                      285,402        254,476
Advanced Nmr Wt B 93                       25,100              0
Ag Bag Intl Uts 94                         57,550           N.L.
Ajay Sports Inc                            21,535          3,014
Alco Intl Gp Inc                           72,670         29,350
Alpha Solarco Inc                          23,757          1,862
Amer Biomed Inc Wts                         1,265         21,065
Amer Bus Comp Cp                          254,782        322,891
Amer West Airline                         993,087      1,123,786
Angeion Cp                                229,865        233,475
Applied Laser Wts A                        82,930         43,600
Applied Laser Wts B                         9,400         30,000
Archer Commun Inc                         206,794        209,387
Artagraph Reprod                          119,696         77,591
Avitar Inc                                309,850        282,950
Avitar Inc Uts 96                         113,525        134,290
BPI Environmental                          70,095         24,669
Bailey Cp                                  25,913          5,162
Benihana Natl Cp A                         71,630         98,214
Biocontrol Tech Inc                       210,048        196,910
Biomechanics Cp Amer                       26,034         62,172
Biomedical Waste Sys                      424,921          7,280
Biopool Intl Inc                           37,962         12,305
Boca Raton Cap New                          3,000        366,136
Boston Pac Med Uts                         37,700           N.L.
CAPX Cp (Del)                             132,203        289,002
CEC Industries Cp                          77,631         39,731
Capitol Multimedia                          9,970         32,000
Cherne Medical Inc                        158,100        123,020
Churchill Tech Inc                         57,500         88,493
City Investing Uts                        250,000        250,052
Clinicorp Inc                              58,713             50
Computone Cp                               27,142          4,642
Comverse Tech Inc                         281,579        278,998
Conquest Airlines                         119,735         75,400
Cortex Pharm Inc                          313,596        301,173
Creative Learning                          59,968         18,476
Creative Tech Cp                            6,426         32,252
Crowley Finl Svcs                          17,699        153,739
Cryomedical Sci                           868,655        627,117
Cybernetics Prods Wt                       19,954            200
Dawn Capital Cp                            19,064             25
Decora Ind Inc                             38,103            500
Diagnostic Sciences                        60,243         21,328
Diamond Enter Uts 95                            0         18,730
Diamond Entertain Cp                        4,145        207,778
Docucon Inc                                77,465        136,507
Dresdner Bk Sp ADR                        702,960        168,050
Drug Screening Sys                         61,348        118,154
Eastco Ind Safety Cp                            0        138,462
Elec Clearing House                        27,155          2,011
Electro Kinetic Cl A                            0         37,129
Environ Diagnostics                           352         47,428
Farmstead Tele Wt 92                       74,000              0
Fingermatrix Inc                          132,089        151,176
Finl Data Sys Inc                          47,414          5,994
Fonic Inc                                  26,975            125
Fountain Pharm                            184,220        244,769
Fountain Pharm Wts B                       37,960         79,195
Future Med Prods                           87,583         65,966
Galagraph Ltd Ord                          47,109         18,809
Golden Triangle Oil                        26,769              0
Grease Monkey Hldg                         78,850         15,220
Great Amer Rec Pfd                          6,620         29,575
Health Club TV Ntwk                        76,686              0
Healthcare Imaging                          3,420         37,803
Hemacare Cp                               131,234        110,814
Hemodynamics Inc                          158,187         60,205
Heritage Bancorp Inc                      186,880        222,035
Highline Inds Inc                       2,009,118      3,416,368
Highline Inds Uts 94                        5,070         26,195
I Flow Cp New                               4,455         25,761
IMRE Cp                                    69,077          9,562
Info Solut Wts A                                0         57,500
Info Solutions Inc                          1,855         98,025
Intl Bankcard Svc Cp                      121,697        178,139
Intl Bus Schools Inc                       21,581              0
Intl Remote Imaging                         1,901         57,820
Jack Carl 312 Future                        7,621         41,170
Jacor Commun Inc                           21,464          3,131
Juniper Feature Wt B                       21,225              0
Kitchen Bazaar Inc                        102,195         30,000
LA Entertainment S3                        74,483          1,987
Larson Davis Inc                            3,109         33,275
Las Vegas Enter Ntwk                       51,282         19,900
Leeco Diagnostics                          71,305            980
Lidak Pharm Cl A                          175,374         24,968
Lo Jack Cp                                127,205        201,919
Magnetech Cp Wts                          185,880         48,083
Main St Main Inc                           26,177         47,232
Margate Inds Inc                          111,297              0
Mascott Cp                                      0         27,996
Mega Group Inc                                  0         68,105
Metalclad Cp                                8,827         31,985
Microterra Inc                            124,965        168,124
Minorco ADR                                 2,507         92,366
NTN Canada Inc                              9,470         75,694
Neolens Inc                               254,871        253,163
New York Testing Lab                       36,628              0
Noise Cancellation                      1,009,181        680,269
Noise Com Inc                              78,460        157,070
Nona Morelli's Ii                          32,201          7,317
Noxso Cp                                   42,858         14,520
Ntwk Equip Tech Wts                         1,225         22,021
Nutrition Mgmt Cl A                         5,210         41,700
Nutrition Mgmt Uts                         36,000              0
Nytest Environmental                       37,525             50
Orexan A Cp                                26,300            380
Omni U. S. A. Inc                          20,575             75
Pantheon Inds Inc                           3,809         35,634
Paracelsian Inc                            31,530            325
Parallel Pet Cp                             8,800         37,500
Partech Hldgs                                   0         98,219
Peerless Prod Wts                               0         25,000
Personal Diag Inc                           7,478         34,903
Pet Products Inc                            8,830         51,460
Pharmatec Inc                              33,976        121,306
Pharmetics Inc                                  0         19,596
Plants For Tomorrow                         2,111         94,581
Plastigone Tech Inc                        47,794            695
Plastigone Tech Wts                        21,550              0
Playorena Inc                               7,100         32,655
Playorena Inc Wts                          22,645          3,000
Polydex Pharm Ltd                          46,753         11,368
Projectavision Inc                        199,109         71,212
Pure Tech Intl                              1,681        185,706
Quadrax Cp                                143,868         48,374
Roadmaster Inds Inc                        31,316         12,668
Robern Apparel Inc                          3,250        156,600
Robern Apparel Wts A                      106,575         22,725
Robern Apparel Wts B                      111,455         13,155
Royce Laboratories                        693,142        634,624
Ryan-Murphy Inc Wts                        23,500          2,500
Ryka Inc                                  160,113        136,592
SGI International                       1,799,832      1,622,014
Sage Alerting System                      125,795              0
Scorpion Tech Cl-A                        380,076        307,236
Seahawk Deep Ocean                        927,728         30,250
Selvac Cp                                  15,000         70,493
Senetek ADR                               309,679        308,325
Sentex Sensing Tech                       247,658        254,964
Site Based Media Inc                      625,234         95,102
Somanetics Cp                             208,809        316,420
Somanetics Cp Wts B                       217,620        130,494
Southland Cp                               43,032         19,427
Sparta Surgical Cp                        130,207         19,490
Suprema Specialties                        24,370            175
TSS Ltd                                    21,552          1,803
Technigen Cp A                             35,903         93,761
Telefonos de Mexico                     1,041,960      2,006,716
Theragenics Cp                              6,997         28,436
Total Research Cp                          15,889         35,494
Toyota Motor Cp ADR                        22,100         46,919
Triple Threat Enterp                        6,000         36,533
Tubby's Inc                                     0         30,813
US Pawn Inc                                 1,319        148,229
United Heritage Cp                         25,979         57,313
Valley Forge Sci Cp                       343,381        312,698
Valuevision Intl A                         22,940          3,548
Vector Aeromotive                              10         21,413
Ventura Entertain                          57,487         88,573
Vimrx Pharm Inc                           229,474        240,241
Visual Equities Inc                        28,122              0
Western Canada Bev                         36,851         14,444
Western Deep Lvl ADR                        1,128         21,858
Wisconsin Pharmacal                        75,286         29,164
Xscribe Cp                                 42,834         18,493


Short Interest Tables Explained

    These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month
of at least 200,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at
least 18,271 shares.

    Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

T -- National Market System.

N.L. -- Not listed.

+ -- Stock split.

* May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations.

    Short interest may also be affected by options positions.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1992


                             1442 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 28, 1992 Thursday

SECTION: FOOD; Pg. FOOD-1

LENGTH: 1648 words

HEADLINE: Guess who's coming to (cook) dinner?

BYLINE: MAUREEN CLANCY, Food Editor

BODY:

   At the time it seemed like such a simple idea. Take one personable,
enormously talented French chef.

   Put him in a home kitchen with a bunch of food and an extra pair of hands and
watch him cook up a great dinner. But then, Woodrow Wilson probably thought the
League of Nations was a pretty simple idea, too. The dinner would be a benefit
for the year-old San Diego Regional Cancer Center, a leader in immunotherapy and
gene therapy research. The chef would be Jean-Marie Meulien, chef at Le Clos
Longchamp restaurant in Le Meridien Etoile, Partis and consulting chef for
Marius restaurant at Le Meridien in Coronado. The kitchen and the extra pair of
hands would be mine. I got to know, like and respect Meulien in Paris last fall.

   He gamely led me on a four-hour, pre-dawn tour of the huge market at Rungis,
then prepared a stunning dinner at Le Clos Longchamp, which rates two stars in
the venerable Michelin guide. At that time, I suggested my dinner idea to him
and received the classic Gallic response: "Why not?" Susan Thomas, director of
public relations at the Coronado Meridien and Sergio Mangini, general manager,
said oui (or was that oi) and we were off and running. Thomas started scheming
about dates, menus, tablecloths and glassware. Cancer Center president Dr. Ivor
Royston started drawing up a guest list of benefactors. My kids started worrying
about what strange and unmentionable foodstuffs would be foisted upon them on
the big night. My editors started salivating over the story that could come out
of such an adventure. And I started parleing Francais.

   Sure, I was concerned that my kitchen wouldn't be up to snuff.

   The refrigerator needed cleaning; the disposal was on the fritz; and I had
broken my last rubber spatula on a particularly intransigent batch of brownie
batter. But first things first.

   My French was as stop-and-go as rush hour traffic. Meulien's English is
virtually non-existent.

   So the first step was to set up lessons with my now-and-then tutor, Janette
Tihanyi. The day before C-day (C for Cooking and for an adventure that required
almost as much strategic planning as the assault on Omaha Beach), I picked up
wines for the dinner and set three tables (including one rented for the
occasion) for 32 people, using an assortment of tableware from my cabinets and
Le Meridien. That evening, I worked out a seating chart, scoured counters and
floor and washed the hanging copper pans that gather dust each day while I heat
up take-out goodies. In the morning, I cleared space in the fridge, packing
beach coolers with the juice boxes and jams, pickles and peanut butter that I
figured Meulien wouldn't need. I bought huge bags of crushed ice for drinks, ice
buckets and the like and picked up the floral arrangements. I was just about to
shampoo Sam, the lovable but grungy resident Lab, when Le Meridien's shiny white
van pulled in the driveway.

   In a scene straight out of "S.W.A.T.", four doors opened simultaneously, and
out hopped an assault team of chefs carrying huge baking sheets, towers of
frying pans, bags and cartons of groceries, sci-fi-sized plastic tubs of soups
and sauces, and what looked like enough heavy cream to set America3 afloat.
After greetings, introductions, small talk about the weather and handshakes
galore, Meulien moved with deliberation to set up his kitchen. Suddenly every
inch of space was covered with the trappings of haute cuisine.

   Baby zucchini, with blossoms still attached, were lined up on massive cookie
sheets like so many synchronized Rockettes.

   Baskets of blackberries and blueberries were grouped on tile counters to
avoid staining butcherblock surfaces.

   The empty fridge quickly became overloaded and a large vat of cream-infused
lobster soup had to be placed in a sink with cold water and ice. The counter in
front of our Wolf range was lined with bottles of vinegars and oils, a tub of
mushrooms, kosher salt, peppermills and paper towels. Meulien tossed Marius cook
Marion O'Connor a key to unlock his enormous metal box of knives. First task on
the agenda was preparing the zucchini blossoms for their Provencal
mushroom-and-herbs stuffing.

   Meulien asked me to watch as he gently removed the bright yellow pistils from
a blossom, then separated the blossom from the baby zucchini.

   "These are the best part," he said in French, holding up the fragile pistils.

   "I saute them with a little olive oil and garlic.

   Mmmm. Delicious." After we de-flowered about 150 zucchini, Meulien
demonstrated splitting the fragile blossom with his fingers, just enough to
insert the stuffing but not so much that the stuffing would fall out.

   Then, slowly and precisely, he slashed the lower end of each zucchini with
five quick motions, then pressed it into a graceful fan. Looked easy enough to
me.

   I grabbed my favorite knife and set to work. After just two or three slashes,
I heard what became a familiar refrain. "Ooh, non, non, non, " said Meulien,
taking the knife from me and pressing his fingers on the blade to prove that
this knife wasn't about to really CUT anything. Sharpening and scolding
complete, I set to work on the green sea of veggies, slashing some perfectly,
others less perfectly and gobbling up the really gross errors so Meulien
wouldn't see them. We stuffed the blossoms with sauteed mushrooms perfumed with
tarragon and thyme; then steamed them and set them aside for their dinnertime
rendezvous with a shiny tomato sauce. We chopped onions and cooked lentils to
garnish the cream of lobster and lentil soup that would kick off the feast.

   We readied tiny balls of barely cooked carrots, snipped chervil and slivered
smoked salmon for cocktail-hour nibbles. Two waiters arrived with Marius' maitre
d'hotel, Sheridan Dowling.

   They surveyed the table, buffed glasses to a high sheen, lined up errant
chairs, then carefully cut a huge block of butter into individual squares.
That's when the bomb hit.

   The only big flap of the day.

   Meulien asked for the butter to ready the saute pans for the beef fillets. By
now, the pace was picking up in the kitchen; chitchat was slowing down; the
clock was ticking away.

   And when Meulien discovered that some of the butter had been used for the
table, he flipped his toque.

   Quietly, mind you.

   But, with eloquent gesticulations and rapid-fire French, he made it clear
that the crew should have brought more butter. I hastily offered to run out and
buy more.

   However, my suggestion was politely dismissed by both Meulien and Herbeck,
who chose to repair to separate corners of the kitchen and work in silence.
Preparations continued.

   The tails and claws of freshly steamed Maine lobsters were sliced into
medallions.

   Red bean and celery root purees were warmed and seasoned.

   The prettiest of the squash blossoms were deep-fried to be used as a central
garnish for each plate. The count-down continues There was a trip back to the
hotel to pick up freshly baked breads and picture-perfect, individual apple
tarts.

   Since the massive baking trays wouldn't fit through the kitchen door, we had
to rig up plastic crate "pedestals" in the yard, putting the cloth-covered trays
on top.

   We all took turns checking to make sure that Sam was locked securely in her
dog run. I made a quick trip up the street for more butter, then fired up the
backyard grill to cook turkey burgers for my children, who eyed the plethora of
zucchini with great disdain. At 7:15 p.m., Meulien and the crew stepped into the
back yard for the obligatory "pre-curtain" smoke. As the work progressed, I
learned a lot more than how to stuff squash blossoms and prepare tomato coulis.

   I also learned about cleanliness, organization and precision. And formality.
(I quickly discovered that a professional French kitchen is not a place for pet
names.

   My calling Meulien "Jean-Marie" was the irreverent equivalent of Bart Simpson
calling his teacher "Yo, dude.") My French improved a bit, too.

   One word I'll never forget is pile(pronounced peel), which means "exactly, on
the dot," as in "your guests will sit down to the table at 7:30 pile." When I
tried to shift the convivial, slow-moving crowd into the dining room at 7:28,
Meulien stood in the kitchen doorway, dead serious, arms folded and foot
tapping. It's showtime! When the guests were seated, the kitchen became consumed
with a frenzy I wouldn't have thought possible given the calm, leisurely pace of
the afternoon.

   Meulien did laps around the center island, ladling soup into the garnished
bowls.

   "Allez, allez, allez," (Let's go) he prodded as Herbeck and I scooped
egg-shaped dollops of pistachio-flavored custard atop each soup. Later the
stuffed zucchini blossoms were presented to the appreciative audience. (Frankly,
I didn't have much of an appetite for zucchini.) The Angus beef fillets were
sauteed and sauced. Apple tarts were dusted with sugar, caramelized with a
blow-torch, then centered on plates we had "decorated" with a narrow border of
caramel sauce dotted with bittersweet chocolate sauce. The last dessert plate
disappeared through the swinging door, but the activity in the kitchen didn't
let up.

   Boxes were packed; pots and pans washed.

   I introduced Meulien and Herbeck to the dinner guests, who responded with
enthusiastic applause.

   Though encouraged to remain in the dining room, the chefs hustled back into
the kitchen, where, standing at counters, they sampled their handiwork. As he
dug into the beef, Meulien seemed to pay no heed to the extraordinary flavor of
his creation, but rather raved over the red wine, a 1988 Chateau Potensac from
the Medoc region of Bordeaux. It was nearly midnight when the last guest
departed, the last stack of pans was loaded into the hotel's van.

   The chefs were off for a few hours' sleep before gearing up for their next
work day. And I was left with a sauce-stained notebook, a kitchen of dirty
glasses, renewed respect for chefs and lots of extraordinary memories. Oh, yes.

   And a refrigerator full of butter.

GRAPHIC: 6 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Zucchini blossoms are stuffed with herbed
mushrooms and garnished with baby zucchini. 2. French lesson: Chef Jean-Marie
Meulien of Paris shows food editor Maureen Clancy how to prepare baby zucchini.
3. Fillet of Angus beef is sauced with veal stock and berries. 4. First course:
Meulien adds cream of lobster and lentil soup to bowls. 5. Deserving a hand: Le
Meridien chefs Rene Herbeck (above, at left) and Jean-Marie Meulien are
applauded by their dinner guests. (FOOD-2) 6. Taking a break: Chef Meulien
(right) relaxes after a long day. (FOOD-2) 7. BON MOTS FROM MUELIEN 8. MORE BON
MOTS FROM MUELIEN (FOOD-2); PHOTOBY: 2,5. Union-Tribune / JOHN NELSON

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1443 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                May 23, 1992, Saturday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 606 words

HEADLINE: S.D. SCIENTISTS HOLD HIGH HOPES FOR NEW GENE THERAPY METHOD

BYLINE: By NORA ZAMICHOW, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   San Diego scientists announced Friday a new method of gene therapy that they
say will prove cheaper and more practical than techniques now used in the
cutting-edge field.

   "We wanted a technique that was more practical and that could be generally
applied to more cancers. And we found one," said Dr. Robert E. Sobol of the San
Diego Regional Cancer Center. "The result is a more generally applicable method
of gene therapy."

   With the new technique, researchers employ skin cells to act as messengers
that will stimulate the body's immune system, prompting it to ward off cancer
cells.

   Sobol, who works with Dr. Ivor Royston, scientific director of the cancer
center, presented the team's findings Friday at the third annual meeting of the
American Assn. for Cancer Research.

   In gene therapy, a field so new it was a mere notion 20 years ago, scientists
are still attempting to translate the promise of ideas to actual medications
that can treat patients with deadly diseases.

   With gene therapy, scientists hope to one day edit the body's genetic code,
stifling harmful genes and promoting useful ones. While traditional medications
treat the symptoms of disease, gene therapy attempts to target the actual
causes.

   Until now, gene therapy scientists have relied on genetically engineered
tumor cells to stimulate the body, prompting the immune system's attack. But the
cancer cells, Sobol said, have proven difficult to grow and to genetically
manipulate. Cells for lung, breast and colon cancers have long thwarted
scientists' efforts to grow them outside the body.

   By contrast, the skin cells -- or fibroblast -- are readily obtainable, grow
without difficulty in cultures, and can be easily manipulated genetically, Sobol
said. "We felt it had definite advantages."

   To make these cells useful in battling cancer, scientists modify them
genetically so they secrete cytokines, or substances that stimulate the immune
system. Sobol and his group are working specifically with the cytokine called
interleukin-2.

   In a preliminary study of mice, data showed that 60% of mice tested with this
new gene therapy were protected against colo-rectal cancer, while all those in
the unprotected control group got tumors.

   "With gene therapy, by taking genetically modified fibroblast, we were able
to significantly enhance anti-tumor activity," Sobol said.

   In the group of mice treated with the new method of gene therapy, most warded
off cancer. And, among those 40% that got cancer, the tumors were smaller than
their counterparts in the control group.

   More important, Sobol believes the method is not limited to a particular type
of cancer.

   "The approach we developed is more generally applicable to different types of
cancer than the other methods," he said.

   Last fall, federal officials asked Sobol, Royston and their colleagues to
conduct more experiments when the team asked for permission to begin using the
therapy on human patients.

   In the months ahead, scientists will continue to investigate gene therapy,
seeking to ensure that it's safe. Armed with the new data, including the study
presented Friday, the team will probably return to federal officials, asking
once again for permission.

   Because of the unique nature of the therapy, the team will need permission
from two federal authorities: the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee with the
National Institutes of Health, and the Food and Drug Administration.

   Sobol and the others believe they will be able to treat human patients by
early next year. The study would be limited to cancer patients for whom other
treatments have failed or there is no treatment.


                             1444 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1992 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                              May 22, 1992 Friday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme links growth to cystic fibrosis products

BYLINE: MICHAEL E. KNELL

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. said yesterday it expects an 80 percent jump in profits this
year as it readies a two-pronged attack on cystic fibrosis.

   A region leader in the young biotechnology industry, Genzyme sees next year
as a boom time that will include construction of a $75-million complex in
Allston, expansion of its Cambridge headquarters and rapid profit growth.

   "In the coming year, you will see the company expand in every visible area,"
Henri A. Termeer, Genzyme chairman, president and chief executive officer, told
shareholders at yesterday's annual meeting.

   Genzyme last year had revenues of $121.7 million, up from $54.8 million in
1990 and $34.3 million the year before. However, last year's $19.6 million
profit followed two years of large losses, and sales remain dependent on a
handful of products.

   "It's our goal to independently create a major new health-care products
company," Termeer said. "But with all respect to what we have done, we clearly
are in the first mile of a marathon."

   Cystic fibrosis afflicts one of every 2,500 children.

   "Cystic fibrosis is our largest single research project and our largest
future opportunity," he said. "Without any doubt, this is a billion-dollar
opportunity for the company."

   The disease can be treated with either replacement of defective proteins or a
gene therapy that helps the body itself make new protein, said Genzyme Senior
Vice President Alan E. Smith.

   The company's leading product now is Ceredase, a treatment for Gaucher
disease.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1445 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 22, 1992 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 841 words

HEADLINE: Molecule may aid cancer fight;
Potent chemical made at Scripps disrupts DNA of malignant cells

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists at The Scripps Research Institute report they have synthesized a
chemical that in laboratory tests has proved more potent than most other known
chemotherapies in killing cancer cells while sparing normal cells. The chemical
cuts through cancer cells' DNA, their genetic instructions, disrupting the
cells' ability to reproduce. "We find it to be extremely promising as an
anti-cancer agent," said K.C. Nicolaou, chairman of Scripps' chemistry
department and the scientist who led the research. The chemical's ability to
leave normal cells intact is exciting to scientists because it means a resulting
therapy could have fewer side effects than existing treatments.

   The work is reported in the journal Science today. "The molecule looks like a
sophisticated weapon," Nicolaou said, "with a delivery system, a triggering
device and a warhead which will explode at the right moment to destroy the DNA
in the cancer cells." A simpler version of a naturally occurring anti-bacterial
agent called dynemicin A, the new molecule was effective in shrinking leukemia
and breast and lung cancers in mice while showing almost no side effects. If
similar levels of success can be achieved in human trials, the agent could be
among the most effective chemotherapies known, the La Jolla scientists said.
Lawrence Piro, director of the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation's cancer
center, said he hopes to begin clinical tests in people within 12 to 18 months
if additional experiments in mice prove successful. The Scripps work was
discussed yesterday at the annual meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research.

   The convention has brought some 6,500 scientists to San Diego for
presentations on the latest discoveries and newest therapies being explored for
fighting cancer.

   Wolfgang W. Wrasidlo, a member of the Scripps team, described the chemical's
initial results in mice. The chemical was more effective than most common
chemotherapy agents in tests on more than two dozen types of cancer cells in lab
cultures, including leukemia, breast, skin, ovarian and solid tumors, the
scientists found. It was especially effective against leukemia, a cancer of the
blood.

   The synthetic chemical destroyed more than 99 percent of leukemia cells,
while damaging far less than 1 percent of normal cells.

   It did so with about one one-thousandth the concentration of more standard
chemical agents used against leukemia. The chemotherapies it was tested against
include cis-platin, doxorubicin, vinblastine, bleomycin and taxol, the
much-touted chemical from the yew tree, which studies indicate may join the
ranks of the most effective chemotherapies.

   Once in cells, the new Scripps molecule seems to be more precise in the
mechanism it uses to kill than are the other chemotherapies, which do more
generalized damage, Nicolaou said. In mice given the agent, tumors shrank
dramatically, while the only apparent side effect was that the mice's usually
smooth coat turned fuzzy, Wrasidlo said. "The data imply that this compound
represents close to an ideal chemotherapy agent," Piro said.

   He cautioned that the new molecule could have adverse effects that show up
later in the animal testing or in the human trails. The scientists do not fully
understand how their chemical is triggered to disable the cells or why it has
such "dramatic selectivity" for attacking cancer cells, Nicolaou said.

   "Still, the results are exciting as they are," he said. The scientists think
they can further refine the molecule so that it will be delivered with greater
reliability just to cancer cells, sparing even more normal cells than in initial
trials, Nicolaou said. John Brauman, a Stanford University chemist, described
the molecule as "significant" and said it may exhibit characteristics other
anti-cancer agents do not, but he added that only further testing can prove its
value as a medicine. Isolated by drug companies in 1987 from soil samples, the
naturally occurring dynemicin A is an anti-bacterial agent created by one type
of bacteria to fight off other bacteria.

   Dynemicin A has a remarkable ability to attack cancer cells, but it also
proved toxic in animal studies. Nicolaou took on the difficult task of first
conceiving of a simpler, synthetic version of dynemicin A and then mixing
chemicals in the lab to build it in hopes that the synthetic would be less
toxic, as well as easier to obtain. Using his weaponry analogy, Nicolaou
explained that the molecule penetrates the cancer cell's nucleus, where the DNA
is located.

   Once there, a "trigger" of sulfur atoms on the molecule is activated by some
unknown mechanism, causing a "molecular warhead" of carbon atoms to become
highly reactive.

   They pull hydrogen atoms from the DNA -- essentially cutting up the genetic
material. The damaged DNA has no way to tell the cell to reproduce, and the
spread of cancer is stopped. Why normal cells are spared similar damage remains
a mystery, Nicolaou said, speculating that they may retain an ability to repair
damage from the "warhead" that the cancer cells lack.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: K.C. Nicolaou | chemist (A-15)

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1446 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 21, 1992 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: Researchers turning table on cancer cells

BYLINE: SCOTT LaFEE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Fighting cancer with chemotherapy is often a war of diminishing returns
because many kinds of cancer cells employ a little-known gene to make them
increasingly resistant to even the most powerful drugs. But researchers at the
National Cancer Institute believe they have turned the table on such cancer
cells through a new genetic therapy that uses the same gene to protect healthy
cells even as doctors attack the cancer with much-heavier doses of drugs.
Reporting at yesterday's opening session of the American Association for Cancer
Research meeting in San Diego, Dr. Michael Gottesman said he and colleagues hope
to begin clinical trials using the therapy on humans next year, pending
government approval.

   The first cases would likely be patients with breast cancer, a disease that
kills approximately 45,000 American women annually. In current chemotherapy
treatment for breast cancer, powerful drugs like methotrexate and
cyclophosphamide generally eradicate healthy bone marrow cells while destroying
some, but not necessarily all, of the cancer.

   A larger dose might destroy more of the cancer, particularly if done early in
the treatment, but it would also be more devastating to the bone marrow, which
is vital to the body's immune system. In such cases, the patient could end up
threatened by both cancer and deadly infections. Gottesman's process involves
manipulating a relatively newly discovered gene called Multidrug Resistance 1
(MDR1), which is found throughout the body.

   When employed by a cell, MDR1 produces a protein called P-Glycoprotein that
sits upon the surface of the cell and acts like a chemical pump.

   As toxic substances begin to penetrate the cell, the P-Glycoprotein siphons
them off and exudes them before they can do damage. The effect is "very useful
to tumor cells because it protects them from many drugs simultaneously," said
Gottesman.

   "We estimate that it's probably expressed in 50 percent of all cancers in
significant proportions." Every kind of cell in the human body contains the MDR1
gene but many do not actively use it.

   Researchers do not know why.

   Mature bone marrow cells and most types of mature blood cells, for example,
leave the MDR1 gene turned off. Tumor cells, on the other hand, leave the gene
turned on.

   Cancer cells not quickly destroyed by chemotherapy drugs are able to pump out
the toxins while more sensitive and defenseless bone marrow cells absorb the
toxic drugs and die. "The reason for failure (of the treatment) is that the
drugs cannot accumulate in the cancer cells," said Gottesman.

   "We believe the drugs are removed from the cell's membrane before they ever
get in.

   If they can get past the cell's surface, they can kill it." Gottesman, Dr.
Ira Pastan, Dr. Arthur Nienhuis of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
and their colleagues figured the only way to boost chemotherapy dosages was to
create the same pump defense in healthy bone marrow cells. Working with mice,
the researchers extracted healthy bone marrow cells and injected the animals
with cancer cells.

   A harmless, non-reproducing virus carrying the activated MDR1 gene was
inserted into the extracted bone marrow stem cells.

   These treated cells were then re-injected into the mice and a program of
chemotherapy begun. "There was no drop in the white count of the mice," said
Gottesman, indicating that the treated bone marrow not only survived stronger
chemotherapy dosages, but appeared to reproduce and replace the original, weaker
marrow. In fact, Gottesman said the MDR1-treated marrow appeared to survive and
spread well enough that only one injection per mouse was required. Inder Verma
of the Salk Institute in La Jolla said Gottesman's proposed treatment was, "on
principal, a good idea.

   It's the execution that must still be worked out.

   There are two questions that must be answered.

   One, how well will it protect healthy cells over a long period and, two, how
do you ensure that all cell types are protected?" Women with breast cancer are
likely to be the first patients because bone marrow transplants already are part
of the accepted cancer treatment, which withdraws some marrow before
chemotherapy simply to preserve it for reintroduction later. Gottesman said if
clinical trials go well he hopes to insert the MDR1 gene into a patient's bone
marrow before chemotherapy and thus avoid compromising the immune system
altogether. In related research, Dr. Robert Sobol, a researcher at UCSD and the
San Diego Regional Cancer Center, outlined efforts to develop a different form
of gene therapy that would fight melanoma and cancers of the kidney, colon and
lymph system. Sobol's research, conducted with Ivor Royston and Habib Fakhrai,
both of the cancer center, and Theodore Friedman of UCSD, involves genetically
altering human skin cells called fibroblasts, then injecting them into the
patient. The fibroblasts contain the gene for interlukin 2, a protein believed
to be crucial in drawing the immune system's cancer-killing T cells to tumors.

   By boosting the body's natural defenses, the researchers believe the therapy
might apply to many types of cancers. Sobol said the group hopes to seek federal
approval for tests on humans later this year.

   The research on the gene therapy techniques has been supported by a grant
from the Lawrence Family Foundation.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1447 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 15, 1992, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 3750 words

HEADLINE: ALL USA HIGH SCHOOL ACADEMIC TEAM

BODY:

    Meet the 20 students on the 1992 All-USA Academic First Team.

   They are biologists and poets, musicians and math theorists,
environmentalists and historians. They were selected by 10 judges - all
educators - as representatives of the nation's best.

   ''The richness and diversity of their interests is striking,'' says judge
Jack Delaney. ''As in other years, I'm astounded at how much these kids have
accomplished at such a young age.''

Adam Abramson
Massapequa (N.Y.) H.S.   -  GPA: 4.0   -  SAT: 1420

- Achievements: Developed neuro-opthalmologic procedure to test vision for early
sign of dysfunction, results submitted to medical journal; awards in math,
biology, writing; columnist, local newspaper; volunteer at nursing home, Big
Brothers/Big Sisters; vice president,
student government; varsity soccer, tennis.    -  Parents: Martin,

Sharon Abramson
-  College: Harvard   -  Nominated by: Arnold Herman

Patricia Bachiller

    Scotch Plains-Fanwood H.S., Scotch Plains, N.J.
-  GPA: 4.0   -  SAT: 1530

- Achievements: Recorded, analyzed song patterns of an Australian finch species
to find similarities in vocal expressions between fathers and sons; awards in
French, writing, poetry reading; pianist; writer for Girl Scouts newsletter;
varsity swimming.
- Parents: Betsy, Tomas Bachiller
- College: Princeton
- Nominated by: Jeff Spring

Erik Bauer
Niles West H.S., Skokie, Ill.   -  Home: Lincolnwood, Ill.
-  GPA: 4.0   -  SAT: 1600

- Achievements: Isolated gangliosides from bovine brains to study their role in
skin cancer; research earned trip to Nobel Prize ceremonies in Sweden; awards in
Spanish, math, English; peer tutor in English, chemistry, physics, math,
Spanish; co-editor, school newspaper; varsity gymnastics.
- Parents: Bruce, Sally Bauer
-  College: Harvard   -  Nominated by: Angela Graham

Anna Kim

    Alhambra (Calif.) H.S.
- Home: Monterey Park, Calif.
-  GPA: 3.97   -  SAT: 1560

- Achievements: Research on metabolism of daunorubicin, a drug used in
chemotherapy, and its potential cardio-toxicity; prize-winning cello soloist;
hospital volunteer.
- Parents: Hea, Yong Sool Kim
- College: Harvard
- Nominated by: Duane Nichols

Michael Capiro

    Killian H.S., Miami, Fla.
- GPA: 3.93 - SAT: 1430
- Achievements: Research discovered conclusive link between rare Australian
bacteria and peptic ulcers; now working on treatment; organized multicultural
ethnic awareness program; organized food, clothing collections for homeless;
volunteer ''listener'' for elementary school pupil; tae kwon do black belt;
awards in extemporaneous speaking.
- Parents: Gilberto, Norma Capiro
- College: U. of Miami
- Nominated by: Ginger Klingensmith

Adam Breon

    Henry Gunn H.S., Palo Alto, Calif.
-  GPA: 4.0   -  SAT: 1600

- Achievements: Worked at Crocker Nuclear Laboratory on analysis of power
systems required to survey air quality in remote areas; re-established school's
dormant computer club; president, Latin club; tutors computer literacy at
elementary school; awards in chemistry, biology, math; student government;
prize-winning chili cook.
- Parents: Dick, Marty Breon
- College: Princeton
- Nominated by:
Arthur Farmer

Edison Chiu

    Bellaire (Texas) H.S.
-  GPA: 4.0   -  SAT: 1530

- Achievements: Research at Anderson Cancer Center finds evidence that
ultraviolet radiation is carcinogenic; awards in biology, calculus, writing;
founder, school bridge club; officer, chess club; adult literacy tutor;
volunteer, Special Olympics.
- Parents: Chen-Hwa, Nai-hui Chiu
- College: Stanford
- Nominated by: Eleanor Smith

Peter Khalifah

    Shawnee Mission (Kan.) South H.S.
- Home: Overland Park, Kan.
-  GPA: 4.0   -  SAT:  1570

- Achievements: Research at Rockhurst College created ''artificial red blood
cells'' by encapsulating hemoglobin; could reduce danger of contracting disease
through blood transfusion; clarinetist; awards in math, computer programmming;
varsity cross-country.
- Parents: Lilla, Raja Khalifah
- College: Duke
- Nominated by: Vivian Cornwell

Kathryn Ingram

    Cedar Creek School, Ruston, La.
-  GPA: 4.0   -  ACT: 30

- Achievements: Research at Louisiana Tech finds low levels of radiation improve
germination, vigor and yield of bush bean seeds; award-winning pianist, writer;
campaign volunteer for George Bush, local Democratic candidates; organized drive
to preserve historic neighborhood; volunteer pianist at nursing home, guide at
museum; varsity tennis.
- Parents: Gaye, Glynn Ingram
- College: U. of the South
- Nominated by: Daphne Jewell

Bert Huang

- SAT: 1560
- Achievements: Developed supercomputer program to model genetic
''proofreading'' by enzymes that preserve genetic heritage; looks at role of
methylation in mutation process, suggests methods of control; all-state
violinist; yearbook managing editor; national chairman, mock Republican National
Convention; Eagle Scout.
- Parents: Shwu-Yong , Wuu-Liang Huang
- College: Harvard
- Nominated by: John Beam

Peter Lee

    North Augusta (S.C.) H.S.
-  GPA: 4.0   -  SAT: 1440

- Achievements: Developed model that expands Pascal's Triangle into three-
dimensional pyramid, then into structure of infinite dimensions; volunteer, soup
kitchen and thrift shop; pianist; student government; Eagle Scout; captain,
varsity soccer.
- Parents: Myung, Young-Hi Lee
- College: MIT
- Nominated by: Terry Skidmore

Susan Lee
Thomas Jefferson H.S. for Science & Technology, Alexandria, Va.   -

Home: Burke, Va.
-  GPA: 3.86   -  SAT: 1500

- Achievements: Working four hours before school in morning, wrote computerized
air traffic communication program for Virginia defense contractor; awards in
Spanish, dance; chair, school superintendent's student advisory council;
executive board, county PTA; founder, varsity drill team; library volunteer;
president, church youth group.
- Parents: Dr. and Mrs. Jung-Keun Lee
- College: Harvard
- Nominated by: Donald Hyatt

Ashley Lowe

    South Dade H.S., Homestead, Fla.
-  GPA: 4.0   SAT: 1550

- Achievements: Five-piece writing portfolio, ranging from expository paper on
Faulkner to sonnet on orchids, wins top regional writing prize; published poet;
editor, school literary magazine; toured with Lightsource '88, choral group; on
missionary team to Jamaica; nursing home volunteer; exchange student in Finland
- Parents: John, Susan Lowe
- College: U. of North Carolina-Chapel Hill
- Nominated by: Beth Garner

Anshul Patel

    Roslyn H.S., Roslyn Heights, N.Y.
-  GPA: 4.0   -  SAT: 1580

- Achievements: Research at Michigan State U. to determine if bacteria strain
can biologically control the nematode, an agricultural pest; awards in writing,
debate; championship mock trial team; hospital volunteer; tutor; varsity track.
- Parents: Mahendra, Surekha Patel
- College: Harvard
- Nominated by: Charles Duggan

 Richard Radke

    Rufus King H.S., Milwaukee, Wis.
- Home: Brown Deer, Wis.
-  GPA: 4.0   SAT: 1540

- Achievements: Wrote program allowing computer to ''talk'' by disassembling
words into phonetic components, sending pronunciations to circuit board that
makes speech sounds; expanded program to speak English and Spanish; a top-
ranked Wisconsin math student three years; peer tutor in math, science; head
delegate, Model Organization of American States; church volunteer.
- Parents: Rita, Robert Radke
- College: Rice
- Nominated by: Henry Kranendonk

David Reich

    Georgetown Day H.S., Washington, D.C.
- Home: Chevy Chase, Md.
- GPA: 3.91
- SAT: 1530
- Achievements: Published op-ed piece in New York Times challenging ''political
correctness'' of questions on SAT; debated issue on TV, radio; tutor in
chemistry, physics, math; clarinet soloist; founder, school chess team; editor,
literary magazine; volunteer with Amnesty International, program for homeless
women.
Parents: Tova, Walter Reich
College: Harvard
Nominated by: Bruce Vinik

Cara Reichel

    West Rome H.S., Rome, Ga.
- GPA: 4.0
- SAT: 1510
- Achievements: Published A Stone Promise, children's book about orphan in
Gothic France who becomes stonecutter and brings beauty to the world; published
short stories, poetry; awards in calculus, history, speech, French; plays piano,
flute; Bible School art director; wrote, directed Sunday School play.
- Parents: Charles, Sharon Reichel
- College: Princeton
- Nominated by: Terry Lambert

Jamie Wells

    William Penn Charter School, Philadelphia
-  Home: Cherry Hill, N.J.   -  GPA: 3.95   -  SAT: 1430

- Achievements: Research at Georgetown University on gene therapy in mammary
cells; founded adopt-a-grandparent program at nursing home; organized peer
tutoring program; produced comic book with original drawings on gulf war;
president, debate society; volunteer at homeless shelter; varsity tennis;
lacrosse goalie.
-  Parents: Estine, Richard Wells   -  College: Yale

- Nominated by: Alice Davis

Dona Wu

    Coconino H.S., Flagstaff, Ariz.
-  GPA: 3.96   -  SAT: 1470

- Achievements: Immunology research with Food and Drug Administration at
post-doctoral level; results to be presented at International Congress of
Immunology in Budapest; awards in chemistry, math, history; pianist. - Parents:
Ankee, Sherman Wu
- College: Harvard
- Nominated by: Jack Boehle

 Ali Zarrinpar

    Beverly Hills (Calif.) H.S.
-  GPA: 3.84   -  SAT: 1540

- Achievements: Research on pheromones, potential replacement for insecticides
in controlling farmland pests; 50 hours college credit at UCLA; president,
California Scholastic Federation; awards, math, chemistry, writing, photography;
Mensa member; varsity football, track.
- Parents: David, Ozra Zarrinpar
- College: Harvard
- Nominated by: Joseph Hooker

 SECOND TEAM

    Anu Bansal, East Greenwich (R.I.) High School; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1460; Project:
Research on an acidic form of vitamin A's ability to inhibit HIV expression in
animal cultures.
Kobie Boykins, Northwest High School, Omaha, Neb.; GPA: 4.0; ACT: 28; Project:
Research at Iowa State U. on microwave patterns shows food cooking speed varies
at vertical levels in microwave oven.
Lawrence Brown III, Lawrence High School, Lawrenceville, N.J.; GPA: 4.0; SAT:
1510; Project: Research on lambda-k definability of second order non- homogenous
linear differential equations.
Sandra Cha, Potomac, Md.; Holton-Arms School, Bethesda, Md.; GPA: 3.94; SAT:
1550; Project: In research at University of Wisconsin-Superior, developed
computer models to determine acid levels of rain water.
Leslie Chun, Iolani School, Honolulu, Hawaii; GPA: 3.96; SAT: 1470; Project:
Analyzed molecular models of pollutants to predict water purification
efficiencies.
Terrance Dee, Palmetto High School, Miami; GPA: 3.71; SAT: 1420; Project:
Research at U. of Miami aids study of male sexual function after spinal cord
injury.
Jason Hwang, Arcadia (Calif.) High School; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1520; Project:
Research on effects of natural and synthetic inhibitors on components of human
blood-clotting system.
Kunal Kanitkar, Richland Northeast High School, Columbia, S.C.; GPA: 4.0; SAT:
1500; Project: Historical research on Northern abolitionists living with newly
freed slaves on South Carolina islands during Civil War.
Janice Lee, Bethel Park (Pa.) High School; GPA: 3.85; SAT: 1410; Project:
Research on using carbon fibers to improve concrete's weather resistance.
Justin Massengale, Palm Bay High School, Melbourne, Fla.; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1490;
Project: Biological research finds mutant bacteria cells that lack two important
proteins also have abnormal calcium levels.
Arthur Melendres, Valley High School, Albuquerque, N.M.; GPA: 4.0; ACT: 27;
Project: Research proves lime juice kills salmonella bacteria.
Frank Pasquale III, Paradise Valley High School, Phoenix; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1530;
Project: Won National Citizen Bee, competition covering wide range of issues in
history, economics, social sciences.
David Rothbart, Community High School, Ann Arbor, Mich.; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1380;
Project: Wrote musical drama performed professionally in Michigan; published
poetry collection.
Jonathan Rowell, Laney High School, Wilmington, N.C.; GPA: 3.98; SAT: 1480;
Project: Developed math theorem that improves the Chinese Remainder Theorem by
requiring less effort to use.
Emily Salvo, Mt. Lebanon High School, Pittsburgh; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1390; Project:
Founded math tutoring show called Variables broadcast live weekly on cable.
Sharina Shah, Pompano Beach, Fla.; Pine Crest School, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.;
GPA: 3.75; SAT: 1530; Project: Research on effectiveness of renal scan and
angiogram to detect internal lesions.
Jonathan Sills, Glenbrook North High School, Northbrook, Ill.; GPA: 4.0; SAT:
1410; Project: Research on application of fractal geometry to computer-aided
replication of natural phenomena.
Joshua Silverman, Stony Brook, N.Y.; Ward Melville High School, Setauket, N.Y.;
GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1400; Project: Research at SUNY-Stony Brook on PNMT, an enzyme in
pathway to synthesis of adrenaline.
James Weatherly, Carthate, N.C.; The O'Neal School, Southern Pines, N.C.; GPA:
4.0; SAT: 1550; Project: Portfolio of writing including short stories, essays.
Erin Whitney, Robert Service High School, Anchorage, Alaska; GPA: 4.0; SAT:
1350; Project: Analyzed cross sections of trees to chart climates in Anchorage
before start of climatic records in 1916.

 THIRD TEAM

    Emmanuel Agwu, Northern High School, Baltimore; GPA: 3.8; SAT: 970; Project:
Research at Morgan State U. on effects of estrogen in uterine fluid of rats.
Andrew Chi, Mt. Lebanon High School, Pittsburgh; GPA: 3.94; SAT: 1430; Project:
Developed computer program to help freshmen with course selection based on their
strengths and weaknesses.
Gilbert Collins, Rufus King High School, Milwaukee; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1490;
Project: Tested acidity of water in all Milwaukee high schools, found acid level
increased on higher floors.
Eric Dawson, Worthington (Ohio) High School; GPA: 3.93; SAT: 1380; Project:
Organized students to deal with handicap discrimination and disability
awareness.
Kimberly Edwards, Benjamin Mays High School, Atlanta; GPA: 3.82; SAT: 1330;
Project: Research on how DNA plasmids survive during cell regeneration.
Russell Graham, New Rochelle (N.Y.) High School; GPA: 3.9; SAT: 1520; Project:
Wrote jazz arrangement of Rodgers and Hart's My Romance for four horns and
rhythm section.
Greta Grass, East Grand Rapids (Mich.) High School; GPA: 3.86; ACT: 26; Project:
Historical video documentary on civil rights movement of the 1960s.
Andrew Huang, Kalamazoo (Mich.) Math and Science Center; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1400;
Project: Invented a computer attachment that can communicate with lab equipment,
household appliances, even humans.
Hyder Husain, Bellaire (Texas) High School; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1450; Project:
Research at U. of Houston on numerical simulations of nonlinear dynamical
systems.
Richard Keuler, Thorofare, N.J.; West Deptford High School, Westville, N.J.;
GPA: 3.93; SAT: 1380; Project: Designed national advertising campaign for Pert
Plus shampoo.
Stuart Levenbach, Plymouth, Mich; Plymouth Canton High School, Canton, Mich.;
GPA: 3.75; SAT: 1310; Project: Underwater research studying the venus flytrap
anemone as indicator of the quantity and type of sea floor contaminants.
Matthew Lovell, Salem, Va.; Governor's School for Science & Technology, Roanoke,
Va.; GPA: 4.0 SAT: 1450; Project: Created database
management program to handle administration, records, transcripts, mailings for
the Governor's School.
Stacy Marcus, Kennedy High School, Silver Spring, Md.; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1440;
Project: Research for National Institutes of Health on cloning, sequencing and
characterizing frog genes.
Ana Markovic, Stone Mountain, Ga.; Parkview High School, Lilburn, Ga.; GPA: 4.0;
SAT: 1470; Project: Composed musical work that presents strains of old folk
melodies as a sonata.
Elizabeth Norman, Pleasant Garden, N.C.; Eastern Center for Advanced Studies,
Gibsonville, N.C.; GPA: 3.98; SAT: 1310; Project: Wrote instructional manual for
new vocational course in biotechnology offering instruction on DNA
fingerprinting and extraction.
Asma Poonawala, Centennial High School, Ellicott City, Md.; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1400;
Project: Research with Defense Department on project to detect T-2 toxin used in
biological warfare.
Michael Sunitsky, Jackson Heights, N.Y.; Stuyvesant High School, New York, N.Y.;
GPA: 3.49 ; SAT: 1240; Project: Developed alternative approach to solving number
theory problem known as Pell's Equation.
Tessa Warren, Stony Brook, N.Y.; Ward Melville High School, Setauket, N.Y.; GPA:
4.0; SAT: 1470; Project: Analyzed ball clay pipe stems uncovered at
archeological site on Long Island.
Lawrence Wilson, Nova High School, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; GPA: 4.0; SAT: 1500;
Project: Research on improving the standard diameter for construction of Cayley
graphs.
Virginia Youngblood, Stony Brook, N.Y.; Ward Melville High School, Setauket,
N.Y.; GPA: 3.84; SAT: 1540; Project: Tested reflectivity of anti-reflection
coatings.

 HONORABLE MENTION

    Alabama: Teena-Ann Sankoorikal, McGill-Toolen High School, Mobile
Arkansas: Jeffrey Martin, Morrilton High School; Kelly Sartain, Heber Springs
High School
California: Barunashish Brahma, Clovis High School; Matthew Connelly, Carmel
High School; Elliott Kennerson, The Bishop's School, La Jolla; Ruvdeep Randhawa
, Loma Linda Academy; Jeffrey Twu, University High School, Los Angeles; Susan
Van Campen, Mira Mesa High School, San Diego; Pamela Yeh, North Hollywood High
School
Colorado: Brian Ericson, Cherry Creek High School, Englewood; Wendy Lane, Kent
Denver School, Englewood; Cameron Turner, Mullen High School, Denver; Andrew
Warren, Cherry Creek High School, Englewood
Delaware: LeMonica Washington, Newark High School
Florida: Alexander Barylski , Pine View School for the Gifted, Sarasota; Trina
Kavula, Largo High School; Alpesh Patel, Leesburg High School; Kristopher
Swayze, Nease High School, St. Augustine
Georgia: Jahbaree Harmon, Benjamin Mays High School, Atlanta
Hawaii: Julie Smith, Kahuku High School
Illinois: Kathylynn Brunner, John Hersey High School, Arlington Heights; Michael
Liebman, Niles North High School, Skokie; Sinclair Wu, Illinois Math & Science
Academy, Aurora
Indiana: Jeanette Byers, Indiana Academy for Science, Math & Humanities, Muncie
Iowa: David Stoffel, Bettendorf High School; Jay Girotto, Kennedy High School,
Cedar Rapids
Louisiana: Jim Lee, Baton Rouge High School
Maryland: Jane Chen, Centennial High School, Ellicott City; Rachel Schiff, Walt
Whitman High School, Bethesda
Michigan: Carl Keyes, Napoleon High School; Matthew Matasar, Detroit Country Day
School, Birmingham; Dorothy Pao, Plymouth Canton High School, Canton; Lisa
Passmore, Waterford Kettering High School, Waterford; Neil Rabaut, Interlochen
Arts Academy; Vijay Singh, Detroit Country Day School, Birmingham
Mississippi: Alice Chen, Jackson Preparatory School
Missouri: Nathan Cooper, Valley High School, Caledonia; Megan Nichols, Kickapoo
High School, Springfield
Montana: Richard Larsen, Glasgow High School
Nebraska: Shih Wei, Millard North High School, Omaha
New Jersey: Phaedra Cianciulli, Villa Walsh Academy, Morristown; Jane Cummins,
Livingston High School; Michael Patchen, West Windsor-Plainsboro High School,
Princeton Junction
New Mexico: Evan Scannapieco, Los Alamos High School
New York: Joan Adamo, Bishop Kearney High School, Rochester; Steven Engel,
Schreiber High School, Port Washiigton; Richard Lavi, Cold Spring Harbor High
School; Vanessa Liu, Stuyvesant High School, New York; Logan McCarty, Central
High School, Amherst
North Carolina: John Patty, North Carolina School of Science & Math, Durham
Ohio: Sehjung Hah, Upper Arlington High School; Amar Hamoudi, The Columbus
Academy, Gahanna ; Steve Schenk, St. John's High School, Toledo
Oregon: Karl Meyer, Phoenix High School
Pennsylvania: Tina Chiu, Conestoga High School, Berwyn; Gregory Ku, Upper Dublin
High School, Fort Washington; Chen Yu, Mt. Lebanon High School, Pittsburgh
Rhode Island: Tara Melish, South Kingstown High School, Wakefield
South Carolina: Ashley Wilkerson, Eastside High School, Taylors
South Dakota: Cari Skogberg, Belle Fourche High School
Tennessee: Zemer Gitai, White Station High School, Memphis; Mate Sztipanovits ,
Hume Fogg Magnet School, Nashville
Texas: Gann Bierner, Westwood High School, Austin; Bryce Denney, Dickinson High
School; Lawrence Huynh, Eisenhower High School, Houston
Virginia: Samuel Jones IV , West Springfield High School, Springfield; Karen
Lindsey, Randolph-Henry High School, Charlotte Court House ; Kristin Walinski,
Patrick Henry High School, Ashland
Washington: Traci Shallbetter, Deer Park High School
Wisconsin: Pamela Kindschi, Beloit Memorial High School
West Virginia: Patrick Esposito, Morgantown High School; Joshua Lief, Wheeling
Park High School, Wheeling; Bradley Naranch, The Linsly School, Wheeling
Wyoming: Natalie Johnson, Riverside High School, Basin

 THE JUDGES

    Jack Delaney, Reading, Mass.; past president, National Association of
Secondary School Principals.
Roland Haun, Ft. Knox, Ky.; president-elect, American Association of School
Administrators.
Leon Horne, Tacoma, Wash.; executive committee, National Education Association
Bernard Kirshstein, Pennsauken, N.J.; president, New Jersey School Boards
Association
Catherine McNamee, Washington, D.C.; president, National Catholic Education
Association
Rosilyn Schleife, Holcombe, Wis.; past executive committee, National Education
Association
William Sherrill, retired dean of admissions, Howard University, Washington,
D.C.
Kathleen Curry Santora, vice president, National Association of Independent
Colleges and Universities.
Scott Thomson, executive secretary, National Policy Board for Education
Administration
Robert Thornton, development director, Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; color, Stephen Lofkovits, USA TODAY; PHOTOS; color, Robert
Deutsch, USA TODAY (2); PHOTO; color, Anne Ryan, USA TODAY; PHOTO; color, Linda
Sue Scott; PHOTO; color, David Bruneau/AP; PHOTOS; color, Patty Wood (2);
PHOTOS; color, Rob Brown, USA TODAY (2); PHOTO; color, Margaret Croft; PHOTO;
color, Tom Riggs, AP; PHOTOS; color, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY (2); PHOTO; color,
Mary Ann Chastain, AP; PHOTO; color, Faith Barbakoff, AP; PHOTO; color, Joe
Piccolo, AP; PHOTO; color, John Dickerson, AP; PHOTO; color, Eileen Blass, USA
TODAY; PHOTO; color, Steve Marcus, Arizona Daily Sun

CUTLINE: WELLS: With Anna Cooper, 92, at Jewish Geriatric Center, Cherry Hill,
N.J.


                             1448 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 7, 1992, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE B16

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: Geico's Profit Up 3 Percent In 1st Quarter

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Geico Corp. yesterday reported profit of $ 42.3 million ($ 2.93 per share)
for the first quarter, up 3 percent from $ 40.9 million ($ 2.79) in the same
period in 1991.

   Geico Chairman William Snyder called the results "satisfactory," though
weather-related losses cut into the Chevy Chase-based insurance holding
company's operating results. The first-quarter results were buoyed by a $ 21.3
million realized gain on investments. That gain more than offset a $ 13.1
million loss on the sale of Geico's life insurance subsidiary and the slip in
operating income, which declined to $ 34.1 million from $ 41.6 million a year
ago.

   Snyder said storm and other weather catastrophes were substantial, "meaning
that 1992 will be the fourth consecutive year in which weather-related and
natural event losses have been higher than anticipated."

   For example, a March 25 hailstorm in the Orlando, Fla., area generated
homeowner and auto claims of more than $ 11 million.

   Premiums were up 14 percent over last year, as were policies in force
(excluding two subsidiaries acquired in the second quarter of last year), which
climbed 9.1 percent. The company's total revenue, which includes the investment
gain as well as premiums, was $ 578.3 million, up 17 percent from $ 495.6
million the year before. Total assets stood at $ 4.3 billion as of March 31, up
from $ 4.1 billion at the same date a year earlier.

   Geico is the holding company for several insurance firms that sell automobile
and homeowners insurance, mostly via direct marketing rather than through
agents.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, a biotechnology company whose products
are still experimental, reported that it lost $ 1.8 million in the first
quarter, compared with a loss of $ 1.9 million in the same period of 1991. The
company said its revenue in the quarter was $ 375,705, compared with $ 56,722 a
year earlier.



                             1449 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                       May 1, 1992, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: OPINION EDITORIAL; PAGE A26

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Double Helix Battles

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   THE ABRUPT resignation of James D. Watson, the so-called "father of DNA,"
from his post as head of the ambitious Human Genome Project is an uncomfortable
reminder of the pitfalls, moral and practical, that the far-reaching project
still faces. A seemingly trivial issue sparked the resignation: Dr. Watson, who
had served as director for four years, was "insulted" by questions raised about
his financial holdings in a routine ethics review. But other financial disputes
had already dogged the genome project and created bad feeling. Dr. Watson had
previously expressed sharp criticism of the policy by which the National
Institutes of Health, the project's umbrella, has sought to obtain patents on
genes as soon as they are identified. In Dr. Watson's view and some others',
that practice discourages independent scientists from investigating the detailed
properties of genes because they already "belong" to some other institution,
even if that institution is the U.S. government.

   Whether and when to patent such a thing as a gene -- no product or invention
but the naturally occurring stuff of human development -- is a staggeringly
complicated issue. What's protected by a gene patent isn't so much the code
itself -- a small segment of the billions of base pairs that program the
functions of every cell in the human body -- but whatever medical product might
be developed from that code. The implications of this information extend to
questions about gene therapy, disease prevention, genetic discrimination and
even the potential ruin of the health insurance system. You can hardly move in
this field without tripping over an existential dilemma.

   Congress and the NIH wisely decided to go ahead -- despite dark warnings of
eugenics and "Brave New World" -- with the ambitious gene mapping initiative,
which will attempt to ascertain the location of every one of the perhaps 100,000
genes that make up human DNA. But the knotty moral implications of this
knowledge are proving no less difficult to avoid for having been foreseen in
outline from the very beginning.

   Dr. Watson, whose status as the co-discoverer of DNA's structure gave him
unbeatable credibility in this arena, had devoted much of his tenure to
stressing the need for ethical and philosophical analysis of the project's
findings as they arose: He supported a policy of devoting some 3 percent of the
project's eventual $ 3 billion budget to continuing ethical studies of the
findings. Not everyone is happy with the way that money is being used, but the
need for it is only underlined by upheavals in the project's leadership. It's
unfortunate that both scientific and personal conflicts now rob that leadership
of the intellectual continuity and vigilance that the enterprise demands.



                             1450 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    April 30, 1992, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE B12; DIGEST

LENGTH: 789 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   COMPANIES

   Arthur Andersen & Co. said it will lay off 180 workers in its Chicago office
as part of a streamlining program. The layoffs represent 25 percent of the
clerical staff at the accounting firm.

   IBM, in a departure from its marketing practices, said it will sell some
low-end personal computers directly to consumers through a toll-free 800
telephone number. Digital Equipment recently set up a mail-order operation to
sell its PCs, and industry sources said Compaq also is moving toward direct
sales.

   Hershey Foods will buy an 18.6 percent interest in a Scandinavian
confectionary firm, Freia Marabou AS, for $ 180 million.

   American Express Credit Corp., a funding arm of the company's credit card
operation, said it will pay off $ 100 million in debt earlier than its scheduled
maturity. The notes, which carry a 10.25 percent interest rate, were originally
issued April 15, 1985, and were due June 15, 1995.

   Centocor, battling to survive a delay in federal approval for its flagship
drug, signaled it would consider licensing out drugs to other companies,
contracting out manufacturing operations and even selling an equity stake to
raise capital.

   Delta Air Lines said it will slow its rapid expansion by purchasing fewer
airplanes and eliminating jobs. The Atlanta-based carrier said it will cut
planned spending by $ 5 billion as it buys 100 fewer airplanes through the year
2001. It said it hopes no layoffs will be necessary as it cuts its work force.

   Genetic Therapy of Gaithersburg signed a licensing agreement with the
University of Texas to develop products for the treatment of high cholesterol
levels in the blood.

   Philips Electronics announced a joint research venture with GTE to develop
interactive television technology.

   Shearson Lehman Brothers said it is raising its postage and handling fee to $
3.85 from $ 2.85. The fee is charged every time a client makes a trade. Analysts
said the action raises the possibility of a new round of fee increases on Wall
Street. INTERNATIONAL

   The chairman of Tokai Bank, a major Japanese bank that was involved in a
fraud scandal last year, said he will step down, but declined to give a reason.
Ryuichi Kato denied, however, that he was taking responsibility for the scandal,
which caused a sharp drop in the bank's profit.

   Taiwan Aerospace will make further evaluations before acting on a plan to
acquire up to a $ 2 billion stake in McDonnell Douglas, said Economics Minister
Vincent Siew. A recent study indicates McDonnell Douglas was overly optimistic
in estimating its market share for long-range passenger jets, and the Taiwanese
investors are apparently trying to see if they can use that information to get
better terms for a deal. COURTS

   Olympia & York and a Canadian bank are being sued by Robert Campeau, whose
international real estate and retailing empire foundered last year. Campeau's $
1.02 billion lawsuit against the embattled property developer and National Bank
of Canada claims that through directors placed on the Campeau Corp. board,
Olympia & York and the bank forced various financial moves favorable to them as
creditors.

   College Bound and its subsidiary, the Ronkin Educational Group, filed for
Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Florida. Court papers show the companies'
assets and liabilities are unknown, that College Bound owes $ 250,000 to its
largest creditors and that Ronkin owes $ 1.4 million to its top 20 creditors.
College Bound, a tutoring firm, and its top two officers last week were accused
of securities fraud by the SEC. EARNINGS

   America West Airlines, operating under federal bankruptcy protection, said it
narrowed its first-quarter loss to $ 10 million. The company lost $ 49.9 million
in the first quarter of 1991.

   Du Pont reported first-quarter earnings fell 18 percent.

   Alexander's Inc., the metropolitan New York department store chain, reported
a $ 7.6 million loss for the second quarter, compared with profit of $ 7 million
a year ago. The company also said it could become the subject of an involuntary
bankruptcy filing by creditors at any time.

   Wendy's International said first-quarter profit rose 30 percent. PEOPLE

   Morris Smith is leaving as manager of Fidelity Investments Magellan Fund, the
nation's largest stock mutual fund, two years after replacing investment guru
Peter Lynch. Smith will be succeeded by Jeff Vinik, 33, who has overseen the
company's Growth & Income Fund and previously was Lynch's assistant on Magellan.

   Roger Markfield, Macy's executive vice president of merchandising, will
become the Limited store division's executive vice president and general
merchandise manager. Markfield is the third Macy executive to defect in recent
weeks.


GRAPHIC: CHART, DOMESTIC FLOWER GROWERS IN THOUSANDS (DATA FROM CHART WAS
UNAVAILABLE.)


                             1451 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
                              Journal of Commerce

                            April 23, 1992, Thursday

SECTION: CHEM, Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: GRACE, DU PONT TO SHARE LICENSING OF GENE TECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: ALICE CANTWELL; Journal of Commerce Staff

BODY:


   Gene therapy is being used to grow stronger plants and research is under way
to determine where it can produce healthier cows and possibly strike back at
human diseases, a W.R. Grace & Co. official said in announcing a pact with E. I.
du Pont de Nemours & Co.

    The companies will share the licensing of technology for gene delivery, the
rocess of inserting genes into living cells to give those cells new traits.

   Applications include human gene therapy, genetic vaccines, and transgenic
plants and animals, said Russell Smestad, vice president for finance and
commercial development at Agracetus Inc., Grace's subsidiary.

   The gene therapy has proved successful with plants, he said Tuesday.

   "This is second-generation technology with clearly broad utility. We will be
pursuing various applications," he said.

   Under the agreement, Grace, a specialty chemicals company, and Agracetus will
have the exclusive commercial license for all mammalian applications of Du
Pont's gene delivery technology. They will share the license for plant
applications.

   The technology, called "biolistics," is a specific gene delivery method
wherein DNA-coated particles are mechanically inserted into cells.

   Once particles are inside the cells, the DNA migrates from the particle to
become a part of the chromosome of that cell, where it functions like normal
resident genes. Through this technique, pre-existing cellular dysfunction can be
corrected or new functions enabled, Mr. Smestad said.

   In exchange, Du Pont received a license to Agracetus technology that covers
aspects of gene therapy.

   "In our Agracetus subsidiary, we independently developed 'Accell' gene
delivery, a system which uses the same basic insertion concept but a unique
electric discharge propulsion," said F. Peter Boer, Grace's executive vice
president. "Due to Accell's unique advantages for delivering genes into human
tissue, gene therapy has become a major focus of our strategy.

   "We are actively exploring its therapeutic potential for such illnesses as
AIDS, Parkinson's disease, cancer, and cardiovascular disease," he said.

   Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.

   The United States is the world leader in the use of biotechnology such as
genetic engineering to create new drugs for such diseases as cancer, AIDS and
hepatitis.

   Biotechnology is a $ 4 billion-a-year industry, which could grow to $ 50
billion by the end of the decade, according to government estimates.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1996


                             1452 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     April 18, 1992, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Special Section; Part S; Page 3; Column 1; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words

HEADLINE: SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA FILE

BYLINE: By ROSANNE KEYNAN

BODY:

   Two Southern California physicians were invited to the Second National
Conference on Genetics, Religion and Ethics in Houston last month to discuss the
wide-ranging implications of the Human Genome Project.

   Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy, the project is a national effort
to define and locate all genes on the human chromosome within the next 15 years.
The project will examine the ethics of genetic engineering as the research
progresses.

   Dr. Hassan Hathout, director of education at the Genetics Institute in
Pasadena -- who is also a spokesman for the Islamic Center of Southern
California -- said he cited some positive applications of genetic engineering,
such as procedures that allow a disease-producing gene to be replaced by a
normal one.

   But he cautioned that, while research should not be subject to censorship,
"its fruits should pass through a filter of moral allowability. We should refer
to God, who already has shown us the core of his moral code in his divine
religions up to and through Judaism, Christianity and Islam."

   Richard A. Gatti, a professor of pathology at UCLA School of Medicine,
discussed what might happen if theologians and others do not press for global
controls on the ethical use of genetic therapies, such as growth hormones used
to enhance height.

   The work of physicians and theologians should "intersect" as both evaluate
the ethics of future applications of genetic research. With such cooperation, he
said, "things won't be as they usually are, with ethics lagging years behind
(genetic research)."

SPEAKERS

   A "legislative issues briefing" sponsored by the California Council of
Churches and the Pomona Valley Council of Churches will be held next Friday from
8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. at Pilgrim Congregational Church, 600 N. Garey Ave.,
Pomona. State Sen. Diane E. Watson (D-Los Angeles) will speak on proposals to
help low-income children and their families. Assemblyman Richard Polanco (D-Los
Angeles) will discuss health-care issues. Other speakers will be representatives
of the Children's Defense Fund, Shelter Partnership and other organizations.
Registration is $25, including lunch. (714) 622-3806.

   Pepperdine University's 49th annual Bible lectures, entitled "A God So Near:
Great Themes from the Book of Deuteronomy," will be held Tuesday through Friday
on the Malibu campus. Seven lectures and 162 classes will be offered, as well as
breakfast, lunch and dinner programs. Each day will begin and end with prayer,
at 6 a.m. and 9 p.m. Registration and reservations are not required for
lectures; a fee will be charged for dormitory housing, recreational vehicle
parking, meals and banquet programs. For information, phone (310) 456-4270.

   Five American Buddhist scholars will present an all-day seminar on the Zen
tradition in China, Korea and Japan at the Zen Center of Los Angeles next
Saturday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Robert E. Buswell Jr. of UCLA is among the
speakers. Registration is $75, with discounts for members, seniors and students.
The center is at 923 S. Normandie Ave., Los Angeles. (213) 387-2351.

HONORS

   Singer Dionne Warwick will receive the Diva Award for enriching the lives of
AIDS victims at the second annual "Divas: Simply Singing!" benefit May 2 at the
Scottish Rite Auditorium. Earvin (Magic) Johnson is honorary chairman, and
proceeds go to the Minority AIDS Project. Actress Sheryl Lee Ralph and
singer-songwriter David Coury are the producers; Sandra Bernhard, Diahann
Carroll and Marilyn McCoo are scheduled to perform. The Rev. Carl Bean is
founder of the project, which operates a hot line and provides social workers,
treatment, shelter and other support services. Tickets are $15 to $250. For
information, call (213) 656-8735.

   The Rev. Lloyd Ogilvie, senior pastor of the First Presbyterian Church, was
honored recently for 20 years of pastoral service with his Hollywood
congregation. Ogilvie is the author of more than 20 books, including "12 Steps
to Living Without Fear."

   David Ellenson has been appointed to the Grancell Chair in Jewish Religious
Thought at the Los Angeles campus of Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of
Religion. A faculty member since 1975, Ellenson is most noted for his research,
which uses modern sociological and anthropological theory to describe the effect
of modernization on Orthodox Judaism.

GRANTS

   The Inland Counties Interfaith Committee in San Bernardino has received
$25,000 in start-up costs from the California Community Foundation for a
community organizing effort to deal with pressing social problems in Riverside
and San Bernardino counties. The committee, which represents 28 Presbyterian,
Methodist and Roman Catholic church congregations, helps poor and low-income
families in dealing with drug- and gang-related crime, unemployment and rising
school dropout rates.

   The foundation also awarded $20,000 to a Martin Luther King Legacy Assn.
program, "Wings of Hope," which involves South Los Angeles churches in the
battle against drugs. The program trains ministers and lay leaders to improve
pastoral counseling skills regarding drug abuse and treatment.

   More than 45 churches have participated in training, which will be expanded
to include peer leadership for teen-agers.

DATES

   A "one-day experience" in Eastern Christian theology, prayer and music will
be offered next Saturday at the Doheny campus of Mt. St. Mary's College in
downtown Los Angeles. Father Alexei Smith, pastor of St. Andrew Russian Greek
Catholic Church in El Segundo, will direct the program. Registration is $15. For
information, phone (213) 746-0450.

   The Jewish Historical Society of Southern California is sponsoring a tour to
Santa Fe and surrounding areas in New Mexico April 30-May 3. Led by historian
Stan Hordes and other professionals, the tour will explore the historical and
contemporary culture of Sephardic and Ashkenazic Jewish communities -- including
a visit to the studio of artist Judy Chicago. For prices and further
information, phone (213) 653-7740.

   "Road to Bethany," a one-man passion play written and performed by Robert
Macklin, will be presented at 6 p.m. Sunday, April 26, at New Hope Community
Church, 424 New Hope, Santa Ana. Admission is free. (714) 891-0108.

GROUPS

   A special training course for people interested in providing volunteer peer
counseling for their church or community organization is offered by the Westside
Counseling and Training Center, an outreach program of Westminster Presbyterian
Church. For information, phone Ruthann Rountree at (213) 733-3312.

   The H.O.P.E. (Hematology Oncology Palliation Education) Foundation and Adat
Shalom Synagogue are sponsoring a weekly bereavement counseling group for people
of all faiths whose spouses have died in the last two years.

   There is no fee to join the group, which is led by a licensed therapist, but
reservations are required. It meets 7-9 p.m. Wednesdays at Adat Shalom
Synagogue, 3030 Westwood Blvd., Los Angeles. (310) 475-4985.

   Christian support groups for individuals, family and friends affected by AIDS
and the human immunodeficiency virus meet the second and fourth Mondays of each
month at Trinity Presbyterian Church in Camarillo. Confidentiality and a
non-judgmental environment are stressed. The church is at 2304 Antonio Ave.,
Camarillo. For information, phone Margy (805) 482-0620 or June (805) 484-5680.
ROSANNE KEYNAN

GRAPHIC: Photo, Bean Ellenson


                             1453 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 18, 1992 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A-19

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: Viagene seeks $31 million in initial offering

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Viagene Inc., an early-stage biotechnology company, hopes to slip through the
narrowed window of opportunity for initial public offerings and raise as much as
$31 million with a proposed offering. In a filing with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, Viagene indicated the offering sale could include up to 2.6
million shares at $12 per share. The sale could raise as much as $31 million for
the company. The offering is being underwritten by The First Boston Corp. and
Prudential Securities Inc. Viagene also hopes to file next week an application
with the Food and Drug Adminstration to begin testing a drug for the treatment
of AIDS-infected patients.

   If approved, the company plans to begin its clinical trials of the drug in
the third quarter of this year.

   The trials would be the first for the 5-year-old company. Viagene is focused
on developing gene transfer therapies, which involves the inserting of genes
into living organisms with the object of producing therapeutic proteins.

   The AIDS drug has been designed using gene therapy technology. A strong
market for biotech issues has led about a dozen local companies to launch
initial public offerings in the last six months, with at least two others taking
the opportunity for secondary stocks sales.

   In recent weeks, biotech stock issues have retreated from earlier highs.
Viagene did not to respond to a call yesterday.

   Corporations filing for public offerings are required to respect a quiet
period before and just after their offerings. In a February interview, however,
Robert Abbott, Viagene chief executive officer, predicted that his company would
be the first to "inject patients with gene transfer product for therapeutic
results.

   And we'll be the first company to end up with a product based on gene therapy
." According to its SEC filing, the company has raised about $18.5 million since
its founding.

   Viagene also has reported an accumulated deficit of $12.6 during the period.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1454 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  April 18, 1992, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 813 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TO BE AIMED AT CANCER

BYLINE: Paul Taylor Toronto Globe and Mail

BODY:


   U.S. SCIENTISTS are preparing to make medical history by using human gene
therapy in the battle against cancer.  The operation itself will be deceptively
simple, said Dr. Gary Nabel, who is leading the research team at the University
of Michigan medical school.  Researchers intend to inject cancer tumors with
genes from another person.  They hope the patient's immune system will treat the
tumor as a foreign body and attack it.  ''Essentially, what we are trying to do
is mimic organ rejection,'' Nabel told a news conference this week. He noted
that organ transplants can fail if the immune system turns against the foreign
tissue. ''We are planning to stimulate the immune system to reject the tumor.''
Between 12 and 15 patients with malignant melanoma, a deadly form of skin
cancer, are being recruited for the experiment, which should begin in the next
two months. These volunteers are unlikely to benefit from the treatment.  Nabel
said that only patients who are considered terminally ill will be selected.
''We must first determine the safety of the treatment and the appropriate
dosage,'' he said. If it turns out to be safe, it will be tried on patients
whose cancers are less advanced and who are more likely to benefit from
treatment.  Nabel said that gene therapy was still in its infancy and that much
work needs to be done.  It was less than two years ago that a 4-year-old U.S.
girl became the first person to receive ''engineered'' genes. Her success story
has spurred much interest in gene therapy.  But her condition is much simpler
than trying to treat cancer with gene therapy. The girl suffers from adenosine
deaminase deficiency, called ADA for short - a rare fatal disease. Before her
treatment, a cold virus or even a benign germ could have killed her because she
lacks one gene needed to provide her with a normal immune system.  In that
experiment, some of the girl's blood was removed from her body, treated with a
gene she lacked, and put back into her. After she was infused with the altered
genes, her body made the enzyme she lacks, and she has been living a healthy
life, according to doctors at the Clinical Research Center of the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., where she was treated.  Ever since her
treatment, doctors have been planning variations of it to treat cancer and
perhaps even AIDS.  The University of Michigan team plans to go one step further
than was done in the case of the 4-year-old girl. They will inject foreign genes
directly into the patients. More precisely, the genes will be injected into the
patient's tumors. It will be the first time that researchers have attempted the
direct transfer of genes and the first attempt to treat cancer with gene
therapy.  Genes - fragments of the complex molecules known as DNA - are the
blueprints for producing certain substances - usually proteins - that carry out
specific functions. Some proteins, for instance, go into building bones while
others break down food into usable energy. There are thought to be 100,000
different human genes, arranged along the 23 pairs of chromosomes in each cell
of the body.  By injecting foreign genes where they are not supposed to be,
researchers hope to attract the attention of the body's immune system.  The
foreign genes will be introduced in a fatty substance that can stick to the
surface of the cancer cells and then be absorbed by them. Once inside the
cancerous cells, the transplanted genes would start producing proteins that are
unlike anything else in the patient's body.  ''We are asking the immune system
to recognize a part of the body that it has not previously thought was
foreign,'' Nabel explained.  In particular, the foreign genes, which have been
removed from other patients, will produce a protein known as HLA-B7. Nabel said
this protein attaches itself to the surface of the cells, making it relatively
easy for the immune system to spot.  ''We think it will be easy to recognize,''
he said.  Nabel believes that direct gene transfers could be used to treat a
wide variety of cancers in various stages of development. In time, this type of
gene therapy might be used in combination with other anti-cancer treatments.
But it is not without risks.  Some of the foreign genes could escape from the
tumor and enter healthy cells of the body, exposing them to attack from the
immune system as well. In early studies conducted on mice, 10 percent of the
foreign genes escaped from the tumor, although that caused no noticeable
problems, Nabel said.  Furthermore, researchers are concerned that the foreign
genes could enter the cells responsible for human reproduction and be passed on
to the offspring of anyone receiving the treatment. For this reason, only
patients who don't intend to reproduce will be taking part in the first rounds
of experiments involving direct gene transfers.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993


                             1455 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 16, 1992, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 628 words

HEADLINE: Early use of 2 drugs found to slow AIDS;
MEDICAL NOTEBOOK

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Hiv-infected patients who are treated with the drug AZT, together with drugs
to prevent pneumocystis pneumonia, live longer if that combination treatment is
started before they develop AIDS, according to a new study.

    In a group of more than 2,500 men infected with the human immunodeficiency
virus, including 406 who had developed AIDS, researchers from the Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine and other institutions found that those who got the early
treatment were about one-third less likely to die within the next two years. The
progression of their AIDS also slowed, said a report in the New England Journal
of Medicine.

Cancer drug is held to ease arthritis pain

    Low doses of a potent anticancer drug can ease the symptoms of juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis that does not respond to other drugs, according to a group
of researchers headed by scientists at the University of Cincinnati.

   A study reported in the New England Journal of Medicine is the first to find
that the drug, methotrexate, significantly reduces the joint swelling, stiffness
and pain of the disease, which affects 1 in 1,000 children and can be crippling.


Genes and tumors: a new test of rejection

    Scientists at the University of Michigan are preparing for the first
injections of foreign genes into the cells of human patients.

   The researchers said they will use tiny fat globules to carry the genes into
tumors of patients suffering from malignant melanoma, a form of skin cancer. It
is a preliminary test of a strategy they hope will ultimately provide a new
cancer treatment, by tricking the body into reacting as if the tumor were a
foreign substance, like an organ transplant from a mismatched donor.

   "What we're trying to do here is to get the body to see the tumor cells as
foreign and reject them," biologist Gary Nabel said this week in a press
teleconference.

   In previous gene therapy tests, researchers have removed blood cells from
patients, added genes to those cells so that they would make a needed protein,
and then returned the cells to the body. The foreign genes in the Michigan
experiments will be the first to be injected directly into human body cells.

A treatment is found for oral herpes sores

    Two new reports on herpes infections should be of interest to those carrying
either of the bothersome viruses.

   In one report, researchers at the University of Washington said that patients
with genital herpes who have no current sores nevertheless are at substantial
risk of infecting their sex partners. A study of 144 heterosexual couples
revealed that in nine of 14 couples where transmission occurred during the study
period, no symptoms were present at the time of sexual activity.

   The researchers said couples who used condoms appeared to have less risk of
herpes transmission, but the number of condoms users in the study was too small
for a definitive conclusion.

   The second report says that wearing sunscreen on the lips can help present
the recurrence of oral herpes lesions, commonly known as "fever blisters."

   That conclusion came in a study by Dr. James F. Rooney of the National
Institute of Dental Research, who exposed the lips of volunteers who had oral
herpes to ultraviolet B light. The radiation was equivalent to about 80 minutes
of midsummer sun.

   When an inactive substance was applied to the lips of 38 subjects, 27
developed a fever blister within a week of the ultraviolet light exposure. In a
similar group that used a sunscreen, no fever blisters occurred.  Rooney advised
all people with a history of oral herpes to use sunscreens as a simple means of
reducing the estimated 25 million sun-induced fever blisters that occur yearly.

   Accounts appear in the journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1992


                             1456 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 April 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

HEADLINE: EXECUTIVE CHANGES

BODY:


   * Acme Electric Corp., East Aurora, N.Y., appointed Dan Corwin chief
financial officer and vice president for administration.

* Chase Manhattan Bank N.A., New York, named John P. Mellor, human resources
executive for regional banking, to the additional post of senior vice president.


   * ICF International Inc., Fairfax, Va., an enviromental and consulting
services provider, named Michael Rowny chief financial officer.

* Multimedia Broadcast Co., Greenville, S.C., a unit of Multimedia Inc.,
appointed Pat A. Servodidio president.

* Targeted Genetics Corp., Seattle, a developer of gene therapy treatments,
named Barrie J. Carter executive vice president and director for research and
development.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1992


                             1457 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 16, 1992 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1527 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC THERAPY PROVIDES NEW OPTIONS FOR TREATMENT

BYLINE: GARY BLONSTON, Knight-Ridder News Service <

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Thursday, April 16, 1992 GENETIC THERAPY PROVIDES NEW OPTIONS FOR TREATMENT

   Summary: Scientists at the National Institutes of Health push the  therapy
from the laboratory to the clinical level

   Dr. Kenneth Culver thinks he knows why, out of all the medical researchers
in the world, a little band of government employees at the National Institutes
of Health is leading the way into the age of human genetic therapy.

   His explanation: ``the kids.''

   Many of the federal physicians pioneering treatment of patients by genetic
manipulation share an unusual history among genetic researchers, Culver says.
They have practiced pediatric medicine, and they have seen the wreckage that
can be wrought on children by a single genetic flaw -- cystic fibrosis,
hemophilia, sickle-cell anemia, profound immune deficiency.

   W. French Anderson, the guiding spirit of the NIH effort, said, ``The urge
to do something, anything, is very strong.''

   And so, with the combination of inspiration, skill, luck, thick skin and
zeal that drive most medical breakthroughs, the people at NIH have emerged in
the 1990s as the leaders in moving genetic therapy out of the labs and into
medical practice.

   There were years when Anderson remembers being ``scalded'' and ``bashed''  by
government regulators, scientists and others concerned about potential  dangers
of genetic therapy. But less than two years ago, his group finally  passed all
the review committees,    convinced all the health officials and  became the
first physicians to treat disease by correcting genetic defects.

   Their patients are two little Ohio girls, aged 5 and 10, born without  normal
resistance to disease -- a condition called ADA-immune deficiency  because the
girls lack the gene that produces a critical protein called  adenosine
deaminase. Periodically, they are dosed with their own white blood  cells, into
which the missing gene has been inserted by the key tool in the  treatment -- a
modified mouse virus.

   While receiving that continuing treatment, both girls are maintaining
sufficient disease resistance to leave their lives of isolation and, for the
first time, join the world. The 5-year-old, homebound since birth, is  attending
a public kindergarten.

   Sometime this spring, one of them will take the next step in the
experimental treatment, aimed at inducing her own bone marrow cells to produce
white blood cells that are functional and genetically correct.

   An NIH team including Culver and project leader R. Michael Blaese will do
the work.

   If their experimental treatment gets its final government go-ahead as
expected -- and if it works to fullest potential -- it could change their  young
patient's life, conceivably freeing her from the constant medical  attention she
has required since birth to live in a disease-filled world.

   But whether the new therapy succeeds or not, and some genetic specialists
doubt it will, the experiment itself will represent a larger step into the
frontiers of genetic therapy than anyone in modern medicine could have guessed
even a year or two ago.

   Genetic therapy suddenly is emerging as one of the most promising
experimental approaches in modern medicine. In the words of eminent genetics
researcher A. Dusty Miller of the University of Washington, much of the reason
has been ``the determination of the NIH people to get this stuff into people
quickly.''

   He points to work in the 1980s by Steven Rosenberg of NIH's National Cancer
Institute, who first established that it was possible and safe to insert new
genes in human cells.

   Those first experiments did not involve genetic material capable of  treating
disease, but they provided the basis and impetus for Anderson's first tests on
the immune-deficient girls. Last year Rosenberg also launched a  treatment
program, the second to be approved in the United States, attempting  to treat
patients suffering malignant melanoma with a gene that can produce a
tumor-killing cell factor.

   Now, in a burst, research in genetic treatment is expanding from the  federal
labs into clinical settings around the country, among them the  University of
Michigan, the University of Pittsburgh, St Jude's Hospital in  Memphis, Tenn.,
Baylor University in Houston, and the University of  Washington.

   In all, about two dozen people -- most in the United States, a few in  France
and China -- are participating in early, government-sanctioned genetic  trials.
Most are not aimed at treating disease but further testing delivery  methods in
ways comparable to Rosenberg's first experiments, seeking a variety of means of
delivering genetic material to selected cells and organs.

   Although widespread genetic treatment of human affliction still is years
away, medical manipulation of the genes theoretically could prevent dangerous
blood clots in heart attack candidates, ensure that the cells of diabetes
sufferers produce appropriate amounts of insulin, selectively kill malignant
cells in cancer victims, short-circuit the effect of the HIV virus that
produces AIDS.

   Anderson, chief of molecular hematology for NIH's National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, muses about a day -- possibly decades away, maybe only years
-- when pharmacists might dispense injectable, off-the-shelf genetic material
to counteract life-threatening disabilities.

   He imagines a time when cures for such dangerous hereditary conditions as
sickle-cell anemia among Africans and African-Americans might be as broadly
available as vaccines for measles and influenza.

   And he imagines deftly targeted gene delivery vehicles -- microscopic
strands of protein like the harmless, modified mouse viruses currently being
used -- able to seek out specific organs or cell types disabled by genetic
flaws, deposit their load of corrective genes in the living cells and fade
away.

   A less sophisticated version of that approach first opened the field two
Septembers ago.

   To treat the two Ohio girls, physicians had to get the gene they were
missing into certain of their white blood cells called T-lymphocytes, normally
part of the body's prime defense against infection.

   The doctors used one of those mouse viruses, specifically a retrovirus that
can do something far better than medical science ever has: get inside cells
without damaging them and insert their genes in the cells' chromosomes.

   The mouse retroviruses in the girls' cases were chemically stripped down  and
rendered harmless, then modified to carry the ADA gene the girls are  missing.

   Because T-cells have limited life spans, the girls each must undergo
periodic reinfusions of treated cells, and the entire process must be
reinforced with a stupendously expensive enzyme whose annual doses run  $250,000
to $300,000 per patient.

   This spring, Blaese's group at the NIH will try to produce lasting results
through an added treatment that Culver said might one day eliminate the need
for frequent reinfusions or the costly enzyme.

   If the treatment works, when the treated cells are returned to the girls'
system, every blood cell they generate also will carry the new ADA gene, and
their immunity will grow in both strength and duration.

   Some researchers think the elements of this new experiment haven't yet
received enough laboratory exploration, particularly the issue of isolating  the
rare cells. While there are no particular safety concern, they suggest the
treatment is unlikely to succeed and might be coming too soon even to produce
much new scientific information.

   The NIH researchers disagree, but that is the kind of question they can  live
with, particularly since they were being challenged not long ago about  doing
genetic therapy at all.

   Some ethicists oppose all forms of genetic research and manipulation,
fearing an age when genetic screening might be used by employers and insurance
companies to weed out people with unusual conditions, or when genetic therapy
might be aimed at engineering people with particular physical and mental
characteristics.

   By the nature of his work, Anderson has become a philosopher of sorts about
the appropriate roles of medicine in altering genes, and he draws the line at
therapy for disease.

   Those are issues for future generations more than today's, but Culver said
he and his group sense a diminishing public concern and a growing medical
enthusiasm as the first positive results of genetic therapy become apparent.

   ``For all of us in the field, it's moving with incredible speed,'' Culver
said. ``Since we opened the door and crossed that threshold of regulation and
scientific feasibility -- and especially since the nice successes with these
kids -- we're going to see a lot of people pushing to get out from the labs to
the patients.''

   ILLUSTRATION: Graphic - Drawings by KEVIN HENDRICKSON of The Oregonian staff.
ON THE TRAIL OF A GENETIC FLAW.  Source: Office of Technology Assessment,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

   Graphic - Chart and Drawing by Knight-Ridder Tribune.  USING GENES TO FIGHT
DISEASE.  Source: National Institutes of Health.<     LIBRARY NOTE:  For
complete graphic texts see The Oregonian newspaper, The Oregonian microfilm,  or
The Oregonian Library Graphics notebook.

   Photo by Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1458 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 16, 1992 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 693 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENT GIVES NEW HOPE TO 12 CANCER PATIENTS

BYLINE: PETER GORNER, Chicago Tribune News Service <

BODY:

   Thursday, April 16, 1992 GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENT GIVES NEW HOPE TO 12 CANCER
PATIENTS

   In an experiment that could revolutionize cancer therapy, medical
researchers announced this week that they would inject into malignant tumors
new genes designed to trick the human body into destroying the tumors.

   The direct injection of genes into tumors is the ultimate, streamlined
version of gene therapy and differs drastically from three earlier versions.
Those involve removing cells from patients, growing the cells in the
laboratory, ``infecting'' the cells with viruses carrying the therapeutic gene
and finally returning the modified cells to the body.

   Twelve patient-volunteers dying of metastatic melanoma, the most lethal  form
of skin cancer, will receive direct injections of genes designed to  trigger an
immune response and, it is hoped, kill the cancer. Most of the  patients are not
expected to live more than six months without the new  approach.

   ``Direct gene transfer will facilitate the application of gene therapy to
human disease,'' said Dr. Gary Nabel, chief of the University of Michigan team
that will conduct the research. ``If this method of gene delivery proves safe
and effective, it will hasten the day gene therapy becomes widely used in
clinical practice.''

   It is now possible, using genetic engineering, to prepare large amounts of
DNA, or genetic material, in the laboratory. At Michigan, this DNA will be
coated by harmless fat particles, or liposomes, and injected into a patient's
melanoma tumor. The liposomes allow the genes to slide past the cell's
protective membrane.

   Once inside, the DNA has been engineered to produce a protein that invites
attack by the soldiers of the body's immune system -- white blood cells called
killer T-cells, which are believed to be responsible for destroying tumors.
When HIV-infected people, for instance, lose their T-cells, they become
susceptible to a host of cancers.

   The purpose of the new treatment is to determine whether it will cause the
immune system to attack cancer cells, including those that thus far have  eluded
detection. Animal studies have shown that once tipped off to the  presence of
cancer, the immune system will track down and kill other tumor  cells that have
not been modified by new genes.

   The Ann Arbor, Mich., experiment, which just received final FDA approval,  is
medical science's latest attempt at immunotherapy, a tantalizing but
controversial mode of treatment that rarely works, but produces spectacular
results when it does.

   Immunotherapy hinges on the belief that throughout life the human immune
system vigilantly protects against cancer and, in extremely rare circumstances
can even reject an erupting tumor as if it were just another germ or
transplanted tissue.

   Most importantly, immune cells work systematically, ceaselessly patrolling
the entire body. That means it might be possible to train them to seek out and
destroy cancer cells that have broken off from the original tumor and spread.  A
surgeon's knife can cut out solid tumors, but malignant cells that migrate  to
distant sites to continue their wild division are the greatest danger posed by
cancer.

   Proponents believe immunotherapy will soon augment the standard treatments
of surgery, chemotherapy and radiation that together cure only about half of
those who develop cancer. About 514,000 Americans will die of the disease this
year.

   A leading immunotherapy strategy has been to devise ways to genetically
treat protein molecules called antigens on the surface of cancer cells and  turn
them into flashing targets for immune defenders to aim for. The Ann Arbor
experiment seeks to develop such a cancer vaccine.

   But researchers have been stymied by their inability to determine which of
the myriad proteins that stud the surface of a tumor cell -- so-called tumor
antigens -- would be most likely to provoke a potent immune response. Most
antigens that have been discovered on tumor cells are also found on normal
cells.

   However, in November 1991 Belgium researchers reported discovery of the
first set of three tumor antigens that arouse the activity of killer T-cells.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1459 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    April 15, 1992, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A20

LENGTH: 543 words

HEADLINE: 'Beyond Beef' Ad Campaign Set to Begin;
Cattle-Raising Blamed For Host of Problems

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Malcolm Gladwell, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Calling cattle the source of the "most unconscionable inequity" in 20th
century world economics, peripatetic environmental activist Jeremy Rifkin
yesterday launched a campaign to cut American beef consumption by 50 percent.

   Flanked by representatives of a half-dozen environmental groups supporting
the effort, Rifkin said Western beef consumption is responsible for depletion of
the rain forest and the ozone layer, Third World urbanization, topsoil erosion,
global warming, poverty, hunger, economic injustice, cruelty to animals, cancer,
heart disease and monopolistic corporate practices.

   The planned eight-year campaign, "Beyond Beef," is scheduled to begin next
month with a series of MTV-style commercials that Rifkin and his coalition --
which includes Greenpeace USA, Public Citizen and the Rainforest Action Network
-- will ask radio and television stations to air free. Some air time also will
be bought. In addition, the group said it will be making federal policy
recommendations and filing unspecified lawsuits.

   The ads urge consumers to cut beef consumption in half in order to enhance
personal health and aid the environment.

   Rifkin's interest in bovine matters goes back at least five years, when he
became concerned that a virus found in cattle might be the cause of AIDS. In
1987, he petitioned the National Institutes of Health to investigate the
allegation.

   Over the past 10 years, Rifkin also has been involved in various campaigns to
incite public interest in the Persian Gulf War, gene therapy, the greenhouse
effect, experimental biological pesticides, electromagnetic radiation, surrogate
parenting, radioactive materials on the space shuttle, various kinds of AIDS
research, the USDA's seed-collection effort, shipping biological materials
through the mail and the stress of modern society.

   The new campaign follows closely on the publication of his latest book,
"Beyond Beef: The Rise and Fall of the Cattle Culture."

   Rifkin said yesterday the impetus for his campaign was concern that the
cattle industry is causing widespread damage to the environment. Because
thousands of acres of rain forest are being cut down in South America to graze
cattle, he said, beef-eating is contributing to global warming.

   He also said the beef industry is very inefficient and that it takes 2,400
gallons of water to produce a pound of steak. Spokesmen for the cattle industry
said the appropriate figure is closer to 200 gallons.

   The average household uses 107,000 gallons of water every year.

   Rifkin said beef consumption in developed Western nations is using up grain
that would otherwise go to feed hungry people in the Third World.

   According to estimates by Dennis Avery, an economist with the Hudson
Institute, the United States and the European Community have a surplus of 200
million tons of grain. The United States is diverting 60 million acres of
cropland from production because of agricultural surpluses, Avery said in a
statement released by the Food Facts Coalition, a cattle-industry group.

   Rifkin, an economist, was previously co-director of the Citizens Commission
of Inquiry into U.S. War Crimes in Indochina, founder of the People's
Bicentennial Commission and head of the People's Business Commission.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, JEREMY RIFKIN.


                             1460 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                April 14, 1992, TUESDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Cancer patient to get new gene thearapy

BODY:


   Treatment of the first person to receive a new type of gene therapy in which
genetic material is injected directly into the body will begin in two months,
Michigan doctors said Monday.

   The patient, who has widespread malignant melanoma, the most deadly form of
skin cancer, will receive injections of genes that contain instructions for
making immunity-boosting substances.

   The goal is to cause the patient's immune system to reject the tumor, said
Dr. Gary J. Nabel of the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor, the
lead researcher.

   In previous gene therapy experiments, cells were temporarily removed from the
body, treated and injected back into the body.

   The new method may be faster and simpler, Nabel said.

   He said the genetic material will be injected directly into the patient's
tumor every two weeks.

   The procedure is the first to carry genes into the body's cells inside a
bubble of fatty substances, Nabel said.

   Other gene-altering therapies, which use viruses to insert genes into cells,
are likely to be slower and more difficult to carry out, said Dr. W. French
Anderson, chief of the molecular hematology branch of the National Heart, Lung
and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   Attempts to use gene therapy to vaccinate people against their own tumors
have met with limited success, according to Anderson. Such vaccines have
included mixtures of tumor cells with immune-system stimulants, as well as
injections of white blood cells found in cancerous growths, he said.

   About 35 percent of people get some benefit from the white blood cell
therapy, Anderson said. One striking success story is that of a woman with
melanoma who remains cancer-free three years after treatment, he said.

   More recently, scientists have inserted genes into blood cells or cancer
cells to stimulate them to make tumor-fighting substances.

   Malignant melanoma of the skin will strike about 32,000 Americans this year,
and will kill 6,700, according to the National Cancer Institute. The cancer can
arise also in the back of the eye and the lining of the brain.

GRAPHIC: Medical Tribune News Service

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1992


                             1461 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 14, 1992, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; National briefs; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 447 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

BYLINE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   N.J. suspect confesses

    NEWARK, N.J. -- A 25-year-old parolee has confessed to the
slayings of four women whose bodies were found within a block of
one another in East Orange over the weekend, authorities said
Monday.

   The suspect, Jerome Dennis, also was charged Monday with a
fifth slaying last year in Newark.

   "Rin Tin Tin' star dies

   LOS ANGELES -- Actor James Brown, 72, who starred in the
long-running television series ""The Adventures of Rin Tin Tin,''
has died, a daughter said Monday.

   Brown made more than 30 movies but is best remembered for
his role as Lt.  Masters in ""Rin Tin Tin,'' the story of a boy and
his dog who are adopted by the U.S. Cavalry.  It ran on ABC from
1954 to 1960.

   U.N. protester defended

   NEW YORK -- A lawyer said Monday that Lynne Gunther, who
stood off police for 24 hours outside the United Nations, hadn't
doused herself in gasoline or threatened to hurt anyone, as police
contended.  Police officials stayed with their version of the
weekend standoff.

   AIDS study touts DDI

    WASHINGTON -- The antiviral drug DDI appears to be more
effective than AZT in slowing the progression of AIDS symptoms,
according to a study, lead researcher Dr. James Kahn of the
University of California-San Francisco, said Monday.

   Gene research revealed

    ANN ARBOR, Mich. -- Cancer researchers at the University of
Michigan on Monday announced the beginning of what they called the
world's first gene therapy experiment using direct transfer of
genes by injections.

   The researchers, led by Dr. Gary Nabel, will inject a gene
into tumors of skin cancer patients to trigger an immune response
that, if successful, will destroy the tumors.

   Gay cleric is greeted

   PLYMOUTH, Minn. -- Members of a conservative church group
gave warm greetings Sunday at church to their former leader, who
was removed after he revealed he's had gay relationships for 20
years.

   The 24,000 members of the Association of Free Lutheran
Congregations, based in Plymouth, learned last week that the Rev.
Richard Snipstead, 63, had resigned.

   Members were told that Snipstead's wife, Leone, 60, has
developed AIDS, while he carries HIV.  They have six children.

   Seat-belt factor is cited

   NEEDLES, Calif. -- Comic Sam Kinison might have survived a
head-on collision had he been wearing a seat belt, the California
Highway Patrol said Monday.

   Kinison, 38, died Friday when a pickup struck his car on a
two-lane highway.  Police said the pickup was in the wrong lane.

   The comic's bride, Malika, 27, who had a concussion, was
released Sunday from a hospital.  A 17-year-old was being held for
investigation of vehicular manslaughter and DWI.


GRAPHIC: Mug: James Brown in 1957

TYPE: Obituary

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1992


                             1462 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 14, 1992, Tuesday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; National briefs; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 290 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

BYLINE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   N.J. suspect confesses

    NEWARK, N.J. -- Jerome Dennis, a 25-year-old paroled rapist,
has confessed to killing five women, including four whose bodies
were found within a block of one another in a Newark suburb during
the weekend, authorities said Monday.

   Gene research revealed

   ANN ARBOR, Mich. -- Cancer researchers at the University of
Michigan on Monday announced the beginning of what they called the
world's first gene therapy.

   The researchers, led by Dr.Gary Nabel, will inject a gene
into tumors of skin cancer patients to trigger an immune response
that, if successful, will destroy the tumors.

   Gay cleric is greeted

    PLYMOUTH, Minn. -- Members of a conservative church group
gave warm greetings Sunday at church to their former leader, who
was removed after he revealed he's had gay relationships for 20
years.

   The 24,000 members of the Association of Free Lutheran
Congregations, based in Plymouth, learned last week that the Rev.
Richard Snipstead, 63, had resigned.

   Snipstead's wife, Leone, 60, has developed AIDS, while he
carries HIV.  They have six children.

   Seat-belt factor is cited

    NEEDLES, Calif. -- Comic Sam Kinison, 38, might have survived
a head-on collision Friday had he been wearing a seat belt, the
California Highway Patrol said Monday.

   The 17-year-old driver of the pickup that struck Kinison's
car was being held for investigation of vehicular manslaughter and
DWI.  The comic's bride, Malika, 27, who had a concussion, was
released from a hospital.

   Oil well blast kills two

   NEW ORLEANS -- An oil well near Barataria, La., exploded
Monday, killing two men and shattering a nearby oil storage tank on
the edge of a waterway.  The well belonged to Foreman Petroleum Corp


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1992


                             1463 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 April 14, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1571 words

HEADLINE: With Direct Injections, Gene Therapy Takes A Step Into a New Age

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   SOMETIME within the next month, a patient suffering from advanced melanoma
who otherwise has almost no chance of surviving will be the first to receive the
ultimate form of human gene therapy.

   In all gene therapy trials tried to date, researchers have followed a
laborious and protracted routine, first removing cells from a patient's body,
then provisioning them with new genes designed to fight disease, and finally
returning the altered cells to their owner. But in the new experiment,
researchers will simply inject DNA right into the patient's tumor.

    If all goes as planned, the injected genes will stimulate the patient's
immune system to assault the malignancy. Success would usher in a new era of
DNA, not as the arcane stuff of laboratory research, but as a drug.

   Researchers warned, however, that it would be several years before the
effectiveness of the approach for thwarting melanoma or any other disorder could
be demonstrated.

Wide-Open Field

    The novel method is only one of several ingenious experiments now at various
stages of development in the field of gene therapy, where scientists seem
limited only by the breadth of their creativity. Researchers are striving to
devise gene therapies to better treat inherited diseases like hemophilia, cystic
fibrosis, dwarfism and immune deficiencies, as well as chronic adult ailments
like cancer and heart disease.

   And of personal amusement to many of the leading researchers in the field,
they had until recently sneered at the notion of human gene therapy as gee-whiz
hyperbole.

   "When I first came to Ann Arbor, in 1987, I didn't think gene therapy would
work, and I certainly didn't think I would ever be involved in it," said Dr.
Gary J. Nabel of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the University of
Michigan. "I've just been astounded at what has happened in this field in the
last couple of years."

   Dr. Nabel and his colleagues will be performing the injectable DNA therapy,
which has surmounted all Federal regulatory hurdles and now awaits only the
right candidate for trials to begin.

Arousing the T Cells

    In the new method, the researchers will begin with several trillion copies
of the gene that provides the instructions for making an antigen protein called
HLA-B7, which galvanizes the body's immune system, particularly the potent
killer T cells believed to be responsible for dissolving tumors. Those genes
will be encased in liposomes, a greasy fat that will let the DNA slip through
the protective membranes of cells.

   Placing the fat-enclosed genes in a hypodermic needle, the researchers will
inoculate the material directly into one of a patient's visible melanoma tumors.
The liposomes should then infiltrate some of the tumor cells and deposit their
DNA inside, where the genes would prompt production of the HLA-B7 protein. That
protein would then extrude from the cancer cells, setting off an alarm to the
immune system.

   Thus shaken into action, the killer T cells are expected to begin destroying
the altered tumor tissue. But Dr. Nabel said the killer cells would do more than
besiege the few tumor cells displaying the give-away antigen on their surface.
Mouse experiments suggested that the aroused immune troops would also begin to
attack surrounding tumor cells that bear other abnormal proteins, the mutant
signposts of cancerous transformation.

   "Other tumor cells are suddenly recognized by the immune system as
inappropriate," Dr. Nabel said. "They're not supposed to be there."

Microcatheters for DNA

    The injections are only the first stage of the experiment, and they are
probably not capable of defeating a large tumor or curing advanced melanoma. Dr.
Nabel hopes eventually to deliver the liposomes through micro-catheters,
whisker-thin plastic tubes that can be inserted into capillaries.

   Because most tumors have their own network of blood vessels, a single slender
catheter could be placed in one tumor vein and DNA dripped through it, to
dispense the needed genes throughout the entire malignant nodule, including
corners untouchable with surgery or radiation.

   The patient the Michigan researchers are seeking must have widespread
melanoma that has resisted all conventional cancer therapies.  What is more, the
person must be either infertile or post-menopausal.  Because the injected DNA
has a slight chance of escaping from the tumor and migrating throughout the
body, it could in theory infiltrate the patient's sperm or egg cells, where it
would have a chance of rewiring the reproductive chromosomes and thus affecting
future generations.

   At the moment, gene therapy researchers are aiming their fledging attempts at
living patients with established diseases. They are not ready to address the
ethical question of whether it is right to tinker around, inadvertently or
otherwise, with the genes of people to come.

   Should the liposome delivery method prove viable, Dr. Nabel said, then
scientists will have to discuss if it is worth the modest risk of affecting a
person's so-called germ line, their reproductive lineage, for the sake of curing
the patient's disease.

   Other, less ethically textured gene therapy projects are also under way at
the University of Michigan and elsewhere.

   Dr. James Wilson of Michigan recently was given the go-ahead from the Food
and Drug Administration to begin treating patients with familial
hypercholesterolemia, a disease that results in extreme cholesterol buildup
throughout the body and early death, usually from a heart attack.

   Dr. Wilson and his co-workers plan to remove about 15 percent of a patient's
liver, culturing the cells in a test tube and outfitting them with a gene that
produces the low-density lipoprotein receptor, a protein capable of sponging up
dangerous cholesterol in the bloodstream.

   The treated cells will then be injected into the patient's liver, where they
should attach to the capillaries of the organ and begin producing the critical
receptor protein.

   The researchers hope to begin their trial sometime before June.

Hemophilia and Dwarfism

    Several teams are attempting to use genetically altered muscle cells as
efficient drug delivery systems to treat hemophilia and pituitary dwarfism, and
perhaps eventually diabetes.

   In this method, muscle cells will be manipulated to serve as long-term
internal factories, producing vital proteins the patient lacks. Muscle cells
have the advantage of being very long-lived and easily isolated, through a
simple biopsy that can be performed with local anesthesia. And though muscle
cells were long thought to be incapable of secreting proteins into the
bloodstream, and thus of little use as pump houses to supply needed molecules,
researchers have lately discovered the cells will in fact release many of their
proteins into the sanguineous world around them.

   "All of a sudden, muscle tissue looked very attractive for a cellular
implantation system," said Dr. Jeffrey M. Leiden of the University of Michigan.
"You can easily grow up huge quantities of muscle cells from a very tiny
sample."

   He and Dr. Helen Blau of the Stanford University School of Medicine have
independently removed muscle cells from rodents and inserted into the cells the
gene that makes human growth hormone, a substance missing in children who suffer
from pituitary dwarfism. The scientists have reinfused the modified cells into
the mice, where the cells clasped onto muscle fibers as though delighted to be
home again and dutifully began producing the growth hormone.

   Three months after the initial treatment, Dr. Blau's rodents were still
producing the human hormone. She hopes that the muscle cells will continue
secreting the protein indefinitely.

   Dr. Leiden and his co-workers have also begun working with dogs that are
afflicted with a canine version of hemophilia. The biologists are attempting to
treat the animals by supplying their muscle cells with the gene that makes
Factor VIII, the blood-clotting protein missing in many human hemophiliacs.

Immune System Disorder

    At the National Institutes of Health, where the first federally approved
gene therapy experiments were performed more than 18 months ago, Dr. W. French
Anderson and his collaborators began by treating two girls with an immune
disorder called adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, similar to the illness
that killed David, the Texan boy who spent his abbreviated life in a sterile
bubble.

   The researchers took white blood cells from the girls, installed in the cells
a gene for an enzyme the girls lacked and injected the refashioned samples into
the young patients.

   But the white blood cells die quickly, thus requiring frequent reinfusions of
altered blood cells.

   Dr. Anderson's team recently received approval from the Government's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to try a more lasting method.

   They will begin by giving patients with the immune disorder a shot of a
growth protein to goad the bone marrow to release into the bloodstream some of
its precious stem cells, precursor blood cells capable of blossoming into white
blood cells for many weeks, if not months or years.

   The researchers hope that by fitting the necessary gene into these stem
cells, and restoring the cells to their young charges, the need for replenishing
infusions will be cut significantly. Gene therapy, then, may become not simply a
palliative measure, but something approaching a cure.

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "DNA as an Experimental Drug"

    In an attempt to treat melanoma, scientists will inject a tumor with copies
of a gene for making a protein that stimulates the immune system. The DNA will
be encased in fatty globules called liposomes to aid penetration. When cells
infilitrated by the gene make the protein, HLA-B7, the protein sets off an
alarm, summoning potent immune cells called killer T cells. The T cells are
expected to attack not only the altered tumor tissue, but also other tumor cells
bearing abnormal proteins.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1992


                             1464 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 14, 1992, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 177 words

HEADLINE: Human trials for direct gene transfer

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    The first study in which new genes will be injected directly into humans
will begin within two months in cancer patients, researchers reported Monday.

   Gene therapy studies done so far involved removing cells from the body,
adding new genes, then putting the cells back into the body. While results have
been promising, experts say this method is cumbersome and would be difficult to
use in a hospital or clinic.

   ''Direct gene transfer simplifies gene therapy,'' says Dr. Gary Nabel,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. ''If this method of gene delivery proves safe
and effective, it will hasten the day gene therapy becomes widely used in
clinical practice.''

   Nabel's study will involve 12 people with malignant melanoma, a deadly skin
cancer. The idea: to inject a gene directly into a tumor to stimulate the immune
system into launching an attack. Nabel will use a gene known to cause organ
rejection in transplant patients.

   When the immune system is alerted to the presence of the gene in a tumor, it
should react by ''rejecting'' the cancer cells.


                             1465 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 13, 1992 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 542 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy team eyeing timetable

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The La Jolla scientists who want to use gene therapy to treat cancer patients
say they will wait at least until September to seek federal approval for their
experimental procedure. The team from UCSD and the San Diego Regional Cancer
Center will use the time to complete additional laboratory experiments that
federal officials requested last November when the scientists were denied
permission to begin using the therapy on patients. "My goal would be to try to
get into the clinic and be treating patients with this by early 1993," said Ivor
Royston, scientific director of the cancer center and a driving force behind the
effort. Gene therapy is a potentially powerful new approach to medicine that
uses transplanted genes to produce natural substances that a person is lacking
but needs to fight disease.

   Unlike conventional medicines that attack symptoms of disease, the gene
treatments address the underlying cause of disease. The San Diego team believes
the therapy it is developing would be effective in fighting melanoma and cancers
of the kidney, colon and lymph system by stimulating an immune system response
that seems to have gone awry.

   The doctors could become one of only a handful of medical groups in the
United States performing gene therapy. Two gene therapies, one for a rare immune
system deficiency and one for melanoma, a virulent skin cancer, are being tested
in patients at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Md. Two
doctors at the University of Michigan also have received permission through the
elaborate federal review process to begin gene therapy. In November, a panel of
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to the NIH rejected the San Diegans'
request to start using the therapy, saying more tests in animals were necessary
as well as greater detail about which patients would be receiving the treatment.
Royston said his team will skip the June meeting of the committee but might
consider reapplying for the September meeting.

   He said that 90 percent of the additional tests in mice are complete, but
added, "When we go there we want to have done everything." Because gene therapy
is new and involves the unusual transfer of genetic material, the federal review
was established at the NIH to scrutinize plans to practice gene therapy.

   The fall meeting of the review committee is Sept. 14-15. The treatment the
San Diego scientists are proposing could be delivered as a simple injection of
genetically altered cells in an arm or thigh.

   There, a few million cells, about the volume of a vaccination, would act like
a biological factory, turning out the needed product. The cells would be altered
to contain a gene for interlukin 2, a protein that the scientists believe is
crucial for attracting the immune system's cytotoxic T cells to destroy tumors.
Royston said his team may seek out a company to aid in preparing the biological
materials for transplant.

   The genetic material is placed inside a virus that has been rendered harmless
for causing disease.

   The virus then can penetrate skin cells taken from the patient. The proposal
comes from Royston and Habib Fakhrai, of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center,
UCSD scientist Theodore Friedmann and Robert E. Sobol, who has appointments at
both institutions.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1466 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     April 13, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A2; SCIENCE NOTEBOOK

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy: An Improved Delivery Vehicle

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Boyce Rensberger

BODY:

   Molecular biologists have invented a new vehicle for carrying genes into
cells undergoing gene therapy -- the infant field in which good genes are
installed in cells to perform functions that defective genes fail to do. The new
vehicle has a cargo capacity 10 times larger than the old one, and is thousands
of times more likely to reach its destination.

   The old method involved splicing the good, new gene into the DNA of viruses
and letting the altered viruses infect the cells. Viruses are good at getting in
because they carry special molecules on their surfaces that cells "think" they
should consume; the duped cells promptly pull the virus inside. Then the virus
releases its own genes, delivering the new one at the same time. The problem is
that there is only so much space inside a virus's protein shell. Only one small-
to medium-size extra gene can fit.

   David T. Curiel and colleagues at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill decided that if there wasn't much room inside the virus, there was plenty
outside. Because the only reason for having the virus was to use its surface
protein, the Chapel Hill group found a way to attach the good new gene to the
outside of the shell. They did this by making a double-ended linker molecule
that binds to the virus and the gene.

   According to a report in the current issue of the journal Human Gene Therapy,
the method works beautifully. Genes 10 times longer than would fit inside a
virus are successfully carried into cells. And while the old method required a
half-million individual viruses per cell for success, the new one takes only
five.


                             1467 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 13, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F27; WASHIGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 1377 words

HEADLINE: Up and Down and Up With Area Stock Index

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   It went up. It went down. It went up again. It went down again. And after
three months, the Washington Business stock index was back where it started. The
index opened on Jan. 2 at about $ 19.61 and it closed on March 31 at about $
19.81.

   In a way, the result was not surprising, because many of the major stock
averages registered only small gains or losses during the first quarter.

   The Dow Jones industrial average was up 2.1 percent. The New York Stock
Exchange composite lost 2.7 percent. The Standard & Poor's 500 index lost 3.2
percent and the Nasdaq composite gained 2.9 percent.

   The exception was the Johnston, Lemon & Co. index, of 30 area blue-chip
companies, which rose 11.5 percent with the help of strong gains by Riggs
National Corp., MNC Financial Inc., USAir Group Inc., Geico Corp. and The
Washington Post Co.

   There were, of course, many individual winners and losers among area stocks.
And the patterns were fairly clear.

   Several bank and thrift stocks bounced back when it began to look like they
had survived the worst of the real estate crisis. And the prices of several
biotech companies, which went out of sight, came back to earth once the easy
money had been made.

   Here are the stocks, trading at $ 2 or more, that turned in the best
performances during the first quarter of 1992. The first number is the price on
Dec. 31, 1991, the second is the price on March 31, 1992:

   Washington Federal Savings Bank (D.C.) -- (44 cents to $ 2, up 354.5
percent). The long-depressed stock rallied when the thrift reported a
significant improvement in its profits and a sizable reduction in the funds put
aside for troubled loans.

   Data Measurement Corp. of Gaithersburg -- ($ 1.25 to $ 3.38, up 170.4
percent). The maker of computerized industrial measurement systems was
profitable last year after losing money in 1990.

   Ameribanc Investors Group of Annandale -- ($ 1 to $ 2.38, up 138 percent).
Hit by real estate loan problems, Ameribanc won government approval for a plan
to raise more capital -- and thus provide a better cushion against loan losses.

   Infodata Systems Inc. of Falls Church -- ($ 1.50 to $ 3.50, up 133.3
percent). Although profits fell in 1991, Infodata has been working with Mobil
Corp. of Fairfax on software to keep track of environmental laws that affect
Mobil's business.

   First Citizens Financial Corp. of Silver Spring -- ($ 1 to $ 2.13, up 113
percent). Parent of Citizens Savings Bank, the company reported that its losses
were diminishing, which was encouraging to investors.

   OW Office Warehouse Inc. of Virginia Beach -- ($ 5.75 to $ 10.63, up 84.9
percent). This chain of 46 office supply stores will be acquired by rival
OfficeMax Inc. for $ 11 a share. OW lost $ 9.5 million in 1991.

   Universal Security Instruments Inc. of Owings Mills, Md. -- ($ 1.63 to $ 3,
up 84 percent). Universal, which makes telephones, answering machines, smoke
detectors and floodlight systems, has attracted attention from stock analysts.

   Riggs National Corp. of Washington -- ($ 4.25 to $ 7.63, up 79.5 percent).
Seeking to shore up its tattered finances, Riggs sold $ 51 million in troubled
real estate and raised $ 49 million from a new stock offering. Riggs also showed
a $ 2.1 million profit in the fourth quarter of 1991.

   CFS Financial Corp. of Fairfax -- ($ 3.50 to $ 6.25, up 78.6 percent). CFS,
parent of Continental Federal Savings Bank, said it will consider selling the
company.

   Columbia First Bank of Arlington -- ($ 6.75 to $ 11.75, up 74.1 percent). The
bank reported a $ 775,000 profit for the quarter, ending Dec. 31, compared with
a $ 2.8 million loss a year earlier, raising investor hopes for a turnaround.

   Biospherics Inc. of Beltsville -- ($ 5.25 to $ 8.50, up 61.9 percent).
Although 1991 sales were down, profits were up, the result of belt-tightening at
this biotech firm.

   MNC Financial Inc. of Baltimore -- ($ 4.88 to $ 7.88, up 61.5 percent). MNC,
parent of Maryland National and American Security Banks, has suffered $ 500
million in loan losses but its stock rallied on hopes that things are getting
better.

   Jupiter Industries Inc. of Chevy Chase -- ($ 7.13 to $ 11.50, up 61.3
percent). Formerly Greater Washington Investors Inc., a venture capital firm,
Jupiter continues to contemplate the acquisition of a manufacturing company to
even out its financial results.

   Rowe Furniture Corp. of Salem, Va. -- ($ 3.63 to $ 5.75, up 58.4 percent).
Shipments have been rising and losses diminishing, presenting a stronger picture
at Rowe, which had been hurt by the recession.

   Cadmus Communications Corp. of Richmond -- ($ 6 to $ 9.50, up 58.3 percent).
A printing company, Cadmus has seen sales continue to grow, but profits have
been under pressure. Investors expect Cadmus to benefit from an economic upturn.

   Here are the stocks, trading at $ 2 or more, that turned in the poorest
performances during the first quarter. The first number is the price on Dec. 31,
1991, the second is the price on March 31, 1992:

   Crop Genetics International Corp. of Hanover, Md. -- ($ 11 to $ 6.50, down
40.9 percent). An agreement with DuPont Co. to develop a virus-based insecticide
sent Crop Genetics stock soaring to $ 11 from $ 4.50, but the price has since
retreated.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg -- ($ 15.25 to $ 10.25, down 32.8
percent). Using genes to repair or revamp human cells is a promising area but
commercial sales are a long way off.

   Alpha 1 Biomedicals Inc. of Washington -- ($ 14.25 to $ 9.75, down 31.6
percent). The firm is working on an AIDS vaccine and trying to develop a drug
for hepatitis B.

   MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg -- ($ 43.75 to $ 31.50, down 28 percent). A
very hot biotech stock when it came out in May, the firm is working on vaccines
for AIDS and other infectious diseases.

   Insituform East Inc. of Landover -- ($ 5.63 to $ 4.25, down 24.5 percent).
Significant municipal customers had deferred work in the second quarter, ending
Dec. 31, hurting the bottom line at Insituform, which relines old sewer pipes.

   General Kinetics Inc. of Herndon -- ($ 5.75 to $ 4.38, down 23.8 percent). A
builder of fax machines that are secure against electronic eavesdropping, the
company fired its president after being forced to drop a $ 10 million stock
offering.

   Government Technology Services Inc. of Chantilly -- ($ 13.25 to $ 10.25, down
22.6 percent). The company sells computers to federal and state agencies. While
sales and profits rose in 1991, profit margins were squeezed by competition.

   General Physics Corp. of Columbia, Md. -- ($ 15.75 to $ 12.25, down 22.2
percent). The company, which trains operators of nuclear power plants, reported
increases in sales and profits.

   Rouse Co. of Columbia, Md. -- ($ 18.50 to $ 14.75, down 20.3 percent). A real
estate company, Rouse stock remains under pressure but analysts say that an
economic turnaround will help Rouse, which operates 80 retail malls around the
country.

   Universal Corp. of Richmond -- ($ 34 to $ 27.25, down 19.9 percent). Its main
business is tobacco, but it also has an insurance company, where things have
been slow.

   North American Vaccine Inc. of Beltsville -- ($ 13.06 to $ 10.50, down 19.6
percent). Parent of American Vaccine Corp., the company said its losses tripled
in 1991, rising to $ 5.8 million from $ 1.8 million because of contract
expirations and increased research costs.

   T. Rowe Price Associates Inc. of Baltimore -- ($ 45 to $ 36.75, down 18.3
percent). This mutual fund company, which has $ 21.5 billion under management,
saw its 1991 sales and profits rise sharply, compared with 1990, when the firm
took a $ 6.5 million charge because a real estate trust's commercial paper went
into default.

   Cel-Sci Corp. of Alexandria -- ($ 3.19 to $ 2.63, down 17.6 percent). Cel-Sci
is engaged in AIDS research with Alpha 1 Biomedicals. It recently raised $ 14
million from investors.

   Allied Research Corp. of Baltimore -- ($ 12.13 to $ 10, down 17.6 percent).
The company manufactures weapons systems and saw its stock reach $ 17.50 during
the Persian Gulf War.

   Oncor Inc. of Gaithersburg -- ($ 9.38 to $ 7.75, down 17.4 percent). Producer
of products to diagnose and manage cancer and genetic diseases, the firm
recently raised $ 33.7 million in a stock offering.


GRAPHIC: CHART, WASHINGTON BUSINESS SELECTED AREA STOCK EXCHANGE.  (DATA FROM
CHART WAS UNAVAILABLE.)


                             1468 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            April 9, 1992, Thursday

SECTION: HEALTH WATCH; Section B; Page 3

LENGTH: 126 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy cure for hemophilia?

BYLINE: By Amanda Husted STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Researchers, in meetings sponsored by the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, are mapping plans for using gene therapy to treat - and possibly cure
- hemophilia.

   People with hemophilia, which afflicts about 20,000 males in the United
States, have a genetic defect that prevents them from producing a protein that
regulates clotting of the blood. The therapy would involve inserting a clotting
factor gene into cells with access to the bloodstream; those cells should
produce clotting factor.

   Researchers are testing methods in laboratories and in animals and hope to
get clinical trials in humans under way within two years.

   Hemophiliacs currently must infuse a clotting factor derived from collections
of large amounts of blood plasma.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1992


                             1469 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     April 2, 1992, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE / MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY;
RESEARCHERS SEE PROMISE IN GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   California researchers have developed the first conclusive evidence that a
crude form of gene therapy has promise in treating young boys with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy.

   The controversial new therapy involves a technique called myoblast transfer,
in which muscle cells from a donor were injected into a withered leg muscle in
the young boys.

   Stanford pharmacologist Helen Blau and her colleagues report today in the
British journal Nature that the injected cells fused with muscle cells in three
of the eight boys treated and began producing the crucial protein that is
normally missing in the disorder. She has not yet, however, seen any increase in
muscle strength as a result of the treatment.

   The defective MD gene was discovered in 1987. It is the blueprint for the
previously unknown protein, called dystrophin, whose role in the muscle cell is
still not completely understood. But its absence leads to the eventual death of
the muscle cells.

   Today's report comes less than a month after similar findings were announced
by Tennessee geneticist Peter K. Law of the Cell Therapy Research Foundation in
Memphis. Law, in fact, said that myoblast therapy produced pronounced increases
in lower body muscle strength in 13 boys he has treated.

   But Law's results have been greeted with skepticism by other researchers who
believe that his studies could not rule out alternative causes for the increased
strength, especially his use of an immunosuppressive drug called cyclosporine.
His initial paper on the increases in strength was submitted to the Lancet, a
highly respected journal, which flatly rejected it for not meeting strict
scientific criteria.

   Furthermore, critics charge that Law's published report that the missing
protein was actually produced in the boys' muscles after treatment is
inconclusive, while Blau's evidence is, in her own words, "absolutely
definitive." Blau's results confirm at least part of Law's controversial
results, according to Muscular Dystrophy Assn. President Leon Charash. "It is
the largest trial yet to prove that cell transplants can cause dystrophin to be
produced in muscle cells," he said.

   But regardless of the controversy over Law's work, it is becoming clear that
myoblast transfer has the potential to become the first effective therapy for
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which kills an average of two boys per day in the
United States.

   About one in every 3,500 boys born in the United States has the genetic
defect that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Females can be carriers of the
gene, but rarely develop the disorder.

   The affected babies appear normal at birth, but develop a progressive
weakening of the muscles that usually places them in a wheelchair by the age of
12. There is currently no therapy for MD and most victims die in their late
teens or early 20s when the muscles that operate the heart and lungs cease
functioning.

   The new therapy is possible because each muscle cell has hundreds to
thousands of nuclei, each with its own genetic information. Cells elsewhere in
the body have one nucleus. Muscle tissue also contains immature cells, called
myoblasts, that can fuse with existing muscle cells and insert their own nuclei.

   In their treatment, Blau and her colleagues obtained healthy myoblasts from a
biopsy of arm muscles from the father or brother of the MD patients. This tissue
sample was grown in the laboratory to produce billions of cells. Finally,
millions of myoblasts were inserted into the major muscle of each boy's leg in
100 injections. As a control, sham injections of saltwater were performed on the
opposite leg.

   Using a new and highly sensitive test, the Stanford team was able to show
that the treated leg in three of the eight boys began producing dystrophin. One
boy, who has been studied the longest, has produced it for six months.

   Blau is confident that she will be able to obtain much better results as she
refines the techniques for administering the cells -- confidence based on the
demonstration that the treatment works in mice. But she said it will still be
several years before such a treatment could be used on a wide basis.


                             1470 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    April 1, 1992, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F2; DIGEST

LENGTH: 760 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   ECONOMY

   Gasoline prices rose for the first time since late February. The nationwide
average price for a gallon of self-serve regular unleaded rose 0.5 cent for the
week ending Tuesday, to $ 1.054, the American Automobile Association said.

   COMPANIES

   Texaco will cut its $ 3.8 billion 1992 capital and exploration budget by 10
percent, company Chairman Alfred DeCrane said, citing falling natural gas prices
and the weak economy.

   Boeing said it may take an after-tax charge of as much as $ 1.2 billion
because of a new accounting requirement that it anticipate future health
benefits to retirees.

   Tele-Communications signed a pact with Digital Equipment to develop medical
and education services that can be transmitted on TCI's cable television
systems. It also announced an experiment in Silicon Valley that will allow
workers to do computer-related work from home.

   Sears said it would step up its job-cutting program by eliminating about
2,000 positions within a year while opening more than 100 new stores.

   Genetic Therapy of Gaithersburg licensed the right to develop and market
products using the gene for Interleukin 1-b from Cistron Biotechnology in Pine
Brook, N.J. The gene will be inserted into tumor cells to treat cancer.

   Morgan Stanley won the right to handle the year's largest international share
deal, Wellcome Trust's sale of as much as $ 7.65 billion of stock in
pharmaceutical group Wellcome Plc.

   Time Warner exercised an option to defer the payment of $ 2.3 billion in bank
debt as part of its effort to refinance or revise its lending agreements,
Bloomberg Business News said.

   Olympia & York of Toronto, the financially struggling real estate giant,
failed to convince a group of banks to extend a $ 450 million loan that comes
due Wednesday, the New York Times reported today. The paper also said Olympia &
York had enough immediate cash to retire the part of a $ 300 million commercial-
paper program that matures today.

   INTERNATIONAL

   Russia's deferral of principal payments to foreign government creditors was
extended until June 30. The creditor government group, known as the Paris Club,
took no action on Russia's overdue interest payments. Sources said the interest
arrears would be addressed after an IMF program is in place, clearing the way
for a full debt rescheduling.

   Canada's gross domestic product inched up 0.1 percent in January, the
government said.

   Kuwait's National Council approved a government plan to buy $ 20 billion of
bad debts from commercial banks. Critics of the plan said it would bail out some
of the emirate's most influential people, who lost billions of dollars in the
stock market.

   Three Japanese banks had their long-term debt downgraded by Moody's Investors
Service, which cited the deterioration in the quality of the banks' loans,
Bloomberg Business News said. The three banks are the Bank of Tokyo, Mitsui
Trust & Banking and Tokai Bank.

   REGULATION

   The Commodities Futures Trading Commission approved securities based on the
health of the insurance industry for trading on the Chicago Board of Trade.

   The Transportation Department tentatively gave Delta Air Lines the right to
fly between Detroit and London, dealing a blow to Northwest Airlines, which had
argued that it could provide better service.

   PEOPLE

   Sam Walton, 74, founder of Wal-Mart Stores, has been in a Little Rock, Ark.,
hospital for several days for cancer-related treatment, the company said.

   Hardee's named Ron Powell president of the Roy Rogers division. Powell was
executive vice president and general manager of Roy Rogers when Marriott owned
the chain.

   EARNINGS

   Groupe Bull, the French state-owned computer maker, said its 1991 net loss
narrowed to $ 585 million from $ 1.2 billion the previous year.

   ODD LOTS

   The New York City bar association, in response to the government's recent
move to freeze the assets of the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman,
Hays & Handler, called on Congress to amend the law that allows such a move
without a court order. A report by the association's committee on professional
responsibility said the government should first get approval from a federal
judge before a freeze is used.

   The Independent Bankers of America Association asked its members to write to
Congress in opposition to interstate bank branching, which would let banks open
branches across state lines. The group is trying to counter a letter sent by
NationsBank President Hugh McColl to 125,000 shareholders urging passage of an
interstate branching bill.


                             1471 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 29, 1992, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1393 words

HEADLINE: Cancer-cure hope in gene "marking';
Bone-marrow work points to "less toxic, more effective' goal

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Houston researchers have taken an important first step toward
the possible use of gene therapy to cure deadly forms of cancer.

   The research involves transplantation of bone marrow cells
that have been genetically ""marked'' for identification.  This
technique is designed to help physicians evaluate the effectiveness
of bone marrow transplants that use a patient's own tissue, said
Dr. Albert B. Deisseroth, the physician-researcher at the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Hospital who is leading the
effort.

   The procedure also points the way toward genetic
manipulations that could cure more devastating cancers for which
treatments now are relatively ineffective, he said.

   ""The progress being made may be faster where the diseases
are invariably fatal,'' said Deisseroth.  ""The balance sheet for
the potential gain is clearer.

   ""I want to convey the message that there is hope; there are
new directions.  We are opening new doors and eventually we'll be
able to implement strategies to help people.

   ""They may be less toxic, easier to endure and more
effective.  That's our goal. ''

   Deisseroth is scheduled to announce his findings at an
American Cancer Society meeting today.

   Researchers alter the genetic material in cells for two
reasons: To mark cells so that they can be distinguished from those
ordinarily circulating in the body, or to change the ways cells
behave.

   Deisseroth has used the marking technique in a patient with
chronic myelocytic leukemia, which causes an overproduction of
white blood cells and ultimately becomes a deadly form of the blood
malignancy.  He plans to follow suit in nine more patients.

   Ultimately, Deisseroth plans to alter bone marrow genetically
to make it more resistant to the toxic effects of chemotherapy.

   Both techniques require review by local and federal panels
that evaluate gene therapy proposals.

   Deisseroth said he worked for 14 months on the development
and approval processes.  He is now applying for approval for his
work designed to improve bone marrow resistance to chemotherapy.

   The marking project itself is important because it gives
doctors a way to evaluate bone marrow transplants using a patient's
own marrow -- a procedure called autologous transplant.

   Such transplants are needed when physicians must use
excessive amounts of chemotherapy to eradicate cancers.  The drugs
used to fight cancer are toxic to both malignant and healthy
tissue, and bone marrow is particularly sensitive, Deisseroth said.

   If doctors can administer enough medication to eradicate the
bone marrow and the cancer cells it contains, they have a better
chance of curing the patient.  But they must transplant bone marrow
cells into the patient to restore the ability to make blood
components: red cells that carry oxygen, white cells that fight
infection and platelets to prevent bleeding.

   The transplanted cells must be very similar to those the
patient has lost.  Some patients receive transplants from parents or
siblings and suffer no rejection problems.

   Other patients do not have a related donor or a donor whose
blood closely matches their own.  In these cases, physicians harvest
some of the patient's own marrow, try to remove all traces of
cancer cells from it, and transplant it back into the patient after
treatment.

   However, in diseases like chronic myelocytic leukemia,
relapses occur with disturbing frequency.  In early disease, the
transplants are 70 percent effective.  But most patients receive the
treatment in late stages when it is effective in only 30 percent to
35 percent of cases, Deisseroth said.

   Doctors must determine the source of the cancer cells to
determine why a patient relapses.  Two causes are possible: The
chemotherapy could have been inadequate, leaving malignant cells
that reproduced; or cancer cells could have been left behind in the
marrow that was transplanted into the patient.

   Marking the marrow cells will allow doctors to determine the
source of the relapse, Deisseroth said.

   Using a modified retrovirus that does not cause infection,
Deisseroth conveys into a patient's cells a gene that causes
resistance to an antibiotic.

   If the cancer cells carry this genetic marker, then the
marrow is the source of the relapse.  If not, the chemotherapy was
inadequate.

   Understanding the reason for the relapse helps doctors design
more effective future treatment, Deisseroth said.  It also enables
them to evaluate the efficiency of their technique for genetically
altering bone marrow cells.

   When physicians treat bone marrow to remove malignant
cells, they also hope to increase the numbers of normal, immature
cells that are precursors for the blood cells the body needs.  The
more of these the patient receives, the more likely the bone marrow
will be repopulated with normal cells.

   By measuring the number of marked cells and the
concentrations of those cells in the marrow, physicians will be
able to determine the effectiveness of their genetic alterations.

   If they alter the immature cells, called stem cells, the
change is more likely to be permanent as these cells divide and
produce continuing populations of altered cells.  Changing the
genetic structure of mature cells has a more limited effect,
because these cells will die without dividing and perpetuating the
genetic alteration.

   ""It's a very important step,'' Deisseroth said.  ""Once we
have learned how to modify early cells in man, we are opening the
door to the use of marrow in the treatment of any disease'' that
can be attributed to a genetic defect.

   He hopes to make such a change by introducing into bone
marrow cells a gene that causes resistance to many drugs.  This gene
causes the cell to make a protein that acts like a pump,
transferring toxic materials from the inside to the outside of the
cells.

   Scientists identified the gene when they were trying to
determine why cancer cells become resistant to chemotherapy.  If
this drug-resistant trait could be introduced into normal bone
marrow cells, the marrow would be less susceptible to destruction
by chemotherapy.

   Deisseroth said he would introduce the drug-resistant gene
into the cells using the same technique he employed to mark the
cells in the case of the leukemia patient.  However, he said he
probably would first apply this technique to tumors such as breast
cancer, because this would make it easier to ensure that all the
cancer cells had been removed from the bone marrow.

   Removing cancer cells would be important because doctors do
not want to introduce a set of drug-resistant cancer cells into a
patient, he said.

   After the gene alteration, the patient would receive the
chemotherapy that would kill the cancer cells and the normal cells
in the bone marrow.  However, the drug-resistant normal cells would
be left behind.  ""With each treatment, the bone marrow would get stronger,''
Deisseroth said.

   Eventually, he would hope to add other beneficial genes to
the marrow, such as those that make it impossible for proteins that
promote tumors to bind to cells.

   ""It would shut down the growth of the tumor,'' he said.

   Such techniques are ""opening new doors to new directions in
therapy,'' Deisseroth said.



   "Marking' cells in bone marrow transplants

   About 35 percent of patients who undergo autologous bone
marrow transplants in late stages of cancer are cured, while the
remainder relapse.  By genetically ""marking'' certain marrow cells,
doctors hope to better understand why the cancer returns and how to
treat it in the future.

   1. Bone marrow is harvested from a patient whose cancer is in
remission.

   2. Patient undergoes intensive chemotherapy, which kills the
cancer cells but also destroys remaining bone marrow.

   3. Cancer cells are removed, or ""purged'', from the
harvested bone marrow to allow doctors to distinguish it from
marrow that has remained in the patient's body.

   4.A ""marked'' gene is introduced into the cells of the
cleansed bone marrow to allow doctors to distinguish it from marrow
that has remained in the patient's body.

   5. These ""marked'' cells are reinfused into the patient to
repopulate bone marrow that was destroyed by chemotherapy.


GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. Albert D. Deisseroth examines bone marrow cultures in a
laboratory at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center (color);
Graph: 2. "Marking' cells in bone marrow transplants (b/w, p. 18) (TEXT); 1. Ben
DeSoto/Chronicle, 2. Knight-Ridder Tribune, Sources: University of Texas
M.D.Anderson Cancer Center

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1992


                             1472 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 29, 1992, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 418 words

HEADLINE: Failing livers targeted for gene-therapy testing

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   A Baylor College of Medicine researcher is evaluating
patients for a type of of gene therapy designed to help failing
livers.

   Dr. Fred Ledley, who practices at Texas Children's Hospital,
plans to transplant healthy liver cells into children whose livers
are failing and for whom no suitable transplant organ can be found.

   He intends to use the same antibiotic-resistant gene to mark
the transplanted cells that Dr.Albert Deisseroth is using to mark
transplanted bone marrow cells.  Deisseroth is a
physician-researcher at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center.

   ""We know cells go to the liver'' and look like normal liver
cells in animals, Ledley said.  However, he cannot differentiate
between normal and transplanted cells.

   ""We need to know this to tell whether the transplant
works,'' he said.

   In some children with acute viral infections or poisoning
that affects the liver, the organ can recover if the youngsters
live long enough, Ledley said.

   For these children, the transplanted cells act as ""a bridge
to recovery,'' he said.

   The markers will tell him whether the child's liver
recovered on its own or if the transplanted cells assumed some of
the liver's normal function.  Without the genetic markers, the
normal and transplanted cells are virtually indistinguishable,
Ledley said.

   If the child's liver has recovered without the aid of
transplanted cells, that child can be taken off anti-rejection
medication that suppresses the immune system, Ledley said.  However,
if the marked or transplanted cells are functioning, the immune
suppression will continue, he said.

   For patients whose livers do not recover, the transplant can
mean a few weeks of life during which a donor can be sought, he
said.  For children who are low on transplant lists because their
genetic diseases do not present an imminent threat of death, the
cell transplant promises a chance to restore normal functioning of
the liver.

   These children are ill because their livers do not
metabolize or eliminate certain acids or chemicals that can poison
the whole liver.  If enough transplanted cells can be induced to
grow in their livers, the transplants will perform this function
and cure the illness.

   For now, Ledley hopes to obtain the cell transplants from
donated livers that are too damaged to be transplanted.  Eventually,
he thinks, parents or siblings will be able to donate the cells for
transplant.

   ""It's a whole new direction for care,'' he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1992


                             1473 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 29, 1992, Sunday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Children with failing livers are targeted for gene therapy testing

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   A Baylor College of Medicine researcher is evaluating patients for
a type of of gene therapy designed to help failing
livers.

   Dr. Fred Ledley, who practices at Texas Children's Hospital,
plans to transplant healthy liver cells into children whose livers
are failing and for whom no suitable transplant organ can be found.

   He intends to use the same antibiotic-resistant gene to mark
the transplanted cells that Dr.Albert Deisseroth is using to mark
transplanted bone marrow cells.  Deisseroth is a
physician-researcher at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center.

   ""We know cells go to the liver'' and look like normal liver
cells in animals, Ledley said.  However, he cannot differentiate
between normal and transplanted cells.

   ""We need to know this to tell whether the transplant
works,'' he said.

   In some children with acute viral infections or poisoning
that affects the liver, the organ can recover if the youngsters
live long enough, Ledley said.

   For these children, the transplanted cells act as ""a bridge
to recovery,'' he said.

   The markers will tell him whether the child's liver
recovered on its own or if the transplanted cells assumed some of
the liver's normal function.  Without the genetic markers, the
normal and transplanted cells are virtually indistinguishable,
Ledley said.

   If the child's liver has recovered without the aid of
transplanted cells, that child can be taken off anti-rejection
medication that suppresses the immune system, Ledley said.  However,
if the marked or transplanted cells are functioning, the immune
suppression will continue, he said.

   For patients whose livers do not recover, the transplant can
mean a few weeks of life during which a donor can be sought, he
said.  For children who are low on transplant lists because their
genetic diseases do not present an imminent threat of death, cell
transplants offer a chance to restore normal functioning.

   These children are ill because their livers do not
metabolize or eliminate certain acids or chemicals that can poison
the whole liver.  If enough transplanted cells can be induced to
grow in their livers, the transplants will perform this function
and cure the illness.

   For now, Ledley hopes to obtain the cell transplants from
donated livers that are too damaged to be transplanted.  Eventually,
he thinks, parents or siblings will be able to donate the cells for
transplant.

   ""It's a whole new direction for care,'' he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1992


                             1474 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                March 25, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 6426 words

HEADLINE: Uncovered Short Sales of Nasdaq Stocks Are Up

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

BODY:

   The number of shares in over-the-counter stocks sold short and not yet
covered rose last month by 2.5 million to 354.8 million, the National
Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday. Figures reflect trades
that took place in the month preceding March 6, which were settled by March 13.

   "I don't know where it's coming from since the total amount of money devoted
to short-selling is down," said Michael Murphy, a prominent short-seller in Half
Moon Bay, Calif. The short-selling fund he runs became the latest casualty of
that capital flight earlier this month, when the State of Virginia withdrew its
$25 million investment out of political concerns.

    The rise in over-the-counter short positions was in contrast to declines
reported earlier in the week in the short positions in stocks traded on the New
York and American Stock Exchanges.

   Mr. Murphy attributed the increase in the Nasdaq short position to hedging
activities on the part of investors who have piled up impressive capital gains
on their portfolios and want some protection against an overall market slide.

   Traditional short-sellers, in contrast, seek to profit from stocks they
believe are overvalued. By borrowing the shares for a nominal fee, and selling
them to other investors at the current price, they are betting that they will
eventually be able to replace the borrowed stock at a lower price.

   Professional short-sellers, as a group, had a rough 1991 and were down
another 9.91 percent in January and February, according to Harry Strunk, an
investment consultant in Palm Beach, Fla. Still, the early returns from March
suggest that "they'll have their first positive month since November," he said.

   The short position in Westwood One Inc., a producer and distributor of radio
programming, rose 32 percent last month. That was before the Government
announced on March 12 that it would ease the rules governing how many stations a
single owner can acquire, a move that should make radio properties more
valuable. The stock rose slightly in the month, but has slipped a bit since the
Government move.

   Short-sellers evidently took profits in the Healthcare Compare Corporation,
whose price fell during the month despite what many analysts' viewed as its
smart acquisition of Occupational-Urgent Care Health Systems Inc.

   One good call by short-sellers appeared to be Healthcare Service Group Inc.,
a provider and launderer of hospital uniforms. It is under investigation by the
Securities and Exchange Commission. Even before March 9, when the company
reported that it would be restating earnings back to 1986, the short position
had grown to 2.7 million shares -- equivalent to 71 days of average trading for
the company. Its price fell sharply after the announcement.

Largest Increases

Security Name                           3/13/92      2/14/92       Change

Telefonos de Mexico                   6,160,702    1,753,738    4,406,964
Noise Cancellation                    1,651,828      930,440      721,388
Aura Systems Inc                      2,686,683    2,004,232      682,451   T
Dell Computer Cp                      3,087,944    2,525,704      562,240   T
Cytrx Cp                              1,367,534      810,652      556,882   T
SGI International                       727,989      195,909      532,080
Tele Commun Inc A                     3,901,640    3,429,253      472,387   T
Digital Prods Cp                        539,277       73,117      466,160   T
Centocor Inc                          6,603,152    6,191,512      411,640   T
Healthdyne Inc                          665,969      273,768      392,201   T
Comp USA Inc                          1,129,376      750,514      378,862   T
Price Co the                          3,045,217    2,667,957      377,260   T
Triple Threat Enterp                    366,087        9,050      357,037
Sequoia Sys Inc                       1,192,296      836,079      356,217   T
ICOS Cp                                 888,973      535,321      353,652   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     2,872,057    2,522,628      349,429   T
Advanced Enviro A                       788,219      447,770      340,449
Borland Intl Inc                      1,470,501    1,148,395      322,106   T
Cellular Inc                            720,901      404,587      316,314   T
Micro Healthsys Inc                     728,763      416,464      312,299   T
Safetytek Cp                            338,424       37,360      301,064   T
Westwood One Inc                      1,215,242      920,328      294,914   T
Surgical Care Affil                     829,228      552,306      276,922   T
Landmark Graphic Cp                     683,816      416,223      267,593   T
WPP Gp ADR                              787,314      529,876      257,438   T

Largest Decreases

Security Name                           3/13/92      2/14/92       Change

Diamond Entertain Cp                      1,000    1,059,618   -1,058,618
Medicis Pharm Cl A                      340,068    1,363,702   -1,023,634
+ Intelligent Elec                    2,114,480    3,091,820     -977,340   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                  3,992,829    4,885,274     -892,445   T
Conquest Airlines                       193,815    1,004,469     -810,654
Healthcare Compare                      644,318    1,353,530     -709,212   T
Imaging Mgmt Assocs                      22,479      613,492     -591,013
Watts Industries A                        7,312      590,618     -583,306   T
Pacificare Health                       431,432      974,405     -542,973   T
Washington Energy Co                     70,836      558,120     -487,284   T
Medco Containmnt                      1,315,472    1,795,517     -480,045   T
DSC Commun Cp                           632,463    1,093,162     -460,699   T
Food Lion Inc Cl A                      821,016    1,255,362     -434,346   T
Amer Bankers Ins Gp                      20,485      448,598     -428,113   T
Fleet Call Inc Cl-A                      48,779      390,634     -341,855   T
News Commun Inc                         252,606      588,043     -335,437
CCC Franchising Cp                      119,649      435,183     -315,534
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                   2,297,047    2,608,342     -311,295   T
TW Holdings Inc                       1,813,990    2,112,445     -298,455   T
Medicis Pharma Wt B                       7,955      293,705     -285,750
Amgen                                 1,642,217    1,918,821     -276,604   T
US Healthcare Inc                     1,360,256    1,632,089     -271,833   T
Video Lottery Tech                      402,978      667,333     -264,355   T
Vimrx Pharm Inc                         294,871      550,339     -255,468
Corestates Fin Cp                       174,238      428,742     -254,504   T

Largest Cover Rations

Security Name                           3/13/92    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Rouse Co                              2,526,883       30,418           83   T
Healthcare Svcs Gp                    2,717,166       38,020           71   T
Copytele Inc                          1,925,811       51,958           37   T
Cardinal Distr                        1,669,779       47,839           35   T
Fastenal Co                           1,140,893       37,631           30   T
RPM Inc                                 751,488       25,187           30   T
Presstek Inc                            853,991       30,512           28   T
Staples Inc                           2,648,536       97,539           27   T
BBT Finl Cp                             768,985       30,081           26   T
C.I.S. Tech Inc                       1,004,928       40,424           25   T
Cabot Medical Cp                        701,343       29,247           24   T
Research Industries                     707,662       29,855           24   T
Videocart Inc                         2,709,178      114,581           24   T
Pac Rim Hldg Cp                         591,632       26,996           22   T
Interface Inc A                         682,188       33,000           21   T
Summit Tech Inc                       1,631,674       78,940           21   T
Amer West Airline                     1,314,411       67,361           20
IHOP Cp                                 703,447       34,338           20   T
Midlantic Cp                          4,221,824      206,297           20   T
Intl Mobile Mach Cp                   2,857,778      153,817           19   T
Buffets Inc                           1,943,170      108,885           18   T
Circon Cp                               909,715       51,372           18   T
Reuters Hldg ADR                      2,829,251      156,594           18   T
+ Cambex Cp                             739,404       42,921           17   T
Ecogen Inc                              727,922       42,118           17   T

Largest Positions

Security Name                           3/13/92      2/14/92       Change

Centocor Inc                          6,603,152    6,191,512      411,640   T
Telefonos de Mexico                   6,160,702    1,753,738    4,406,964
Midlantic Cp                          4,221,824    4,304,873      -83,049   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                  3,992,829    4,885,274     -892,445   T
Tele Commun Inc A                     3,901,640    3,429,253      472,387   T
XOMA Cp                               3,690,701    3,714,579      -23,878   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  3,328,331    3,418,145      -89,814   T
Dell Computer Cp                      3,087,944    2,525,704      562,240   T
Price Co the                          3,045,217    2,667,957      377,260   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     2,872,057    2,522,628      349,429   T
Intl Mobile Mach Cp                   2,857,778    2,882,276      -24,498   T
Reuters Hldg ADR                      2,829,251    2,746,318       82,933   T
Healthcare Svcs Gp                    2,717,166    2,729,104      -11,938   T
Videocart Inc                         2,709,178    2,574,284      134,894   T
Aura Systems Inc                      2,686,683    2,004,232      682,451   T
Staples Inc                           2,648,536    2,475,983      172,553   T
Rouse Co                              2,526,883    2,518,350        8,533   T
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                   2,297,047    2,608,342     -311,295   T
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg                   2,273,713    2,074,061      199,652   T
+ Intelligent Elec                    2,114,480    3,091,820     -977,340   T
Datascope Cp                          2,077,939    2,322,541     -244,602   T
Michael Foods Inc                     2,066,366    2,062,615        3,751   T
+ Parametric Tech Cp                  2,021,829    2,171,948     -150,119   T
Macmillan Bloedel                     1,945,330    1,824,330      121,000   T
Buffets Inc                           1,943,170    2,131,266     -188,096   T

National Market

Security Name                             3/13/92        2/14/92

3Com Cp                                    65,573        121,580
50 Off Stores Inc                       1,751,205      1,709,880
ADAC Laboratories                          64,672         26,133
ADC Telecommun Inc                        419,795        282,180
AES Cp (The)                               56,263        103,234
AW Brands Inc                              51,014         70,563
Abbey Healthcare Gp                        32,428           N.L.
Acclaim Entertainmnt                       75,318        115,365
Adia Services Inc                          81,506        112,180
Adobe Systems Inc                       2,872,057      2,522,628
Advacare Inc                               50,820         14,270
Advan Interventional                      390,026        259,504
Advanced Polymer Sys                      120,412        143,596
Advanced Telecommun                       112,722         66,459
Advanced Tissue Cl A                      314,182        390,372
Agouron Pharm Inc                         191,330        165,938
Akzo N V ADR                               61,502         87,198
Alias Research Inc                        567,334        512,429
Alliance Pharm Cp                         967,681        879,558
Allied Capital Cp                          18,056            145
Alteon Inc                                218,244        189,229
Altera Cp                                  59,357         82,427
Amer Bankers Ins Gp                        20,485        448,598
Amer City Bus Journl                       66,555         87,900
Amer Claims Evaluat                       197,138        176,651
Amer Dental Laser                         355,673        351,726
Amer Film Tech Inc                        406,257        405,098
Amer Healthcorp                                 0         22,226
Amer Management Sys                        26,986         50,618
Amer TV Commun Cp A                        43,948         81,568
Amer United Global                          2,291        169,593
Amgen                                   1,642,217      1,918,821
+ Amtech Cp                               232,097        284,442
Amvestors Fin Cp                          270,689        266,567
Amylin Pharma Inc                         216,907         64,403
Applebee's Intl Inc                        80,366        190,143
Applied Immune Sci                        254,054        231,389
Applied Power Inc A                       131,022        163,328
Archive Cp                                 74,711         33,281
Artel Commun Cp                            84,687        119,484
Aspect Telecomm Cp                         23,697         59,454
Atmel Cp                                   39,112        116,228
Au Bon Pain Cl A                          501,748        471,303
Aura Systems Inc                        2,686,683      2,004,232
Automated Sec ADR                         495,639        491,700
Aztar Cp                                   56,494         27,863
BBT Finl Cp                               768,985        749,082
BHA Gp Inc Cl A                            11,471         58,658
BLOC Dev Cp                               507,003        542,207
BMJ Financial Cp                           20,151         40,328
BWIP Hldg Cl A                             57,892          6,198
Babbage's Inc                             201,223        219,959
Bachman Info Sys Inc                      205,639        158,508
Bally Gaming Intl                         192,367         86,748
Bank South Cp                             211,516        279,890
Bay View Capital Cp                        28,020          5,714
Baybanks Inc                              565,398        807,625
Bayport Restaurant                         22,900          6,101
Beeba's Creations                           3,384         45,838
Betz Labs Inc                              72,093         93,737
Big O Tires Inc                            11,959        104,846
Bindley Wstn Ind                          824,060      1,076,343
Bio Tech Gen Cp                           368,580        379,259
Biogen Inc                                587,740        611,290
Biomira Inc                               153,205         18,605
Boatmen's Bancshares                      653,075        620,364
Bon Ton Stores the                          2,514         21,300
Borland Intl Inc                        1,470,501      1,148,395
Boston Five Bancorp                        39,510        218,961
Boston Tech Inc                           712,389        712,664
Brooktree Cp                               15,334         38,741
Buffets Inc                             1,943,170      2,131,266
Burnup & Sims Inc                         632,055        700,357
C.I.S. Tech Inc                         1,004,928      1,010,210
Cabot Medical Cp                          701,343        601,128
Cadbury Schweppe ADR                       37,043          2,572
Cal Microwave Inc                          45,237         25,624
Calgene Inc                             1,280,407      1,255,168
Calumet Bancorp Inc                        21,480           N.L.
+ Cambex Cp                               739,404        611,306
Cambridge Biotech Cp                      477,798        442,010
Canon Inc ADR                             132,455        178,363
Canyon Res Cp Wts                          21,650          3,100
Capital Associates                            591         47,601
Cardinal Distr                          1,669,779      1,666,829
Care Gp Inc the                            20,461         39,259
Casey's Gen Stores                        283,151        268,126
Cato Cp the Cl A                          102,773        122,075
Cel Sci Cp                                548,386        535,111
Cel Sci Cp Wts 95                          64,795        235,075
Celgene Cp                                 39,627        146,344
Cellular Inc                              720,901        404,587
Celtrix Pharmaceut                         44,282         13,940
Centex Telemanagemnt                    1,312,608      1,274,327
Centocor Inc                            6,603,152      6,191,512
Central Co Op Bank                         77,884         96,267
Central Fidelity Bks                       78,175        136,454
Century Medicorp Inc                        5,587         29,685
Cephalon Inc                              261,095        225,160
Charming Shoppes Inc                      313,695        232,076
Charter Golf Inc                          136,984         32,978
+ Checkers Drive In                       249,515        207,607
Checkpoint Sys Inc                        178,531        213,108
Chipcom Cp                                107,486         37,616
Chips & Tech Inc                          820,551        791,708
Cintas Cp                                  68,127        113,774
Circon Cp                                 909,715        737,307
Citfed Bncp Inc                             7,610         67,309
Citizens Bancorp                           89,365        169,943
Clearly Canadian Bev                      651,762        692,726
Clothestime Inc the                        75,069         18,345
Co Oper Bk Concord                          8,800         39,397
+ Cognex Cp                               143,565        239,638
Collagen Cp                               986,871      1,109,239
Collective Bancorp                         34,628         63,357
College Bound Inc                         449,267        432,912
Columbia Hospital Cp                      284,997        273,477
Comcast Cp A                              319,768        233,933
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                    3,992,829      4,885,274
Commerce Clearing A                       155,547        192,056
Comp USA Inc                            1,129,376        750,514
Computer Prod Inc                         819,810        625,100
Concord Camera Cp                         349,487        384,156
Cons Papers Inc                           111,495        139,566
Cons Products Inc                          75,269         23,512
Consilium Inc                             412,768        426,763
Constellation Bncp                        184,966        210,152
Coors Adolph Co B                          98,998         80,383
Copytele Inc                            1,925,811      1,888,142
Corestates Fin Cp                         174,238        428,742
Corporate Capital Re                       17,713             48
Corrections Cp Amer                       226,075        241,163
Covington Dev Gp                           49,907         67,834
Cracker Barrel Old                        779,673        616,371
Cray Comp Cp                              978,363        960,119
Crestar Finl Cp                           238,079        259,628
Crestmont Finl Corp                        65,324         45,169
Crop Genetic Intl Cp                      294,903        476,496
Curative Tech Inc                         264,622        258,451
Cygnus Therapeutic                         72,049         32,141
Cytocare Inc                              131,136        159,332
Cytrx Cp                                1,367,534        810,652
Dekalb Genet B                             23,102          4,010
DEP Cp                                     12,253        182,521
DNA Plant Tech Cp                         466,847        422,521
DS Bancor Inc                             178,595        244,441
DSC Commun Cp                             632,463      1,093,162
+ Danek Gp Inc                            313,320        264,176
Datascope Cp                            2,077,939      2,322,541
Dell Computer Cp                        3,087,944      2,525,704
Delta Queen Steamboa                       77,620           N.L.
Dento Med Inds Inc                         36,647          8,702
Deprenyl Research                          91,926         45,224
Dibrell Brothers Inc                    1,638,998      1,576,033
Digital Microwave Cp                      384,917        348,395
Digital Prods Cp                          539,277         73,117
Digital Prods Wts A                       178,244              0
Digital Prods Wts B                        52,700              0
Dollar General Cp                         249,566        285,533
Dominion Bkshs                             64,672         82,688
Drexler Technology                        161,448        223,489
Dreyers Grand Ice                          96,684        161,174
Drug Emporium                             415,098        427,822
Dura Pharmaceuticals                        1,870         94,360
Executo N E                               266,311        233,812
Easel Cp                                   83,622         56,074
Ecogen Inc                                727,922        737,261
Egghead Inc                               434,406        542,599
El Paso Electric Co                       763,640        694,577
Electronic Arts Inc                     1,391,334      1,509,654
Enclean Inc                               448,574        523,687
Envirosource Inc                           20,586        104,339
Enzon Inc                                 450,968        375,777
Equitex Inc                                76,917         41,448
Everex Systems Inc                        153,319        135,474
Exabyte Cp                                106,231        198,046
Executive Telecard                        436,086        458,602
Exide Electronics Gp                        2,765         22,274
F&C Intl Inc                               26,432          9,047
FHP Intl Cp                               192,890        315,209
Fastenal Co                             1,140,893      1,172,837
Fibronics Intl Inc                         57,145          3,322
Fifth Third Bncp                          303,093        349,805
Filene's Basement Cp                      203,636        196,794
First Commer Bncp                          61,048         81,366
First Commerce Cp La                       65,350         24,687
First Cons Fin Cp                         111,937         79,100
First Interst of Ia                       374,268        374,199
First Peoples Fin Cp                        4,744         26,063
First Saving Bk FSB                         1,069         44,480
First Team Sports                         198,685        321,904
First Tenn Natl Cp                         57,482         97,454
Fleer Cp                                  574,669        566,442
Fleet Call Inc Cl-A                        48,779        390,634
Food Lion Inc Cl A                        821,016      1,255,362
Food Lion Inc Cl B                        247,041        266,255
Forest Oil Cp                             358,905        370,324
Forstmann & Co                             44,850           N.L.
Fortune Bancorp                             4,363         33,502
Fourth Financial Cp                        61,755         18,906
GMIS Inc                                    5,982         35,698
Gantos Inc                                250,340        391,134
Genelabs Tech Inc                         259,910        203,451
Genetic Therapy Inc                        59,191         79,500
Genetics Inst Dep Sh                      526,360        508,836
Gentex Cp                                 170,234        143,214
Genzyme Cp Wts 94                          31,259          2,086
Gibson Greetings Inc                       35,184         16,370
Goal Systems Intl                          72,554         96,371
Good Guys Inc the                         633,685        479,418
Govt Tech Svcs                             38,280          2,500
Grand Casinos Inc                          98,240         22,954
Grant Tensor Geophys                      458,340        365,264
Great Amer Commun Co                      737,421        990,818
Great Amer Recreatio                       47,650         75,676
Greenwich Pharm Inc                     1,253,068      1,214,138
Grossman's Inc                             19,964         56,501
Groundwater Tech Inc                       54,463         15,594
HMO America Inc                         1,179,062      1,324,016
Hauser Chem Research                       13,228         59,034
Hawthorne Financial                       209,290        236,950
Health Images Inc                         324,434        319,165
Health Mgmt Assoc A                       168,077        117,553
Health Risk Mgmt Inc                       72,910         14,633
Healthcare Compare                        644,318      1,353,530
Healthcare Svcs Gp                      2,717,166      2,729,104
Healthdyne Inc                            665,969        273,768
Henley Properties A                        23,993          6,355
Holopak Techs Inc                          21,324             30
Home Intensive Care                        50,160         73,297
Homedco Gp Inc                             32,264         14,398
HON Inds Inc                               87,285        133,911
Howard Svgs Bank NJ                       819,190        799,494
Hunter Enviromnt Svc                       28,856         10,736
Hycor Biomedical                           55,086         73,032
ICOS Cp                                   888,973        535,321
IHOP Cp                                   703,447        742,309
IKOS Systems Inc                           38,934          6,261
Imnet Inc                                  79,004         25,485
INB Fin Cp                                 16,182         38,870
Interso L V                                 4,588         45,720
IPL Systems Inc A                          79,870        130,370
ISG Tech Inc                               17,166           N.L.
I-Stat Cp                                  22,393           N.L.
Imatron Inc                                66,322        137,974
Imclone Systems Inc                        15,135         36,863
Immunex Cp                              1,435,920      1,614,369
Immunomedics Inc                          475,170        318,136
Imperial Bancorp                          648,468        637,564
In Home Health Inc                         11,859         41,290
Industrial Hldg Wt B                            0         25,725
Info Resources Inc                        636,917        398,293
Input Output Inc                            8,287         34,658
Insituform Gp Ltd                          32,796            546
Insituform No Amer A                      156,604         35,972
Integra Fin Cp                             42,738         61,267
Integrated Devic Tec                      634,709        635,650
Integrated Waste Svc                      425,775        421,506
+ Intelligent Elec                      2,114,480      3,091,820
Inter Tel Inc                               8,687         33,451
Interface Inc A                           682,188        617,683
Interferon Sciences                        25,929         99,206
Intermet Cp                                58,109         40,349
Intl Cablecasting                         342,732        101,273
Intl Dairy Queen A                        397,148        387,082
Intl Microelectronic                        2,429         19,298
Intl Mobile Mach Cp                     2,857,778      2,882,276
Isis Pharm Inc                            363,595        369,729
Ito Yokado Co ADR                           1,542         25,269
J Baker Inc                               739,272        825,640
JJ Snack Foods                             97,536         58,341
JLG Industries Inc                         26,960          2,649
Johnson Worldwide A                        12,847         40,343
Jones Intrcable A                         696,091        719,460
Kelly Services Cl A                       246,042        209,791
Kentucky Central A                        673,490        690,984
Kirschner Medical Cp                      199,666        310,906
Kushner Locke Co                           38,450          5,756
LDDS Comm Cl A                            195,030        261,201
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                     2,297,047      2,608,342
Ladd Furniture Inc                         56,270        127,085
Landmark Graphic Cp                       683,816        416,223
Laser Precision Cp                          3,940         33,366
Lasermaster Tech Inc                      260,688        259,582
Laserscope                                276,933        303,688
Lawrence Savings Bk                        96,671        130,619
Lawson Products Inc                       126,842        145,278
Lechters Inc                              302,681        315,047
Legent Cp                                 287,037        248,380
Lep Gp ADR                                 56,307         34,849
+ Liberty Natl Bncp                         2,786         20,769
Lifecore Biomedical                       419,248        226,815
LIN Broadcasting Cp                       324,467        329,246
Linear Technology Cp                       35,067         72,057
Liposome Co Inc                           797,023        632,338
Liposome Tech Inc                         289,067        242,882
Litchfield Finl Cp                        134,720           N.L.
Little Switzerland                        224,460        223,604
Loewen Group Inc                          742,754        974,540
MIPS Computer                           1,937,752      1,810,694
MS Carriers Inc                             6,254         25,113
MTC Elec Tech Ltd                             527         20,329
Macmillan Bloedel                       1,945,330      1,824,330
Magic Software Ord                         19,727          1,255
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg                     2,273,713      2,074,061
Mail Boxes Etc                            438,760        496,786
Marble Finl Cp                              1,260         18,221
Marcam Cp                                 221,612        176,672
Marine Drilling Co                          1,750         29,512
Marquest Med Prod                         148,738        109,732
Masco Inds                                141,826        108,814
Matrix Pharmace Inc                        53,165          6,829
Matrix Service Co                          81,569         50,573
McCaw Cellular A                          728,731        744,634
McCormick Co NV                           116,605        191,223
Meadowbrook Reh Cl-A                       64,765           N.L.
Mechanical Tech Inc                        23,310            600
Medaphis Cp                                14,702         65,418
Medco Containmnt                        1,315,472      1,795,517
Medical Action Inds                       231,111        339,653
Medical Care Intl                         982,939        735,300
Medical Imaging                           272,317        265,471
Medical Marketing Gp                      326,642        288,870
Medical Tech Sys Inc                       60,521         29,536
Medicine Shoppe Intl                    1,364,879      1,319,453
Medimmune Inc                             388,628        441,047
Memorex Telex NV Adr                      833,628           N.L.
Mentor Cp the                           1,124,778      1,091,074
Mentor Graphics Cp                        803,841        938,800
Mercantile Bncpn Inc                       50,733         13,149
Merchants Natl Cp                          77,903         51,429
Meris Labs Inc                            212,533        136,111
Merisel Inc                               274,099        197,740
Merit Medical Sys                          41,672         59,222
Meritor Savings Bank                      728,943        736,722
Mesa Airlines Inc                         387,981        318,895
Metropltn Fsl Seattl                      182,159         23,590
Miami Subs Cp                             213,048         75,727
Michael Foods Inc                       2,066,366      2,062,615
Micro Healthsys Inc                       728,763        416,464
Microage Inc                               75,379        221,378
Microcom Inc                              178,078        139,377
Micrografx Inc                            118,777         66,787
Microsoft Cp                            1,242,550      1,217,895
Mid Atlantic Medical                      440,037        320,866
Midlantic Cp                            4,221,824      4,304,873
Midwesco Filter                           114,829          8,726
Miller Herman Inc                         223,547        209,176
Millicom Inc                              363,532        361,853
Mobile Telecomm Tech                       83,578        102,223
Molex Inc                                 254,182        109,627
Mr Coffee Inc                             209,270        212,814
Multibank Fin Cp                           15,438         37,562
Multimedia Inc                            240,891        250,984
Mycogen Cp                                 63,963         45,625
Mylex Cp                                  183,500        155,634
NMR of Amer Inc                             2,525        216,125
NS Bancorp Inc                             89,363         55,802
Nam Tai Electronics                         4,100         66,469
Nanometrics Inc                             1,000         34,050
Natec Resources Inc                       208,012        199,547
Natl Comp Sys Inc                           2,572         26,307
Natl Data Cp                              264,350        300,390
Natl Pizza Co Cl B                         83,917         66,158
Nellcor Inc                                80,373        182,128
Neorx Cp                                1,256,640      1,116,579
Network General Cp                        416,769        405,076
Network Systems Cp                        420,862        503,851
Neutrogena Cp                             403,992        346,160
Noble Drilling Cp                         204,126        168,115
Noel Group Inc                             19,600        131,925
Nordson Cp                                 40,195         65,066
Nordstrom Inc                           1,091,919      1,165,774
North Amer Biologicl                       11,049         40,193
North Star Universal                      548,844        557,977
Northeast Bncp                            100,068        177,524
Northern Tr Cp                             36,047        122,894
Nova Pharm Cp                             286,981        109,023
Novell Inc                                872,196        940,147
Nu-West Inds Inc                          389,076        392,286
Nucorp Inc Delaware                       106,398         73,162
Nucorp Inc Wts C 93                        23,401              0
Nview Cp                                  220,581        194,198
OW Office Warehouse                        73,215         29,811
Octel Commun Cp                           253,547        349,597
Old Kent Fin Cp                           485,321        432,576
Old Stone Cp                              449,044        478,239
Oncor Inc                                 124,374         91,619
Opta Food Ingredient                       44,350           N.L.
Optek Tech Inc                              8,380         25,983
Optical Coating Labs                       20,556          3,255
Optical Radiation Cp                      126,286        152,198
Outback Steakhouse                        325,678        270,862
Oxford Health Plans                        26,054         70,557
Platinum Tech                             377,942        379,629
Pac Rim Hldg Cp                           591,632        566,051
Paccar Inc                                 90,737         72,378
Pacific Dunlop ADR                        598,023        607,177
Pacificare Health                         431,432        974,405
+ Parametric Tech Cp                    2,021,829      2,171,948
Payco American Cp                          21,107         55,723
Pentair Inc                               449,323        422,687
Penwest Ltd                               247,185        249,363
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                       428,681        435,005
Pharmacy Mgmt Svc                         470,659        470,952
Pharmchem Labs Inc                         13,354         36,135
Photographic Science                        9,860         57,460
Photronics Inc                             12,376         40,781
Phycor Inc                                 40,640          9,357
Pic N Save Cp                             132,391        253,465
Piccadilly Cafeteria                        2,204         68,775
Plenum Publishing Cp                      228,226        227,320
Ponder Inds Inc                           113,367         80,200
Possis Cp                                 309,641        354,597
Powell Inds Inc                            99,954         79,215
Premier Anesthesia                         42,815           N.L.
Premier Bncp Inc                           21,195         53,955
Presidential Life Cp                      440,993        435,399
Presstek Inc                              853,991        779,418
Preston Cp                                 74,434         46,025
Price Co the                            3,045,217      2,667,957
Production Oper                           103,010         79,442
Progress Fin Cp                            63,792         31,683
Proteon Inc                                54,270         13,956
Provident Life Cl A                        34,440          1,322
Puget Sound Bncp                            1,282         54,543
Puritan Bennett Cp                        481,669        464,293
Pyramid Technology                        580,427        390,271
QVC Network Inc                           231,609        246,713
Quadra Logic Tech                          83,503        106,145
Quality Food Centers                      120,246        137,444
Quantum Cp                                350,142        503,311
Quarterdeck Office                        415,309        370,962
Quiksilver Inc                            195,753        139,439
REN Cp USA                                 28,887          4,907
RPM Inc                                   751,488        725,926
Rally's Inc                               338,427        553,244
Rasterops                                 173,641         81,826
Ratners Gp ADR                            362,081        336,909
Read-Rite Cp                              148,374        165,436
Recoton Cp                                148,104         44,554
Regeneron Pharmaceut                      270,244        306,038
Rentrak Cp                                364,273        364,439
Repap Enterprises Cp                      599,735        434,629
Repligen Cp                               457,654        322,857
Research Industries                       707,662        565,267
Reuters Hldg ADR                        2,829,251      2,746,318
Ribi Immunochem                           195,051        255,108
Riggs Natl Cp the                         581,580        773,852
Rio Hotel & Casino                         14,686         57,371
Roadway Services Inc                      299,990        322,039
Roberts Pharm Cp                          273,944        209,334
Rogers Cantel Mob B                       172,939         36,173
Roses Stores Inc                          275,871        300,707
+ Ross Cosmetics Dist                      53,323         13,350
Rotech Medical Cp                          58,335         91,408
Rouse Co                                2,526,883      2,518,350
Ryan's Family Steak                       139,209         94,842
SCI Systems Inc                           848,788        767,657
SHL Systemhouse                            23,739         83,470
Safetytek Cp                              338,424         37,360
Salick Health Care                        210,100        192,935
Savannah Foods Inds                       821,947        942,536
Sayett Gp Inc Wts                           1,625         31,600
Sayett Group Inc                           37,272          6,260
Scholastic Cp                              82,263           N.L.
Scios Inc                                 217,012        195,959
Scitex Cp                                 625,447        453,999
Score Board Inc the                       378,594        411,953
Seafield Capital Cp                           491         17,388
Seagate Tech                              525,129        460,358
Sepracor Inc                              141,993        101,719
Sequoia Sys Inc                         1,192,296        836,079
Seven Oaks Intl Inc                        24,122              0
Sheffield Inds Inc                          8,755         43,702
Shorewood Pkging Cp                        74,390         56,186
Sierra On Line Inc                        412,375        342,449
Sierra Tucson Cos                         602,322        587,009
Sigma Aldrich Cp                           82,949        103,577
Silicon Valley Bncsh                      414,523        436,403
Software Publishing                       222,250        297,615
Software Toolwks Inc                      487,908        603,549
Solectron Cp                               52,101         32,404
Somatix Therapy Cp                        105,908         27,600
Somatogen Inc                             450,328        349,388
Sonic Cp                                  297,276        308,428
Sonoco Products Co                         71,930         44,675
Span America Med Sys                       11,245         34,427
Spartan Motors Inc                        214,980        184,513
Spec's Music Inc                            8,280         27,044
Spectran Cp                                72,069         45,518
Spectranetics Cp the                      108,669         25,846
Sphinx Pharma Cp                           23,606          4,927
Spiegel Inc A NV                          230,799        277,888
Sports/Leisure Inc                         27,117          5,218
St Jude Medical Inc                       425,537        384,296
St Paul Bancorp Inc                        23,116         52,593
Staff Bluilders Wts                         7,400         41,300
Staff Builder Del                          15,835         64,152
Standard Register Co                       18,864         56,292
Staodyn Inc                                 4,728         47,197
Staples Inc                             2,648,536      2,475,983
Star States Cp                            336,920        351,846
State Street Boston                       702,745        734,085
Stewart Stevenson                          25,732         78,155
Stryker Cp                                433,788        411,707
Sulcus Computer Cp                        302,323        178,778
Summit Tech Inc                         1,631,674      1,466,358
Sun Microsystems Inc                    3,328,331      3,418,145
Sungard Data Systems                      377,651        271,643
Sunrise Medical Inc                        62,352         29,872
Sunrise Tech Inc                          503,697        374,453
Sunward Tech Inc                           31,558          9,817
Sunwest Fin Svcs Inc                        2,602         57,974
Super Rite Cp                              31,915         51,742
Supercuts Inc                              62,614         40,853
Surgical Care Affil                       829,228        552,306
Surgical Laser Tech                       371,151        361,775
Sybase Inc                                218,940        259,974
Symantec Cp                               470,749        502,388
Synetic Inc                               206,754        213,315
Synopsys Inc                               80,868           N.L.
Syntro Cp                                  53,687          6,204
Syquest Tech Inc                           40,191         19,755
System Software                           359,126        274,630
Systemed Inc                              537,247        552,707
T Cell Sciences Inc                       369,848        294,392
Tetra Tech Inc                            391,154        456,073
TSI Cp                                    190,625        139,084
TW Holdings Inc                         1,813,990      2,112,445
T*hq Inc                                  121,342         89,078
Takecare Inc                              337,264        339,845
Tandon Cp                                  40,381        113,105
Tandy Brands Access                        73,795         19,668
Tanknology Environ                        192,989        124,283
Tech Data Cp                               26,397         47,886
Telco Systems Inc                           6,289         29,247
Tele Commun Inc A                       3,901,640      3,429,253
Telxon Cp                                 609,832        490,667
Teva Pharm Ind ADR                        121,277        165,567
Thorn Apple Valley                         46,256         18,871
Thousand Trails Inc                       246,158        234,382
Tokos Med Cp Del                          375,654        200,854
Topps Co Inc the                          587,120        566,132
Trimble Navigation                      1,453,397      1,275,300
Trimedyne Inc                             555,238        665,691
Tseng Labs Inc                            202,230        211,408
Tuesday Morning Cp                         38,958          8,219
UNR Inds Inc                              158,711         35,857
US Bancorp Oregon                         251,920        257,087
US Healthcare Inc                       1,360,256      1,632,089
+ US Homecare Cp                           21,528         41,869
US Long Distance Cp                         9,087         38,816
US T Cp                                   315,572        494,451
Union Bk                                  263,877        417,195
United Gaming Inc                          75,688         17,411
United Ins Cos Inc                        120,792        143,278
United Stationers                          70,359         40,065
Univax Biologics Inc                          600         53,780
Universal Intl Inc                         22,825          2,673
Utah Medical Inc                           27,434         47,126
Valley National Cp                      1,305,541      1,194,373
Value Health Inc                          102,875         84,471
Ventritex Inc                             134,587         80,649
Verifone Inc                              482,084        401,535
Vermont Fin Svcs Cp                       136,056        270,890
Vestar Inc                                361,191        187,815
Vicorp Resta                               61,954         34,224
Video Lottery Tech                        402,978        667,333
Videocart Inc                           2,709,178      2,574,284
Viratek Inc                               332,926        388,824
Vital Signs Inc                           241,492        227,687
Vitalink Pharmacy                          36,645           N.L.
Vitesse Semiconducto                      100,858         44,291
WPP Gp ADR                                787,314        529,876
Warrantech Cp                              65,309         88,783
Washington Energy Co                       70,836        558,120
+ Washington Mut Sv Bk                  1,114,522        997,434
Watts Industries A                          7,312        590,618
Weitek Cp                                 230,575        278,662
Wellfleet Commun Inc                      735,315        633,594
Westmark Intl Inc                         369,002        275,845
Westwood One Inc                        1,215,242        920,328
Wet Seal Inc Cl A                          25,723         45,060
Wharf Resources Ltd                             0         17,108
Willamette Inds Inc                        68,092         89,225
William Sonoma Inc                        281,424        239,188
Wolf Financial Gp                          35,685        268,080
Wolverine Exploratio                      204,217        183,232
Worthington Inds Inc                      164,932        194,145
Wyman Gordon Co                            31,206        118,120
XOMA Cp                                 3,690,701      3,714,579
Xilinx Inc                                491,876        408,791
Xyplex Inc                                 11,375         40,086
Yellow Freight Del                        343,508        365,193
Zebra Tech Cp Cl-A                        203,898        191,293
Zenith Labs Inc                            98,203        144,911
Zeos Intl Ltd                             613,518        465,234
Zitel Cp                                   32,439         12,497
Zoom Telephonics Inc                      152,530         32,774

Other Nasdaq

Security Name                             3/13/92        2/14/92

Alpnet Inc                                 26,172         49,147
ASEA Ab ADR Spons                          20,023         57,290
Action Staffing Inc                       328,050        286,708
Adelphia Commun Cp A                      244,477        242,025
Admar Gp Inc (The)                         32,712         98,291
Advanced Enviro A                         788,219        447,770
Advanced Nmr Sys Inc                      255,945        274,838
Airship Intl Wts A                         23,588            350
Airship Intl Wts B                         29,267          6,000
Alcide Cp                                  45,244         83,019
Alden Electronics A                        22,404              4
Alpha Solarco Inc                          21,608         53,209
Alter Sales Co Inc                          2,150         24,440
Amer Bus Comp Cp                          364,321        381,867
Amer Drug Screen Wts                       34,000         15,751
Amer Drug Screens                          69,020         15,579
Amer West Airline                       1,314,411      1,337,932
An Con Genetics Inc                        28,775          2,007
Angeion Cp                                258,292        256,108
Anglo Swiss Mining                         11,294         48,394
Archer Commun Inc                         246,014        275,692
Aryt Optronics Ord                         17,413              0
Aspen Wind Inc                              3,907         24,075
Avitar Inc                                 26,500            200
BPI Environmental                          66,522        160,487
Barringer Technology                          321         72,630
Benihana Natl Cp A                        104,080        122,080
Bio-Dyne Cp                                11,971         64,826
Biocontrol Tech Inc                       172,147         65,379
Biomechanics Cp Amer                      146,985        246,349
Biomedical Wast Wt A                       48,833         28,335
Boca Raton Cap Cp                          44,756          1,643
Bradley Pharma A                           27,420         48,901
Bradley Pharma Wts A                       22,875         52,000
Bristol Hldgs Inc                          37,409         19,471
CAPX Cp (Del)                             257,814        128,106
CAPX Wts A (Del)                                0         21,100
CCC Franchising Cp                        119,649        435,183
Calif Beach Restr                          20,868         45,868
Canaveral Intl Cp                          26,395            953
Caretenders Hlthcorp                       39,695         21,443
Centurion Mines Cp                          2,300         26,075
Cerprobe Cp                                47,688              0
Choices Entertnmt Cp                       19,188          2,000
City Investing Uts                        250,000        250,046
Commun Entertainment                       26,664         69,518
Community Finl Cp                          26,908              0
Compumed Inc                               56,294          3,713
Comverse Tech Inc                         331,801        419,047
Comverse Tech Wts 92                        7,334        175,228
Conquest Airlines                         193,815      1,004,469
Cortex Pharm Inc                          306,667        179,178
Creative Learning                          25,636            350
Creative Tech Cp                           26,551         48,526
Cryomedical Sci                           385,845        576,367
Cybernetics Prods                          92,023         15,386
Dames & Moore Inc                          32,920           N.L.
Davstar Inds Ltd A                         95,029         65,558
De Beers Cons ADR                          40,165         10,200
Deprenyl U's A Inc                         17,128         37,284
Diagnostic Med Instr                            0         18,270
Diamond Entertain Cp                        1,000      1,059,618
Dimensional Vis Gp                        119,326           N.L.
Dimensional Vis Wt B                       13,345           N.L.
Direct Connect Intl                        43,392            400
Dynagen Inc                                64,085         33,763
Eastco Ind Safety Cp                      325,665        405,733
Eateries Inc                               50,489         18,690
Education Alternativ                       28,200          1,860
Electro Kinetic Cl A                      192,529        122,363
Electrocon Intl Inc                        19,230         39,690
Electronic Tech Gp                         20,670          2,951
Excel Tech Inc                             21,532         76,345
Exploration Co the                         32,796         12,896
Finl Data Sys Inc                          80,089        152,364
Finl Data Sys Wts A                             0         17,200
Finl News Network                           4,900         67,129
Fisons ADR                                 70,549         88,758
Fountain Pharm                            287,524        163,564
Frenchtex Inc                              21,675          1,000
Future Med Prods                           82,355        182,513
Gentner Commun Cp                          20,590            559
Globesat Hldg Cp                           22,725              0
Gold Express Cp                            51,801          2,101
Greentree Software                          7,100         31,968
Haben Inds Inc                             50,013            467
Healthcare Imaging                            783         25,158
Hemacare Cp                               140,024        119,512
Homecare Mgmt Inc                          28,758          9,181
Hughes Resources Inc                       38,034            237
IPS Health Care                           132,284         83,659
IPS Health Care Wt                         15,830         54,475
Imaging Mgmt Assocs                        22,479        613,492
IMRE Cp                                    20,587         40,619
Insta Cool Inc                             50,357         11,964
Intercontl Enterpris                       32,686            130
Internet Commun Uts                        20,950          1,550
Interneuron Pharm                          77,529         55,178
Intl Bankcard Svc Cp                      181,578         76,652
Intl Superconduct Wt                            0         29,432
Isramco Inc                                 5,711         55,856
Judicate Inc                               26,132         54,354
Juniper Features Ltd                       84,910         25,210
Kinder Care Learning                       51,614         22,457
Kitchen Bazaar Inc                        186,980              0
Kloof Gold Mine ADR                        18,216            829
Las Vegas Ent Wts A                        45,000           N.L.
Las Vegas Enter Ntwk                       37,100           N.L.
Laser Cp                                        0         21,250
Laser Recording Sys                         4,183        192,634
Lasersight Inc                                  0         55,923
Leadville Min Mill                         15,580         54,680
Lidak Pharm Cl A                           57,503        143,309
Lifecell Cp Wts 97                         29,795           N.L.
Lo Jack Cp                                134,196        162,615
Longwood Group Inc                         27,540          9,330
Margate Inds Inc                           20,000          1,297
Marketing Sys                                   0         18,685
Mascott Cp                                 74,096          1,000
Maxicare Hlth New                         222,454        279,730
Medical Dynamics Inc                        5,548         24,108
Medicis Pharm Cl A                        340,068      1,363,702
Medicis Pharma Wt B                         7,955        293,705
Medsonic Inc Wts 97                         2,600         24,981
Mega Group Inc                             84,310              0
Meridian Natl Cp                          110,547         12,966
Meridian Natl Cp Wts                            0         20,000
Metalclad Cp                               31,244        207,000
Micro Energy Inc                           69,201        106,037
Microterra Inc                             82,895          9,559
Mirror Tech Inc                           103,126         16,632
NTN Canada Inc                             75,000              0
NTN Commun Inc                             35,628         17,284
Natural Alternat Uts                        1,600         99,950
Natural Alternatives                        7,481         50,097
Neolens Inc                               235,469        221,768
News Commun Inc                           252,606        588,043
News Commun Wts A 95                        7,100        184,175
Noise Cancellation                      1,651,828        930,440
Noise Com Inc                             237,660        323,075
Non Invasive Mon Sys                       20,380        221,060
Nutrition Mgmt Cl A                        80,750           N.L.
Nytest Environmental                        3,383         75,352
OCG Technology Inc                          2,394         32,027
OTR Express Inc                            89,395        138,595
Omni U. S. A. Inc                             500         53,560
Pace Medical Inc                              100         24,248
Pantheon Inds Inc                         150,553          6,540
Personal Comp Prod                         17,403        100,243
Personal Diag Inc                          61,127          4,260
Pharmatec Inc                             116,026         17,630
Pharmetics Inc                             60,371              0
Plants For Tom Wt Aa                      116,948        296,345
Plants For Tomorrow                        58,692         15,093
Playorena Inc                              14,830         31,810
Polymerix Inc                              57,095         32,660
Pro-Dex Inc                                63,302         18,561
Projectavision Inc                         30,218          7,538
Protein Polymer Uts                         1,000         92,800
Pure Tech Intl                            201,314         59,627
Raycomm Transworld                         23,709         51,636
+ Regenex Inc New                          27,436          1,592
Repossession Auct Ut                       28,120              0
Research Frontiers                         33,650         55,980
Restor Inds Inc Wts                        44,460          1,020
Richard Barrie Frag                         5,020         31,750
Roadmaster Inds Inc                        22,635         58,894
Robern Apparel Inc                         56,673              0
Robern Apparel Wts A                       17,815              0
Royce Laboratories                        537,932        353,298
Royce Labs Uts 93                           2,695         22,211
Ryan Murphy Inc                            22,628         88,900
Ryka Inc                                  296,342        195,341
Ryka Inc Wts                               16,350         42,025
+ SA Hldgs Inc                             25,360             50
Sanborn Inc                                 4,767         89,408
SGI International                         727,989        195,909
SK Tech Cp                                 21,525         40,632
SMT Health Svcs Ut                        206,980           N.L.
Scan Graphics Inc                           6,838         38,116
Schield Mgmt Co                             9,569         30,000
Scorpion Tech Cl-A                        267,137        302,930
Scott's Liquid Gold                         2,223         43,566
Seahawk Deep Ocean                         24,351        250,194
Senetek ADR                               307,100        307,525
Sentex Sensing Tech                       342,364        329,600
Sherwood Cp                                29,500          1,250
Software Svc Amer                         125,221         80,561
Somanetics Cp                             345,574        237,300
Somanetics Cp Wts B                        25,200           N.L.
Southern Pac Pet ADR                        7,475         86,528
Sparta Surgical Cp                        108,180         13,975
Spectrum Info Tech                        234,267        184,962
St Helena Gold ADR                         25,086          5,213
TSS Ltd                                     4,152        198,897
Technigen Cp A                              4,976         24,957
Telefonos de Mexico                     6,160,702      1,753,738
Tescorp Inc Wts 93                            113         45,447
Thermodynetics Inc                         25,019        115,099
Trans Global Res ADR                       48,891          5,891
Transmedia Ntwk Inc                        48,397         25,781
Triple Threat Enterp                      366,087          9,050
US Tech Inc                                34,041          1,285
US Tech Inc Wts                            28,160              0
US Transport Uts 93                             0         47,845
Ultimap Cp                                 13,044        103,386
Ultrak Inc                                 23,314          3,379
Unicomp Inc                                16,289        201,800
United Heritage Cp                         26,614        106,124
United Heritage Wts                         5,450        101,625
Utilitech Inc                               5,250         28,338
Utilitech Inc Wts 92                        5,000         37,477
VSI Enterprises                            34,513           N.L.
Vaal Reefs Explr ADR                       28,942         55,119
Valley Fed Sav Bk Al                            0         64,580
Valley Forge Sci Cp                       281,167        235,447
Valuevision Intl A                          2,506         25,334
Vector Aero Wts 96                         54,830              0
Vector Aeromotive                          12,326         31,913
Verdix Cp                                  18,194         61,023
Vidcom Post Inc                            33,562          1,000
Vimrx Pharm Inc                           294,871        550,339
Vision Ten Inc                             13,229         40,515
Vision Ten Inc Wts                            423         87,353
Visual Equities Inc                        69,505          2,500
WTD Industries Inc                         31,432         56,794
Water-Jel Tech Inc                        102,838         47,901
Water-Jel Tech Wts B                       55,750              0
Wavetech Inc                                2,825         40,323
Wisconsin Pharmacal                        48,176         19,840
Worldwide Fores Wt B                       64,700           N.L.
Worldwide Forest Pro                       27,860           N.L.


Short Interest Tables Explained

   These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month
of at least 200,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at
least 16,793 shares.

   Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

   T -- National Market System.

   N.L. -- Not listed.

   + -- Stock split.

   * May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations.

   Short interest may also be affected by options positions.

   Underlining [not shown] in the comprehensive table indicates a change of 75
percent of more from the previous month.


CORRECTION-DATE: March 26, 1992, Thursday; April 2, 1992, Thursday

CORRECTION:
A list of over-the-counter stocks with large positions in uncovered short sales
omitted 51 stocks in Business Day yesterday because of a computer error. The
listing of those stocks is given below. The omission also affected the tables
showing Nasdaq stocks with especially large short positions or with large
changes in their short positions. The corrected tables also appear below.

Largest Increases

Security Name                           3/13/92      2/14/92       Change

Telefonos de Mexico                   6,160,702    1,753,738    4,406,964
Highline Inds Inc                     2,112,303            0    2,112,303
Noise Cancellation                    1,651,828      930,440      721,388
Aura Systems Inc                      2,686,683    2,004,232      682,451   T
Dell Computer Cp                      3,087,944    2,525,704      562,240   T
Cytrx Cp                              1,367,534      810,652      556,882   T
SGI International                       727,989      195,909      532,080
Society Cp                            2,476,952    1,954,300      522,652   T
Tele Commun Inc A                     3,901,640    3,429,253      472,387   T
Digital Prods Cp                        539,277       73,117      466,160   T
Autodesk Inc                            815,296      371,890      443,406   T
Centocor Inc                          6,603,152    6,191,512      411,640   T
Compression Lab Inc                   3,841,382    3,441,564      399,818   T
Healthdyne Inc                          665,969      273,768      392,201   T
Comp USA Inc                          1,129,376      750,514      378,862   T
Price Co the                          3,045,217    2,667,957      377,260   T
Triple Threat Enterp                    366,087        9,050      357,037
Sequoia Sys Inc                       1,192,296      836,079      356,217   T
Immune Response Cp                      920,865      566,091      354,774   T
ICOS Cp                                 888,973      535,321      353,652   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     2,872,057    2,522,628      349,429   T
Advanced Enviro A                       788,219      447,770      340,449
Borland Intl Inc                      1,470,501    1,148,395      322,106   T
T2 Medical Inc                        1,559,229    1,242,799      316,430   T
Cellular Inc                            720,901      404,587      316,314   T

Largest Decreases

Security Name                           3/13/92      2/14/92       Change

Intel Cp                                922,076    2,156,735   -1,234,659   T
Diamond Entertain Cp                      1,000    1,059,618   -1,058,618
Medicis Pharm Cl A                      340,068    1,363,702   -1,023,634
+ Intelligent Elec                    2,114,480    3,091,820     -977,340   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                  3,992,829    4,885,274     -892,445   T
Conquest Airlines                       193,815    1,004,469     -810,654
Healthcare Compare                      644,318    1,353,530     -709,212   T
Imaging Mgmt Assocs                      22,479      613,492     -591,013
Watts Industries A                        7,312      590,618     -583,306   T
Pacificare Health                       431,432      974,405     -542,973   T
Biomet Inc                            1,249,021    1,777,887     -528,866   T
Washington Energy Co                     70,836      558,120     -487,284   T
Medco Containmnt                      1,315,472    1,795,517     -480,045   T
DSC Commun Cp                           632,463    1,093,162     -460,699   T
Food Lion Inc Cl A                      821,016    1,255,362     -434,346   T
Amer Bankers Ins Gp                      20,485      448,598     -428,113   T
Cirrus Logic Inc                        526,380      913,000     -386,620   T
MCI Comm Cp                           1,157,128    1,538,645     -381,517   T
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A                  1,659,152    2,038,860     -379,708   T
Fleet Call Inc Cl-A                      48,779      390,634     -341,855   T
News Commun Inc                         252,606      588,043     -335,437
CCC Franchising Cp                      119,649      435,183     -315,534
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                   2,297,047    2,608,342     -311,295   T
TW Holdings Inc                       1,813,990    2,112,445     -298,455   T
Medicis Pharma Wt B                       7,955      293,705     -285,750

Largest Cover Rations

Security Name                           3/13/92    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Rouse Co                              2,526,883       30,418           83   T
Healthcare Svcs Gp                    2,717,166       38,020           71   T
Copytele Inc                          1,925,811       51,958           37   T
Cardinal Distr                        1,669,779       47,839           35   T
York Research Cp                      3,264,550      100,351           33   T
Fastenal Co                           1,140,893       37,631           30   T
RPM Inc                                 751,488       25,187           30   T
Presstek Inc                            853,991       30,512           28   T
Staples Inc                           2,648,536       97,539           27   T
BBT Finl Cp                             768,985       30,081           26   T
CIS Tech Inc                          1,004,928       40,424           25   T
Cabot Medical Cp                        701,343       29,247           24   T
Research Industries                     707,662       29,855           24   T
Videocart Inc                         2,709,178      114,581           24   T
Amer Power Convers                    2,599,671      114,299           23   T
Pac Rim Hldg Cp                         591,632       26,996           22   T
Interface Inc A                         682,188       33,000           21   T
Summit Tech Inc                       1,631,674       78,940           21   T
Amer West Airline                     1,314,411       67,361           20
IHO P Cp                                703,447       34,338           20   T
Midlantic Cp                          4,221,824      206,297           20   T
Intl Mobile Mach Cp                   2,857,778      153,817           19   T
Buffets Inc                           1,943,170      108,885           18   T
Circon Cp                               909,715       51,372           18   T
Reuters Hldg ADR                      2,829,251      156,594           18   T

Largest Positions

Security Name                           3/13/92      2/14/92       Change

Centocor Inc                          6,603,152    6,191,512      411,640   T
Telefonos de Mexico                   6,160,702    1,753,738    4,406,964
Midlantic Cp                          4,221,824    4,304,873      -83,049   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                  3,992,829    4,885,274     -892,445   T
Tele Commun Inc A                     3,901,640    3,429,253      472,387   T
Compression Lab Inc                   3,841,382    3,441,564      399,818   T
XOM A Cp                              3,690,701    3,714,579      -23,878   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  3,328,331    3,418,145      -89,814   T
York Research Cp                      3,264,550    3,170,371       94,179   T
Cisco Sys Inc                         3,207,423    3,353,645     -146,222   T
Dell Computer Cp                      3,087,944    2,525,704      562,240   T
Price Co the                          3,045,217    2,667,957      377,260   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     2,872,057    2,522,628      349,429   T
Intl Mobile Mach Cp                   2,857,778    2,882,276      -24,498   T
Reuters Hldg ADR                      2,829,251    2,746,318       82,933   T
Healthcare Svcs Gp                    2,717,166    2,729,104      -11,938   T
Videocart Inc                         2,709,178    2,574,284      134,894   T
Aura Systems Inc                      2,686,683    2,004,232      682,451   T
Staples Inc                           2,648,536    2,475,983      172,553   T
Amer Power Convers                    2,599,671    2,682,087      -82,416   T
Rouse Co                              2,526,883    2,518,350        8,533   T
Society Cp                            2,476,952    1,954,300      522,652   T
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                   2,297,047    2,608,342     -311,295   T
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg                   2,273,713    2,074,061      199,652   T
Synergen Inc                          2,130,410    2,363,383     -232,973   T

National Market

Security Name                             3/13/92        2/14/92

Advant A Cp                               821,250        788,894
AST Research Inc                        1,295,341      1,114,798
Aldus Cp                                  856,071        764,414
Amer Greetings Cp A                       120,456         45,804
Amer Power Convers                      2,599,671      2,682,087
Apple Computer Inc                        995,116      1,184,482
Applied Materials                         268,306        278,358
Autodesk Inc                              815,296        371,890
BMC Software Inc                          227,498        139,226
Biomet Inc                              1,249,021      1,777,887
Brunos Inc                              1,903,907      1,618,041
Chiron Cp                               1,107,855      1,214,939
Cirrus Logic Inc                          526,380        913,000
Cisco Sys Inc                           3,207,423      3,353,645
Compression Lab Inc                     3,841,382      3,441,564
Consul Restaurant Cp                        8,038         37,535
Costco Wholesale Cp                       714,280        783,473
Cytogen Cp                              1,788,909      1,600,136
Gensia Pharm Inc                          968,776        825,280
Genzyme Cp                              1,119,364      1,380,014
Hechinger Co Cl A                       1,343,276      1,283,309
Immune Response Cp                        920,865        566,091
Intel Cp                                  922,076      2,156,735
Intergraph Cp                             246,615        266,853
Knowledgeware Inc                         171,521        366,328
Lotus Development Cp                      883,330        895,471
MCI Comm Cp                             1,157,128      1,538,645
Novellus Systems Inc                      454,736        164,184
Oracle Systems Cp                       1,309,147      1,123,288
Picturetel Cp                             388,610        424,766
Ross Stores Inc                            34,970         84,399
Safec O Cp                                214,849        147,596
Scimed Life Sys Inc                     1,561,240      1,266,375
Sequent Computer Sys                      397,484        388,584
Society Cp                              2,476,952      1,954,300
Structural Dynamics                       454,260        296,491
Synergen Inc                            2,130,410      2,363,383
Synoptics Commun Inc                      912,722        909,497
T2 Medical Inc                          1,559,229      1,242,799
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A                    1,659,152      2,038,860
Vicor Cp                                  412,443        430,867
Warehouse Club Inc                         83,810          7,508
Wetterau Inc                              680,441        666,579
York Research Cp                        3,264,550      3,170,371

Other Nasdaq

Security Name                             3/13/92        2/14/92

Cortex Pharm Wts A                          8,469         50,175
ERC Inds Inc                                3,532         24,340
Forum Group Inc                            32,687          3,000
Fountain Pharm Wts B                      102,210         31,455
Highline Inds Inc                       2,112,303              0
Lidak Pharm Wts A                          25,825        137,195
Vimrx Pharm Wts A                          36,455          5,550


Short Interest Tables Explained

    These tables include issues inadvertently omitted from yesterday's short
interest tables. All the stocks were identified by Nasdaq as having a revision
in the previous month's position.

    These issues have a short interest position in the current month of at least
200,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at least 18,651
shares.

    Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

    T -- National Market System.

    N.L. -- Not listed.

    + -- Stock split.

    Underlining [not shown] in the comprehensive table indicates a change of 75
percent of more from the previous month.

                             --------------------


CORRECTION: A table in Business Day on March 25, and a corrected table on March
26 -- both with the headline "Largest Cover Ratios" -- listing those
over-the-counter stocks that showed, as of mid-March, the largest ratios of
numbers of shares borrowed and sold short compared with average daily volume --
carried incorrect figures provided by the National Association of Securities
Dealers for the average daily volume of many stocks.

   The table below shows corrected cover ratios based on revised volume figures
issued yesterday by N.A.S.D. Cover ratio represents the number of days, at
average volume level, that it would take to purchase the number of shares sold
short.

    The table includes only issues with a short interest position in the current
month of at least 200,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month
of at least 18,651 shares. National Market System issues are indicated with a
"T."

Largest Cover Rations

Security Name                           3/13/92    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Rouse Co                              2,526,883       60,836           42   T
Healthcare Svcs Gp                    2,717,166       76,041           36   T
Fastenal Co                           1,140,893       37,631           30   T
Jones Intrcable A                       696,091       27,023           26   T
Amer West Airline                     1,314,411       67,361           20
Boston Tech Inc                         712,389       36,677           19   T
Copytele Inc                          1,925,811      103,916           19   T
Cardinal Distr                        1,669,779       95,679           17   T
Loewen Group Inc                        742,754       44,568           17   T
Pharmacy Mgmt Svc                       470,659       28,534           16   T
York Research Cp                      3,264,550      200,703           16   T
RPM Inc                                 751,488       50,375           15   T
Dibrell Brothers Inc                  1,638,998      119,157           14   T
Executive Telecard                      436,086       30,149           14   T
Presstek Inc                            853,991       61,024           14   T
Staples Inc                           2,648,536      195,079           14   T
BBT Finl Cp                             768,985       60,162           13   T
Digital Microwave Cp                    384,917       29,980           13   T
Presidential Life Cp                    440,993       34,252           13   T
Bindley Wstn Ind                        824,060       70,679           12   T
CIS Tech Inc                          1,004,928       80,848           12   T
Cabot Medical Cp                        701,343       58,495           12   T
Pentair Inc                             449,323       37,156           12   T
Research Industries                     707,662       59,711           12   T
Videocart Inc                         2,709,178      229,162           12   T


LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1992


                             1475 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 24, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: BBs Fired by 'Gene Gun' Cause Immune Response

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman

BODY:

   Researchers in gene therapy have developed a kind of "gene gun" that shoots
microscopic gold BBs coated with fragments of human genes directly into the
cells of living animals. Instructed by the foreign genes, the cells then secrete
proteins that provoke an immune response. The technique may eventually provide a
new way to immunize people against viral infections by shooting genes from a
virus into thousands of their cells at a time.

   Conventional vaccines are made by isolating and purifying whole virus or
viral protein and injecting a person with it. The immune system then responds by
attacking the foreign material in the body.

   Stephen A. Johnston and colleagues at the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas reported on the gene gun in the March 12 issue of
Nature. The handheld device is about the same size and shape as a soft-drink
can. It uses high-pressure helium gas to propel more than 1 million gold pellets
into cells. The pellets pass through 10 to 20 cell layers before landing in a
cell that will then incorporate the foreign DNA.

   Johnston found that, despite their speed, the BBs pass through the cells
without harm and cell membranes quickly reseal. In the experiment, pellets were
coated with fragments of the human growth hormone gene and shot into mouse ear
tissue.

   Johnston pursued the gene gun idea because he thought there ought to be a way
to get genes directly into an individual instead of the current laboratory
technique of removing cells from a body, delivering foreign genes to the cells
and then returning them to the patient. The laboratory methods use either a
disabled retrovirus to carry the genes into the cells or microinjection, an
extremely thin needle to inject genes into individual cells under the
microscope.

   With the gene gun, "we can put DNA into thousands of cells at a time instead
of one at a time," said Johnston. "The advantage of this technique over
conventional vaccines is now we're not just dumping a protein into the system,
we're mimicking a real infection. This might be a better way to vaccinate."

   Johnston has so far shot genes into live mice, rats and rabbits as well as
into cultured cancer cells from humans. He said his team is trying now to shoot
pellets coated with HIV genes into the cells of mice. Success could suggest a
way to vaccinate against AIDS.


                             1476 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    March 21, 1992, Saturday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: RELIGION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 838 words

HEADLINE: GENETICS;
Frontier of faith;
Scientist raises gene therapy issues

BYLINE: RUTH SORELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   WHEN Dr. W. French Anderson started posing questions about
the ethics of gene therapy 20 years ago, he faced ridicule.

   Why question something that will never happen, his critics
asked.

   But Anderson now directs the first experiment aimed at
correcting a genetic defect in human beings.  The scientist, chief
of the molecular hematology branch at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., continues to pose ethical questions.

   At a recent conference in Houston on ""Genetics, Religion and
Ethics,'' he heard speakers challenge the most basic elements of
the work to which he has devoted most of his professional career.

   And he was delighted.

   ""We've got to take the bull by the horns and put it out
there,'' he said.  ""This is just the beginning of the philosophical
debate'' about whether gene therapy will change people's views
about their own humanity.

   The issue is crucial to Anderson, who has attempted gene
therapy in two children who were born lacking an enzyme critical to
the development of an effective immune system.

   The first child -- a 4-year-old girl -- underwent the
treatment more than a year ago.

   Blood cells taken from the child were grown in the laboratory
to produce a quantity of T-cells that fight disease.  After 10 days,
Anderson and colleagues added to the white blood cells a virus that
carried a copy of the human gene that tells cells to produce the
enzyme the child lacked.

   These viruses inserted themselves into the genetic code of
the white cells, causing them to produce adenosine deaminase, the
missing enzyme.

   Then these white cells were reinfused into the child.  They
have boosted the levels of the enzyme in her body and enabled her
to fight off disease.

   Anderson proudly displays a picture of the child, who now
attends kindergarten.

   The treatment is not a cure because the corrected white cells
die off with time.  The child requires new infusions of cells about
every three months, Anderson said.

   A 9-year-old boy who has undergone the same therapy is also
doing well.

   Now Anderson wants to correct different cells, the stem cells
that actually make the blood cells.  If these cells could be
identified and the genetic defect corrected, the children would be
cured of their immune deficiency.

   It's the realization of a lifelong dream.

   The plan has already undergone scientific scrutiny, but
Anderson believes the philosophical questions must be discussed and
understood before gene therapy becomes standard.

   For example, will parents who know their children will be
born with a genetic disease be required to have that defect
corrected at birth?  What will happen to people whose genetic
diseases are diagnosed in the womb?  Can they buy insurance or get
jobs?

   The issues will become very real during the next decade when
more and more diseases -- from genetically caused high cholesterol
to hemophilia to cancer -- will be treated by genetic manipulation.

   Anderson predicts that gene therapy will be widely available
in an injectable form within two decades.

   But he applauds the questions of people like Dr. Paul
Billings of the California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco,
who questioned whether the program to map the human genetic code --
the Human Genome Project -- is worth billions when ""science won't
touch the more common ailments of children: neglect, abuse,
malnutrition, lack of education. ''

   He warned that genetic therapy could be easily coupled with
eugenics, or changing the human genetic makeup to remove
""undesirable'' elements from the population.

   Those diagnosed with genetic diseases could face loss of
health insurance, lack of job mobility, and a loss of privacy that
could create a new underclass of genetically underprivileged,
Billings said.

   ""Who, under the current health care system, will get the
care? '' he asked.  ""Be not deluded.  Gene therapy will be used more
for enhancement of human potential or to enrich doctors'' than to
cure disease.

   The questions are serious and the criticism scalding, but
Anderson said they must be asked -- and answered -- before gene
therapy becomes a standard treatment.

   Right now physicians plan only to change the cells in the
body, not the sperm and egg, called germ cells, which merge to form
a human embryo and create the next generation.

   But Billings does not see that lasting long.  ""We will hear
demands for the permanent fix -- change the germ line,'' he said.

   There are concerns that such changes will affect the face of
humanity forever.

   He asked if the immune-deficient children treated by Anderson
are normal or if they define a new class of human beings -- the
corrected human.

   Anderson thinks they are normal.  When he looks at his first
patient, he sees a child who would once have been consigned to a
life of disease and disability but who can now go to school and
shake off common disease like any other person.

   The true answer, Anderson said, ""Is how do we define a human
being? ''

GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. At Baylor College of Medicine's Institute of Molecular
Genetics in Houston, a computer displays data derived from an automated
sequencer, a device that determines individual nucleic acids in a gene (color);
Mug: 2. Dr. W. French Anderson of National Institutes of Health (color); 1.
Buster Dean/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1992


                             1477 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 17, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 3; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: Study Finds One Cell Can Provoke Many Tumors

BODY:

   AN analysis of four cases of bladder cancer has shown that in each one
multiple tumors appear to have been produced by a single mutated cell,
challenging a common view about the origin of such cancers.

   In studying the origins of the tumors, the researchers said, they also found
new evidence about which genes may initiate the cancerous growths.

    The common view has been that in organs like the bladder, where many cells
can be bathed in liquid contaminated by carcinogens, multiple cancerous tumors
were caused by a series of independent cancerous mutations called field defects.
But according to the researchers, who reported their findings in the current
issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, that was not the case in the four
women they studied.

   The finding could affect genetic therapies that may later be developed to
treat cancers. If all tumors in an organ in a particular individual have the
same genetic origin, therapy designed for one tumor could be effective for all
of them. Other areas where field defects were thought to be the cause of
multiple tumors, and whose treatment could be affected by this discovery, are
the esophagus, lungs, mouth and throat.

   "Everyone just talked about field defects like they were God's word and there
was no other way around it," said Dr. David Sidransky, a senior research fellow
at the Johns Hopkins University Oncology Center and principal author of the
study. "But now we've been able to actually test these things."

Pinpointing the Gene

    Researchers studying the bladder tumors took advantage of the fact that each
cell in women has two X chromosomes, one from each parent, of which only one is
active. They found that in each woman the same X chromosome, either the one from
the mother or the father, was inactive in all the cancerous cells, strongly
suggesting that a single cell was to blame for all the tumors in one bladder.
The X chromosome is not thought to be involved in producing the tumor and was
used simply as a way to identify cells.

   The researchers also traced three other chromosomes, numbered 9, 17 and 18,
known to carry genes associated with tumors. All tumors in each woman had the
same changes in chromosome 9, but often had different changes in chromosomes 17
and 18. Researchers interpret this to mean that changes in the gene on
chromosome 9 precede the spread of the tumor-causing cell and that changes on
chromosome 17 and 18 lead to the aggressive and invasive growth which
characterizes the later stages of tumor development.

   "It looks like the gene on 9 sets the stage -- it may be the first event,"
said Dr. Sidransky. "Now we know that it's very important that we go after that
gene first" and find out as much as possible about it.

   While researchers express confidence that the tumors originate with a single
cell, how this single cell spreads from place to place to begin new tumor growth
remains unknown.  Dr. Sidransky said the cells that have mutated may spread by
rapid growth, or by being moved by fluid such as urine or even by being moved by
a doctor removing a tumor.

   The finding is very exciting for scientists studying multiple-tumor cancers,
said Dr. Peter Jones, director for basic research at the University of Southern
California Comprehensive Cancer Center. "It's a big advance in our understanding
of the generation of tumors," he said. "It indicates that not all cells are at
equal risk -- that there may be a single cell at risk."

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1992


                             1478 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 16, 1992, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: Relationship of religion, genetic advances studied

BYLINE: CECILE HOLMES WHITE, Houston Chronicle Religion Editor; Staff

BODY:

   Scientists and theologians winding up a three-day conference
here want more time to articulate how religion influences health
and pastoral care in light of genetic advances.

   At the close of the conference Sunday, they opted not simply
to affirm a cautious and slightly vague draft statement on
genetics, religion and ethics.

   Instead, the conference sent its drafting committee to work
again asking that it take written additions and revisions from
conference participants and hone the statement.

   No deadline was set, but most participants indicated a desire
for a stronger position paper.  They said they need ammunition in
the multi-front battle posed by advances in genetics and genetic
engineering.

   The questions raised by advances in genetics include:

   How will finding cures for genetically-transmitted diseases
and identifying the genes that cause them affect health insurance?

   Who should have access to the results of an individual's
genetic screening?

   Will science alter what it means to be human if it tinkers
with individual genetic makeup?

   How do the different world religions view genetic advances
and to what extent should religious views be allowed to shape
public policy?

   How can the general public and clergy -- their chief
comforters in crisis -- be educated on a subject where research
advances consistently outpace moral conclusions?

   Ruth Smith, a research nurse at M.D. Anderson, said
discussion at the conference revealed disagreement on who must take
initial responsibility for genetic counseling and education.

   There must be cooperation, but many clergy feel such
counseling is ""too hot to handle,'' she said.  ""I personally feel
it's the (responsibility of the) grass-roots health care worker who
refers someone for genetic counseling. ''

   The conference was jointly sponsored by the Institute of
Religion and Baylor College of Medicine.  During the meeting,
discussion ranged from types of gene therapy to a call for heading
off legislation that might jeopardize needed public debate.

   Participants came from jobs as disparate as editing a medical
ethics bulletin to teaching in a university religious studies
department.  Their sentiments for a more inclusive, but specific
statement, surfaced in the final session.

   For three days, theological voices including an Anglican
archbishop and a Hindu physicist had explored the myriad issues
surrounding the Human Genome Initiative, a $ 3 billion dollar plan
to map the human gene system.

   The conference should spark church-science dialogue, said
Archbishop John S. Habgood, the archbishop of York, England.

   Habgood, who spoke on the ""Perils of Trying To Know Too
Much,'' said he hoped the meeting also will lead to basic useful
working principles to apply in genetic counseling and research.

   Dr. George Pazin, an Orthodox Christian from Pennsylvania,
urged that enthusiasm for genetic advances not lead medicine to
underplay the risks involved.


LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1992


                             1479 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             March 15, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT; Pg. 6F

LENGTH: 625 words

HEADLINE: RELAX DRUG TESTING RULES, NOBEL PRIZE WINNER SAYS

BYLINE: Michael B. Lafferty; Dispatch Science Reporter

DATELINE: GRANVILLE, Ohio

BODY:


   Regulation should be loosened to allow drugs to enter the marketplace faster,
even to the point of allowing some people to be hurt, says Nobel Prize winner
James Whyte Black.

   ''We simply have got to damage human beings to see what a drug does,'' said
Black, 68, during a visit last week to Denison University, here.

   Black, a pharmacologist at King's College in London, was awarded the Nobel
Prize in medicine for contributions in the development of beta blockers to
treating angina pectoris (chest pains due to narrowing of coronary arteries) and
in the development of drugs for hypertension and ulcers.

   Millions of people use drugs, including the ulcer treatment drug tagamet,
stemming from Black's research.

   Black said the drug regulatory system doesn't protect as well as it is
supposed to.

   ''It can't happen in current testing because numbers are so small,'' he said.
To get a problem rate of one in 10,000 uses a multi-year test on 50,000 people
might have to be conducted, too many and too expensive for practice.

   He said drug company tests are too tightly controlled by age, race, sex to
ever learn the full range of potential side effects.

   Once a drug's efficacy has been demonstrated in drug company tests, Black
said, a product marketing license should be granted allowing doctors to begin
prescribing the drug. Studies should continue to track a drug's effectiveness in
widespread, practical use before it is fully licensed.

   Approval takes an average of 12 years and $ 231 million per drug, according
to the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, which cited a 1990 study by the
Tufts University Center for Drug Development.

   Final approval, after clinical trials have been completed, takes 2 1/2 years,
according to association spokesman Jeffrey Trewhitt.

   The Bush Administration has recommended changes to speed approval.

   Black cautioned that regulation is needed. ''Drugs are so complicated we can
never turn out backs on them,'' he said.

   But, Black said, the scientific progress that has made revolutionary drugs
and other health advances possible has drawbacks. For example, new understanding
of the genetic connection to various diseases could allow insurance companies to
decide who to insure or employers who to hire.

   He fears scientists will get the blame for unpopular uses of research.
''Scientists are becoming more alienated. They're not trusted as much as they
once were,'' he said, pointing out publicized episodes of cheating and the
contributions in weapons research.

   ''In some cases science is best when science is boring, when we're not making
headlines,'' he said. ''I get rather worried about how much we worry people.''

   Science has also presented the public with what he called ''frightening''
moral issues such as the debate over abortion. Advances have made it possible to
present judges with data to attempt to determine when a fetus is a human being.

   Science also has made it possible to keep a person alive in a coma for
decades. Doctors who decide to pull the plug on the life-support equipment can
be accused of murder by a prosecutor whose job, Black said, is to get even.

   Organ transplants, new treatment techniques, gene therapy all mean more
ethical problems, especially if increasingly expensive medical treatment is
rationed to those who can afford it.

   Black does not believe scientists will be able to conquor AIDS. While a cure
for the disease is not likely, he said, AIDS also will not be the ravager once
predicted. ''We'll learn to live with it by progressively improving treatment,''
he said.

   ''The nightmare version isn't going to happen. I doubt that this is going to
be a disease that ravishes normal heterosexual lives,'' he said.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Dispatch, James Whyte Black

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             1480 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                 March 9, 1992, MONDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 13; N

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: Closing in on gene therapy

BYLINE: David A. Danar M.D.

BODY:


   New research into how blood cells are made could help researchers determine
whether sophisticated gene therapy techniques will cure people with inherited
diseases.

   The research puts scientists one step closer to curing people by injecting
normal copies of missing or defective genes into their progenitor cells. Those
cells, called stem cells, give rise to all other blood cells in the body. If
scientists are able to put new genes into stem cells, a person theoretically
could be cured with one treatment.

   Sophisticated gene therapy experiments already under way are attempting to
put normal copies of genes into the immune cells of people with the defects.

   This approach calls for repeated infusions of new cells.

   As early as this summer, government researchers could begin inserting normal
genes into stem cells to try to cure people with inherited diseases, according
to government researchers who pioneered the gene therapy procedure.

   Just two weeks ago, a panel from the National Institutes of Health gave the
researchers permission to add the technique to their current gene therapy
strategy.

   Doctors would like to try inserting genes into the stem cells of two girls
with a rare inherited enzyme deficiency that makes them extremely vulnerable to
infections.

   The girls, who are 5 and 10 years old, are receiving injections of the
missing enzyme and of immune system cells, both of which have been inserted with
normal copies of the gene.

   The two suffer from severe combined immune deficiency. They are doing
"beautifully," according to researcher Dr. W. French Anderson, chief of the
Molecular Hematology Branch of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in
Bethesda, Md.

   But if the stem cell technique is successful, the girls might no longer need
the injections.

   In the journal Science, researcher John E. Dick of the Hospital for Sick
Children in Toronto, Canada, reports having discovered a way to generate most of
the types of human blood cells in mice by transplanting human bone marrow into
them.

   The mouse model could help researchers answer key questions about whether
stem cells inserted with normal gene can cure severe combined immune deficiency
and other diseases.

   "If we had a mouse model, we could have answered all these questions years
ago," Anderson said.

   Two months from now, scientists may know whether they could cure the diseased
bone marrow cells of people with sickle cell anemia, Dick said. The blood
disease affects up to 60,000 African Americans.

GRAPHIC: Medical Tribune News Service

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1992


                             1481 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      March 9, 1992, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 193 words

HEADLINE: Experts close in on asthma gene

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    British researchers said Sunday they have discovered a marker for a gene
that causes asthma - a finding that could lead to improved treatment within five
years for the 1 in 20 people worldwide who suffer from the disorder.

   The marker was found by studying DNA in blood samples from 1,000 people in
100 families in which asthma appeared to be inherited, say Drs. William Cookson
and Julian Hopkin, Oxford University.

   ''If they did find the gene, it would be of major importance,'' says
allergist Malcolm Blumenthal, University of Minnesota.

   Cookson and Hopkin say they've narrowed their search to three genes and may
be able to isolate the asthma gene in as little as three months.

   If so, prenatal testing for asthma will become possible immediately and
highly specific drugs or even gene therapy may be developed in five years, the
researchers say.

   Blumenthal says the team previously reported finding a gene that causes
allergies, but he and other scientists have not been able to duplicate the
team's studies. Likewise, ''until the preliminary data (on the asthma gene) have
been published, we can't confirm their study,'' Blumenthal says.


                             1482 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 49 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31

BODY:
                       ** COMPANY REPORTS **
                       Genetic Therapy (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31                             1991                 1990

Revenue                                215,202               36,342
Net loss                             1,372,136            1,256,594
Shares outst                         7,495,504            5,728,513
Yr rev                                 471,554              176,800
Net loss                             4,823,605            4,050,679
Shares outst                         6,437,226            5,721,671



LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1992


                             1483 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 3, 1992 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E-2

LENGTH: 280 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: Compiled from wire reports.

BODY:

   Mycogen Corp.'s stock price jumped 1 1/2 to 15 1/2 in trading yesterday as
investors reacted to a research article in Bio/Technology.

   Mycogen researchers said in the journal that they discovered new strains of
Bacillus thuringiensis that are toxic for a wider range of household and
agricultural pests than previously thought. Vical Inc. said it raised more than
$9 million from several venture capital companies as part of a private
financing.

   Vical will spend the money primarily on research and clinical trials
involving a specific type of gene therapy dubbed gene therapeutics. Foodmaker
Inc. extended to March 6 its tender offers for its senior notes. The San Diego
based-parent of Jack In The Box and Chi Chi's restaurants received tenders for
99 percent -- about $149 million -- of its 12.75 percent senior notes, and 82
percent -- about $247 million -- of its senior subordinated notes. Syntro
Corp.'s stock price rose 1 1/4 to 6 7/8 on Wall Street yesterday in response to
rumors that the company may be a takeover target.

   A few months earlier, Upjohn Co. was rumored to be buying the Kansas-based
company, which has an office in San Diego.

   One stock watcher said Syntro is preparing a public offering to raise up to
$15 million. Beeba's Creations Inc., offering to buy up to 1 million shares of
its common stock at $13 per share, drew tenders for 1.5 million shares before
the offer expired Feb. 28. Beeba's will purchase 1 million shares, prorated
among the offers.

   After the buyback, the San Diego-based importer and wholesaler of women's
apparel will have about 2.6 million shares outstanding, compared with about 4.4
million shares a year ago. Compiled from wire reports.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1484 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    February 28, 1992, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE B2; DIGEST

LENGTH: 922 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   COMPANIES

   Black & Decker service centers have begun accepting worn-out rechargeable
batteries, which pose an environmental problem once they reach landfills.
Batteries that can be revived will be installed in rebuilt products. Others will
be broken down into their component parts and recycled, the company said.

   KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and British Airways called off talks on a merger
that would have created one of the world's biggest airline operations. KLM said
they could not agree on a shareholder structure in a proposed holding company
and blamed prohibitive national and international regulations for the failed
talks.

   TWA said it will start flying into Moscow next month from New York, competing
with Delta. It is offering a special $ 598 round-trip fare, about half the
amount charged by competitors.

   McDonnell Douglas told Congress its proposed joint venture with a Taiwan
partner to produce commercial airliners will involve no Taiwanese government
subsidies. "We are not creating a competitor in Taiwan, but a long-term
partner," John Wolf, executive vice president of corporate at Douglas Aircraft,
told the Joint Economic Committee.

   MCA formed a separate unit to explore business opportunities in Japan,
including building a movie theme park.

   Three leading picture-phone makers successfully tested a technology standard
that for the first time will allow users of different brands to talk to each
other. The firms are PictureTel, Compression Labs and VideoTelecom.

   ACQUISITIONS

   Adler Group of Silver Spring, publishers of the pocket-sized Apartment
Shoppers Guide, said it intends to buy the Corridor Real Estate Journal, a
30,000-circulation weekly industry newspaper based in Alexandria.

   REGULATION

   A bill to encourage joint production ventures by U.S. companies by limiting
potential antitrust penalties was approved by the Senate. The bill would extend
the current protections for joint research and development projects to
production ventures.

   A House Banking subcommittee rejected proposals to give the Resolution Trust
Corp. a blank check to finish cleaning up the thrift mess but approved $ 25
billion for the agency through April 1 of next year.

   California insurance regulators sued former Executive Life chairman Fred
Carr, junk bond dealer Michael Milken and others, seeking more than a billion
dollars in reimbursements and alleging fraud, deceit, breach of fiduciary duty
and other wrongdoing that led to the insurer's collapse.

   COURTS

   The FDA released data of its tests on Sporicidin products to the
Rockville-based company at the behest of a federal judge in Baltimore. But
Robert Schattner, developer of Chloraseptic mouthwash and president of
Sporicidin, said the test data is "incomplete, inadequately documented and
recorded. ... " The FDA recalled all of the company's disinfectant products
because they were not registered.

   Seven-Up slapped Coca-Cola with a $ 500 million lawsuit, charging its giant
rival with campaigning to take away bottlers that are licensed to both companies
and take over the market for lemon-lime drinks like Seven-Up. Randy Donaldson,
spokesman for Coca-Cola, said the company had not seen the suit and could not
respond to its allegations.

   Time Warner was sued in Delaware Chancery Court by four shareholders seeking
to block a severance package that reportedly will pay its recently resigned
president, Nicholas J. Nicholas Jr., as much as $ 44.5 million.

   A federal judge refused to throw out insider trading charges against attorney
Henry A. Singer, who is accused of making $ 34,000 with confidential information
about the planned leveraged buyout of WearEver-ProctorSilex Inc.

   CONTRACTS

   MCI won a five-year contract worth up to $ 100 million to provide
international telephone service between all federal agencies and 200 foreign
facilities.

   EARNINGS

   Three big retailers reported mixed results. J.C. Penney's earnings fell 86
percent for the year and 82 percent in the fourth quarter. Woolworth lost $ 166
million in its fiscal year ended Jan. 25, and lost $ 128 million in the fourth
quarter. Both cited restructuring and store closing costs. Caldor reported a
13.5 percent gain in 1991 profits and a 3 percent fourth-quarter gain.

   Crown Central Petroleum of Baltimore reported a loss of $ 6 million in 1991,
compared with a profit of $ 26 million in 1990. In the fourth quarter, Crown
lost $ 10.1 million, compared with a profit of $ 7.3 million a year ago.

   Bridgestone said its 1991 profit increased 21 percent.

   Philips Electronics of the Netherlands said it earned $ 645.1 million in
1991, compared with a loss of $ 2.28 billion a year ago. The profit included
extraordinary gains from the sale of several non-core businesses. For the fourth
quarter, Philips reported a profit of $ 175.8 million.

   PEOPLE

   Marvin Traub, Bloomingdale's former chairman, resigned to form his own retail
consulting and services firm, Marvin Traub Associates.

   Jacques F. Rejeange, president and CEO of Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, was named
to the board of Genetic Therapy of Gaithersburg.

   ODD LOTS

   The "Michelangelo" virus was discovered by 15 percent of 300 companies and
government offices surveyed in January by Dataquest. The virus is designed to
wipe out a computer's memory on March 6.

   Northrop and the Air Force were awarded the Collier Trophy, the aerospace
industry's top design honor, for the B-2 "stealth" bomber. The award comes a
month after President Bush proposed to halt production after 20 planes.


                             1485 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           February 27, 1992 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE OF REGROWING HEARTNOTEBOOK

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Thursday, February 27, 1992 GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE OF REGROWING HEART

   NOTEBOOK

   Researchers have triggered the growth of new blood vessels in  animals'
hearts by injecting genetic material directly into the cells of the  heart wall.

   The genes, which produce a chemical that promotes blood-vessel growth,
produced a 30 percent to 40 percent increase in capillaries in the heart wall,
according to Dr. Eliav Barr of the University of Michigan and the Howard  Hughes
Medical Institute.

   Dr. Jan Breslow of Rockefeller University in New York, an authority on the
genetics of heart disease, said of Barr's work, ``It's absolutely amazing that
they can directly inject genes into the heart, and the genes express (continue
working) for months.''

   Barr said the ability to promote the growth of new blood vessels in the
heart could potentially be a useful treatment for the 750,000 Americans who
have heart attacks each year as a result of narrowing of their coronary
arteries, which supply the heart muscle.

   The theory is that if new arteries could be grown to supply the heart, then
the heart muscle would not lose its blood supply and the heart attacks would
not occur.

   It is also conceivable, Breslow said, that the technique could be used to
insert genes that would trigger the growth of new heart muscle after the heart
has been damaged in a heart attack.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1486 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 27, 1992, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE B9

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Inc. Gets Nod for Cell Test;
Federal Review Panel Clears Way for Controversial Treatment

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sandra Sugawara, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Genetic Therapy Inc. announced yesterday that a federal review panel has
cleared the way for it to test a new gene therapy treatment involving "stem
cells," the latest development in a whirlwind of activity in this highly
controversial area of biotechnology.

   The Gaithersburg-based company has been one of the leading firms in the gene
therapy field, benefiting from its relationship with scientists at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda. It hopes the use of stem cells -- cells that
produce other cells in the blood and immune system -- will enable it to further
advance its work in gene therapy.

   Gene therapy, in its simplest form, involves inserting genes into a cell of
an individual to compensate for a deficiency or give the cell a new
characteristic. Only about half a dozen companies are involved in gene therapy
research, but the field holds the promise of turning the drug business upside
down.

   The pharmaceutical industry spends billions of dollars developing drugs to
treat diseases and their symptoms. But if genetic therapy were successful,
patients could be cured without the use of many of these drugs.

   "Gene therapy represents one of the most important contributions of the
biotech industry," said Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor of Bioventure View
newsletter. "However, it's a lot further away from being a commercially
available treatment than people understand" -- at least another five years, she
estimated.

   NIH scientists working in collaboration with Genetic Therapy conducted the
first gene therapy test in September 1990 on a 4-year-old girl suffering from an
immune deficiency problem. Because of a single gene defect, she lacked an enzyme
that protected white blood cells. Without the enzymes, toxins built up and
killed the white blood cells, leaving her body without an immune system.

    Genetically engineered white blood cells were inserted into her body,
enabling it to mount an immune response to foreign substances. However, because
the white blood cells only live a limited amount of time, the therapy must be
repeated when those cells die. Genetic Therapy hopes that if the stem cells can
be made to continually reproduce genetically proper cells, the company might
have a permanent cure.

   This month, NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee approved Genetic
Therapy's request to use stem cells in a test. The director of NIH must sign off
on the committee's decision. The stem cell trial was one of five tests that the
committee approved, including two others submitted by scientists working with
Genetic Therapy.

   Before February, NIH already had approved 12 clinical trials in gene therapy.
Rapid advances in the field have sparked interest from pharmaceutical companies,
which are closely monitoring the technology because of the potential impact it
could have on their business, according to analysts.

   Most large pharmaceutical companies have not launched their own efforts in
this area because they have considered it too risky, although Sandoz Pharma
Ltd., a pharmaceutical company based in Switzerland, recently purchased $ 10
million of Genetic Therapy stock and has agreed to invest as much as $ 13.5
million to fund certain projects.

   Genetic Therapy stock closed yesterday at $ 10.75, down 25 cents.

   Analysts and venture capitalists say technological advances in gene therapy
have attracted attention in the financial community, but they warn that gene
therapy remains a risky investment because of the peculiar challenges in running
a commercially successful gene therapy company.

   "Being able to treat a few patients through NIH is one thing. Being able to
develop a product that allows you to treat a lot of patients around the country
is another," said Robbins-Roth.

   It is still unclear to some analysts how the therapy would be marketed and
sold.



                             1487 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    February 24, 1992, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1784 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE / MEDICINE;
THE LITTLE ENGINES THAT CAN'T;
BIOLOGY: DEFECTS IN THE TINY POWER PLANTS OF HUMAN CELLS -- MITOCHONDRIA -- MAY
BE LINKED TO DEGENERATIVE DISEASES SUCH AS ALZHEIMER'S AND EVEN TO AGING,
SCIENTISTS SAY. NEW FINDINGS COULD HAVE PROFOUND MEDICAL IMPACT.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   Imagine Los Angeles with half its power plants shut down. At best, such
conditions would produce a "brownout," with large sections of the city working
far below optimum efficiency. At worst, traffic lights would blink out, leaving
arteries clogged; the computers vital to the city's activities would go off-line
and communications would be severely impaired, leaving the entire city
rudderless.

   Now imagine your body with three-quarters of its energy-producing factories
shut down. The brain would be impaired, vision would dim, muscles would twitch
spastically, the heart would weaken and the liver would be impaired.

   For large numbers of people, that is precisely the situation in which they
find themselves. Over the last few years, a growing number of genetic disorders
have been linked to specific defects in the small intracellular particles called
mitochondria, which are responsible for cellular energy production.

   The discoveries have come as a surprise to many researchers who had accepted
the conventional wisdom that all genetic defects reside solely in DNA in the
nucleus of cells.

   Moreover, the recent identification of mitochondria defects has led to new
insight into the nature of many rare diseases and, perhaps more important,
opened the door to new avenues of therapy, including gene therapy. It has also
encouraged researchers to take a fresh look at a variety of more common diseases
-- ranging from Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases to simple
aging -- that may also be caused by mitochondrial defects.

   "Within five years, we're going to have a tremendous impact on health because
(the mitochondrion) is packed full of disease-relevant problems," said molecular
biologist Douglas C. Wallace of Emory University in Atlanta, a pioneer in the
field who was the first to discover a mitochondria-linked genetic disorder.

   "We're interested in anything that involves the brain, heart, kidney, muscles
and eyes" because those organs are the most intensive users of energy in the
body, he said. "We feel it is no coincidence that the organ systems most
involved in the degenerative process of aging are also the most dependent on
oxidative phosphorylation" -- the process by which mitochondria produce energy.

   Mitochondria are generally considered to be descendants of primitive,
air-breathing bacteria. Perhaps 5 billion years ago, they were engulfed by the
progenitors of mammalian and plant cells, becoming a crucial part of those
larger, more complex organisms.

   Over a period of perhaps half a billion years, most of the mitochondrion's
genetic material emigrated to the nucleus of the cell, leaving behind only 35
genes. The DNA -- deoxyribonucleic acid, the blueprint of life -- remaining in
the mitochondrion is quite small, containing only 16,569 chemicals called bases.
The nucleus of the human cell, in contrast, contains an estimated 1 billion
bases that are the blueprint for at least 100,000 genes.

   Mitochondria have one other unique trait discovered by Wallace. They are
transmitted to offspring only in the mother's egg, not in the father's sperm.
This means they do not undergo the genetic scrambling that occurs when sperm
fertilizes egg, but are passed on intact.

   It is this characteristic that has yielded some dramatic findings in
evolution and anthropology. It has allowed molecular geneticists, particularly
Wallace and the late Allan Wilson of UC Berkeley, to trace the genetic ancestry
of modern humans. Those studies led to development of the highly controversial
"African Eve" theory, which posits that all modern humans are descended from a
single woman who lived in Africa 200,000 years ago.

   Wallace has also used the technique to trace the ancestry of American
Indians, reporting that 95% of them are descended from a small band of people
that migrated across the Bering Strait 15,000 to 30,000 years ago.

   It is, however, the medical role of mitochondria that is having the greatest
impact, and Wallace has been among the most important players in this field. He
has been studying them for more than 20 years, beginning with his graduate work
at Yale University, and he was the first to link a mitochondrial defect to a
disease.

   "Once we had shown that mitochondrial DNA could encode genes, the obvious
question was whether there were genetic diseases that might be due to mutations"
in that DNA, he said. But researchers did not then have any idea of what a
disease caused by a mitochondrial mutation should look like.

   One way to predict the effects of a genetic defect is to study people exposed
to environmental poisons that affect the target gene. Wallace knew that many
poisons, such as cyanide and rotenone, block the mitochondrial energy process.
He studied the literature to see what symptoms develop among people exposed to
them.

   He found that they developed myoclonic epilepsy, they went blind, their
muscles jerked spastically and they developed dementia and ataxia, a lack of
muscular coordination. Then he looked for genetic disorders that showed these
characteristics and that were maternally inherited. One obvious example was
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON).

   LHON is a rare disease that is transmitted by the mother, but that affects
mostly males. It produces a rapid loss of vision accompanied by abnormalities in
the rhythm of the heart, typically beginning between ages 20 and 24. Starting in
1977, Wallace began collecting families with a history of the disease. In 1988,
he reported that LHON was caused in most families by the mutation of a single
base at position 11,778. It marked the first time a genetic disease was linked
to mitochondria.

   In the early 1980s, Wallace also began collecting families with a history of
an unusual disorder called myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red fibers disease
(MERRF). The primary symptom of the disorder is an uncontrolled jerking of the
muscles, accompanied by deafness and dementia, and microscopic examination shows
the presence of unusual degenerated muscle cells termed ragged red fibers.

   In 1990, he reported that MERRF was caused by the mutation of a single base
at position 8,344.

   Meanwhile, other researchers had begun studying mitochondria and they found
other disorders. Molecular biologist J. A. Morgan-Hughes and colleagues at the
University of London found that a spectrum of other disorders involving the eye
were caused by deletion of a large segment of the mitochondrial DNA.

   The most severe form of the disorder, called Kearns-Sayre syndrome, involves
paralysis of the eye, or ophthalmoplegia, in which the victim is unable to move
the eyes up and down or left and right. The victim also has droopy eyelids,
muscle weakness, ataxia, heart problems and general degeneration. Symptoms
typically begin shortly after birth.

   A less severe form of the disease, called chronic progressive external
ophthalmoplegia, or CEOP, begins later in life and does not become as severe. In
the first case, Wallace said, significant mitochondrial damage is present at
birth. "Then every cell in the body has deleted DNA, giving you very severe
symptoms because every organ is affected," he said. In CEOP, the damage builds
up during development, perhaps as weakened mitochondria degenerate and die.

   Mitochondrial defects have since been found in several similar disorders.

   The discovery of the link to mitochondria is making possible therapy for such
disorders. By identifying the stage of energy production that is blocked by the
defect, it may be possible to bypass it by administering a missing or defective
chemical.

   "We're working on therapeutic trials for a number of different patients and
diseases at this point," Wallace said. "They work if you know what you are
doing. . . . We'll be able to help a lot of people with epilepsy and other
disorders."

   Other researchers, such as Caltech molecular biologist Giuseppe Attardi, are
looking at more permanent forms of therapy. "We are developing new technologies
aimed at transferring mitochondria from one cell to another, at replacing
completely the mitochondrial DNA of a cell with foreign mitochondrial DNA and at
introducing DNA directly into the mitochondria of a living cell."

   The greatest potential interest is in the link to more common diseases, such
as Parkinson's. A key element in recognizing this link was the discovery by
several researchers that the drug MPTP -- which causes Parkinson-like symptoms
in animals and humans -- interferes with the energy-production process in
mitochondria.

   Recently, Wallace and neurologist Sally Boyson of the University of Colorado
have independently found that blood and muscle cells in Parkinson's victims also
have an impairment in mitochondrial energy production.

   They have not identified a specific defect, however. Wallace believes they
will eventually find similar links to Huntington's and Alzheimer's, as well as
to the aging process.

   "I don't think we're looking at a few, isolated rare diseases," he said.
"Mitochondria and the mitochondrial DNA are no longer arcane subjects irrelevant
to the mainstream of medicine. I think these concepts, as people apply them,
will be found to be a paradigm that stands for a wide number of degenerative
diseases."

   RECENT FINDINGS: The amount of DNA in the mitochondrion itself is quite small
-- only one three-thousandth of the DNA found in the smallest of the human
cell's 46 chromosomes. But researchers have found evidence that defects in these
35 genes can cause several inherited disorders that affect the nervous system,
skeletal muscles, the heart, the retina, the kidney and the liver. These
include:

   * Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy

   * Myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red fiber syndrome

   * Kearns-Sayre sydrome

   * Pearson's disease

   * Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like
episodes.

   * Many researchers now believe that mitochndrial defects may also be involved
in Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases, as well as in normal
aging.

   Mitochondria

   THE BACKGROUND: Mitochondria are the body's energy factories, combining
oxygen with carbohydrates and other fuels to provide the chemical energy that
powers all cells. Depending on their power needs, cells may contain as few as
one mitochondrion (blood cells) to as many as 5,000 (brain cells).

   HOW ENERGY IS PRODUCED: Each mitochondrion carries its own set of 33 genes
that serve as the blueprint for some of the enzymes that actually produce
energy. Blueprints for the remainder of the necessary enzymes are carried in the
nucleus of the cell. Proteins produced in the cell proper combine with those
produced in mitochondria to produce energy.

   SOURCE: The Living Cell

GRAPHIC: Drawing, THE LITTLE ENGINES THAT CAN'T, ANDERS RAMBERG / Los Angeles
Times


                             1488 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               February 21, 1992, FRIDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 366 words

HEADLINE: Scientists clone gene tied to dystrophy

BODY:


   Researchers have discovered new details about the genetic defect that causes
the most common adult form of muscular dystrophy, which will allow them to
diagnose the disorder and may help them develop treatments.

   Scientists have cloned the gene that causes myotonic muscular dystrophy,
identified its function and located the defect that leads to the disease.

   The findings appear in the journal Cell and in two papers that will appear in
the journal Science.

   Myotonic dystrophy occurs when a portion of a certain gene begins to multiply
without restraint. The same segment is present in the genetic material of
healthy people, but its length seems to determine whether it will reproduce
wildly.

   Healthy people have five to 30 copies of the segment, but people who have
more than 50 copies develop myotonic muscular dystrophy. Some people even have
3,000 copies of the segment.

   "That immediately gives us a basis for DNA diagnosis of the disease," said
Dr. C. Thomas Caskey of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.

   The more copies a person has, the more severe the disease.

   Caskey said the new finding will be useful in predicting who is susceptible
to developing the disease. Its symptoms, which include weakness and wasting of
muscles, usually appear in adolescence and early adulthood and may result in
death when a person is in his or her 50s or 60s because of heart or respiratory
failure.

   In addition to cloning the myotonic dystrophy gene, scientists have
discovered that it transfers chemicals in the cells of healthy people.

   "These findings will now lead to a logical search for therapy for the
disease, whether it will be a drug or gene therapy," said Caskey. "Before the
discovery of the gene, there was no logic to this search."

   The new findings closely follow other major discoveries about the genetic
defects involved in myotonic dystrophy that were reported several weeks ago in
the journal Nature.

   According to those reports, the defective gene gets longer each time it is
inherited.

   Thus, the disease becomes more severe in each subsequent generation, which
means grandchildren of a carrier may inherit a more severe form than children
do.

GRAPHIC: Medical Tribune News Service

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 1992


                             1489 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 12; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFS

BODY:


   Debt

* Lamson & Sessions Co., Cleveland, a maker of industrial products, arranged a
$45 million line of credit and a $20 million term loan with GE Capital, a unit
of the General Electric Company.


   Common

* Bell Sports Corp., Rantoul, Ill., a maker of protective helmets, filed for 2.4
million common shares to be sold through William Blair & Co. and Montgomery
Securities.

* Somatix Therapy Corp., Alameda, Calif., a gene therapy concern, offered 3
million shares of common stock at $11.50 a share through Robertson, Stephens &
Co.

* New Plan Realty Trust filed for 3 million shares to be sold through Merrill
Lynch. New Plan, a real estate investment trust since 1972, has been publicly
owned since 1962 and is listed on the New York Stock Exchange. It owns and
operates shopping centers, garden apartments and other real estate in the East.

Ratings

* Public Service Electric and Gas Co. of New Jersey received an A rating from
Fitch Investors Service for its $250 million of 8.75 percent and 7.625 percent
bonds, due in 2000 or 2002. It has received a similar rating for a new shelf
registration of $750 million of bonds.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1992


                             1490 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 93 words

HEADLINE: Corrections

BODY:

   An article about gene therapy in Business Day on Feb. 14 referred incorrectly
to the relationships of the parties in a clinical trial of the technology
approved last week by the Recombinant Advisory Committee of the National
Institutes of Health. The trial will be run by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center in Seattle. The Targeted Genetics Corporation is providing
financial support and collaborating with the center; the company received the
approval from the Food and Drug Administration to test the genetic transfer
mechanism used in the trial.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1992


                             1491 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    FEBRUARY 21, 1992, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 1004 words

HEADLINE: Muscular Dystrophy Cause Pinpointed to the Gene
 Better treatment may be years away, but tests al

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    Just two weeks after saying they were closing in, scientific teams around
the world said yesterday that they have found the exact gene defect behind the
most common form of muscular dystrophy in adults.

   The success was hailed as one of the swiftest achievements in human genetics
as groups of scientists in the United States, the Netherlands, Canada and Wales
published their results in two journals describing the genetic error that causes
the muscle-wasting disease called myotonic dystrophy.

   And, as predicted when the researchers began to zero in, the defect is an
''unstable region'' of DNA in which a section of genetic code is repeated dozens
to many hundreds too many times. The work shows that, as the defect is passed
generation to generation, it may get worse and worse because the size of the
repeated regions may grow.

   The disease affects about one in 8,000 people. Its main symptoms are
stiffness and uncoordination in muscles, but the wide range of other problems
that it causes include cataracts, mental retardation, heart defects, premature
balding and sleep disorders.

   Men and women suffer equally from the disease, and either parent can pass on
the gene. However, the new research hints that processes in the development of
the egg may mean that women make the defect worse as they pass it on, whereas
men usually pass a version to their offspring no worse than they have
themselves.

   Already the teams of scientists, say they have developed tests that can
quickly tell how many extra copies of the defect a person has, how severe the
disease is likely to be when they get it and the risk that their children will
also get it. Such information is vital for doctors and therapists who provide
counseling to members of families in which the disease is common.

   Improved treatments may be several years away, ''but you can't even
contemplate gene therapy studies until you have cloned the gene,'' said Dr.  C.
Thomas Caskey of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Baylor College of
Medicine in Texas. ''We have done that now.''

   MANY SCIENTISTS INVOLVED

   Caskey led one of two groups -- the other is run by microbiologist Robert G.
Korneluk at the University of Ottawa -- that released their reports yesterday
ahead of a scheduled March 6 publication date in Science Magazine.  The magazine
moved up release of the report after three other groups published nearly
identical results in this week's issue of the journal Cell.  Leaders of the
groups publishing in Cell included David Brook of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Duncan Shaw of the University of Wales and Keith Johnson of Charing
Cross and Westminster Medical School in London. Molecular geneticists at the
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory contributed to several of the groups'
efforts.

   ''All these reports are the fruit of work for several years,'' said Johnson.
''As far as we can see, we all have gotten the same result.'' The work, he said,
''has gone amazingly fast.''

   Although the groups of researchers had raced each other to isolate the gene,
they shared most of their results as they went along, and much of their work was
paid for by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Association.

   Two weeks ago in the British journal Nature, essentially the same groups said
they had identified the approximate location of the myotonic dystrophy gene and
said they would soon nail it down. The rivalries of science, in which
publication date generally determines who gets credit for a discovery, were
clear in yesterday's announcement of success.

   Caskey at Texas said his group submitted its paper on the specific defect
first, on January 21, to Science, and he said the groups at MIT and in the
United Kingdom did not send their manuscript to Cell until February 5. Yet the
Cell papers are appearing in a publication with an earlier date after Cell's
editors elected to run it immediately. ''We're just glad that Science moved up
the release date'' in response to the prompt Cell publication, Caskey said.

   PROBLEM SITE: CHROMOSOME 19

   The results show that the defect is on chromosome 19, one of the 23 pairs of
chromosomes whose long coils of DNA molecules carry the 100,000 or so human
genes. The genetic code inscribed in DNA has been deciphered as a series of
linked molecules called nucleotides, with groups of three forming individual
''words'' used as instructions in assembling proteins.

   Four kinds of nucleotides, labeled A, T, G and C, are the building blocks of
the genetic code. The new announcement shows that myotonic dystrophy is linked
to unusual strings of the sequence CGT, one after the other, on chromosome 19.
At the location of the defect, most people have five to 13 set of the sequence,
but the number is much higher in members of families in which the disease is
common.

   People with 50 or more copies may have mild cases of the disease, the
scientists said, whereas severe cases are associated with strings of 100 to
thousands of the sequence.

   The error is in a section of the gene that controls production of an enzyme,
but the enzyme itself, a member of a family of substances called protein
kinases, does not appear to be defective in structure, Caskey said.  More
likely, the repeated segment causes the enzyme to be produced either too much or
too little, or at the wrong time, and the bigger the repeat the more it disrupts
normal production of the enzyme.

   NEXT STEP

   The next step, Caskey said, is to find out exactly what the enzyme does and
find ways, through drugs or gene therapy, to compensate for the havoc wrought by
the repeated section.

   Also under study is the reason the defect may grow as it passes from
generation to generation. Caskey said evidence is strong that, for unknown
reasons, the gene-copying mechanism that puts a woman's share of her genes into
unfertilized eggs in the ovary may increase the number of repeated segments,
while the similar process in development of sperm will pass on an existing
repeated segment but is unlikely to make it worse.



                             1492 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 21, 1992, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 175 words

HEADLINE: Gene that causes muscular dystrophy isolated

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    Just two weeks after scientists reported finding the genetic pattern that
signals adult muscular dystrophy, scientists now say they've isolated the gene
that causes it.

   Experts say that rapid feat allows scientists to ''begin to think
intelligently'' about how the disease works and treatment possibilities, says C.
Thomas Caskey, Baylor College of Medicine.

   Long-term options may include drugs and gene therapy.

   Myotonic muscular dystrophy affects 1 in 7,000 to 8,000 worldwide, causing
muscle loss and weakness in early adulthood. In their 50s or 60s, patients'
hearts and lungs fail.

   Caskey's group and six others in the USA and elsewhere, working independently
but sharing information, located the gene on chromosome 19.

   Three of the groups' reports are in today's Cell; Caskey's and three others
appear in the March 6 Science.

   Norine Stirpe of the Muscular Dystrophy Association, which helped fund the
efforts, says researchers should continue to produce quick results, and ''we can
hopefully learn more about other diseases.''


                             1493 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          February 19, 1992 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. C07

LENGTH: 1056 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY IS FORCE FOR GOOD, NOT EVIL

BYLINE: JOSEPH D. DeLUCA

BODY:

   Wednesday, February 19, 1992 BIOTECHNOLOGY IS FORCE FOR GOOD, NOT EVIL

   Summary: Answers to disease, hunger are at our fingertips -- if we  aren't
frightened off

   To many people, the term ``biotechnology'' conjures up images of mad
scientists laboring over bubbling test tubes in a dungeon laboratory, trying  to
create either a new breed of superhumans or a hybrid species of killer  ants.
But far from this eerie notion, the process by which scientists alter  the very
building blocks of life is one that promises to revolutionize the  world.

   Deep within the cells of all living things lies the genetic code that gives
each animal and plant its distinctive characteristics and allows it to
reproduce. The structure of the DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, that makes up
this code is the same for everything from tuxedoed penguins and long-necked
giraffes to giant saguaro cactuses and tiny four-leaf clovers. And whether  they
understood it or not, man's ancestors tampered with this genetic code  when they
accidentally or purposely used selective breeding to develop better  horses,
tastier corn and stronger brew.

   The principles behind this process were first understood in the mid-1860s  as
a result of Austrian botanist Gregor Mendel's famous study of the  hereditary
traits of peas. But it was not until 1972, when a team of  researchers in
California successfully transferred a gene from one organism to a completely
different one, that modern biotechnology was born. Today,  scientists can do
such amazing things as identify and map DNA sequences,  produce large quantities
of DNA from trace amounts and selectively inhibit  genes from carrying out their
protein-producing function.

   These and other advances have fortunately come at a time when diseases are
ravaging the lives of millions and starvation is plaguing an ever-growing  Third
World population. Faced with these problems, biotechnology is fast  becoming one
of the most effective weapons in man's battle against disease and hunger.

   Biotechnology is clearly having some of its greatest impact in the area of
medical science. The first great breakthrough came when scientists were able  to
produce human insulin in the laboratory. Now biotech is beginning to  unravel
the mysteries of diseases long thought incurable. Identification of  the genes
that cause hereditary disorders, faster diagnosis of many illnesses  and the
promise of gene therapy are sending shock waves through the medical  community.

   One such case is cystic fibrosis. The most common fatal genetic disease in
the United States, it affects 30,000 children and young adults who rarely live
past their 20s. Although a cure for this disorder has not been found, much
excitement and optimism were stirred when scientists discovered the gene that
causes cystic fibrosis in 1989. Already, the gene's defect has been fixed in
the laboratory and a cure could be developed within five to 10 years.

   More than 50 other disease-related genes also have been identified. And the
treatment of various other diseases is further being aided by biotechnology as
scientists perfect the technique of gene therapy. By taking good genes from a
healthy donor, inserting them into a patient's cells and returning these cells
to the patient's body, doctors can begin to cure a disease that has already
struck. Many are looking forward to using this technique to treat ailments  such
as leukemia, hemophilia, Alzheimer's, epilepsy, Parkinson's, dwarfism,  liver
and bone marrow disease and even cancer.

   Helping farmers turn out more hogs, potatoes and buckwheat at cheaper  prices
is another way the science of DNA-slicing is reshaping our world. And  not a
moment too soon. With world population expected to reach 10 billion  within 40
to 50 years, getting the most out of every acre of farmland is  becoming
critically important.

   So far, agricultural productivity of basic crops such as wheat and rice  have
been increased 12-fold over their ``natural'' levels; 75 percent of this  due to
plant breeding and genetic improvement. In fact, the world is producing 250
percent more grain than it did in 1950. Food surpluses have caused  Argentina
and the United States alone to put aside enough developed farm land  to feed 1.2
billion people on high-protein corn.

   Elsewhere on our farms and in our fields, bovine somatotropin is another of
biotechnology's best success stories. BST is a protein found naturally in cows
that controls their milk production. Thanks to advances in biotech, we can now
manufacture our own BST in the laboratory, which when given to Elsie, will
cause her to make many more buckets of milk without the slightest ill effect.
In fact, just a small amount of increased BST will yield up to 30 percent more
milk per cow per day without any additional feed. Governments around the world
have already given milk from BST-treated cows the thumbs-up, and its  wide-scale
use is just around the corner.

   With the wondrous array of benefits biotechnology promises mankind, the  only
thing capable of preventing it from fulfilling its phenomenal potential  is the
suspicion and fear of an uninformed public. Images of mad scientists,  dungeon
laboratories and invincible creatures certainly combine to make  biotechnology a
scary prospect. And sensible controls must indeed be  implemented to ensure that
the technology is used in an ethical manner. After  all, no sane person wants to
live in a ``brave new world'' where human  characteristics are predetermined and
babies are grown for spare parts.

   But it must be realized that every advancement has both a good side and a
bad side: Fire can heat food or burn buildings; scalpels can aid surgery or
facilitate murder; and nuclear energy can power cities or lay them waste. It
would be one of mankind's gravest blunders to allow a few theoretical  negatives
to outweigh the awesome and overwhelming benefits of biotechnology.

   Joseph D. DeLuca is a research associate in oligonucleotide synthesis at  the
Yale University School of Medicine's W.M. Keck Foundation Biotechnology
Research Laboratory. He is also an adviser to the Committee For A Constructive
Tomorrow, a Washington, D.C., non-profit organization promoting free-market  and
technological solutions to consumer and environmental concerns.

   ILLUSTRATION: Drawing By Newsday/ANTHONY D'ADAMO - Vegetables

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1494 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    February 16, 1992, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Book Review; Page 6; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 301 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF:  NON FICTION

BYLINE: By CHRIS GOODRICH

BODY:

   SHADES OF GREY: Ordinary People in Extraordinary Circumstances by Barry
Siegel (Bantam Books: $20; 304 pp.). No question -- Barry Siegel, a roving
correspondent for this newspaper, has produced a strong, early contender for
Best Book With Worst Title, 1992. Just about everything is wrong with the title,
just as most things about the book itself are right; "Shades of Grey" is in fact
full of life and color, and deals with very interesting people whose stories are
not extraordinary so much as overflowing with intellectual uncertainty.
Ambiguity lies at the book's heart -- that's what the title wants to get across
-- and Siegel deserves much credit for treating it as a fact of many people's
lives rather than as something to be swept under the journalistic rug. Siegel
catches people not when their conflicts are resolved, or at least well-defined,
but betwixt and between: when research scientists disagree with physicians' use
of their discoveries, when lawyers and judges find that existing law produces
injustice, when doctors must determine with scant information the viability of a
fetus. Siegel does the conventional reporting required in newspaper stories --
most of those collected here were first published in The Times -- but he goes
further, getting many people to reveal their deepest fears and misgivings. A
doctor unpopular in the medical community for pushing experimental gene therapy
says he doesn't know if he's right, saying that "Most pioneers by definition
flame out"; a young lawyer in a death- penalty case moves for a mistrial --
based on his own failure to subpoena an FBI agent who might have cleared his
client. This is superior journalism, dealing with what Siegel calls "continual,
subterranean news," and one can only hope it's the start of a trend.


                             1495 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1992 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            February 16, 1992 Sunday
                                 SECOND Edition

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS TEAM GENETICS, MARROW FOR AIDS BATTLE

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   Sunday, February 16, 1992 RESEARCHERS TEAM GENETICS, MARROW FOR AIDS BATTLE

   Research scientists say a new combination of genetic therapy and  bone-marrow
transplants will be used to try to cure patients of AIDS-related  cancer and rid
them of the virus that causes the deadly disease.

   A clinical study to be conducted in Seattle is the first to use human gene
therapy as a potential treatment for the human immunodeficiency virus
infection, which causes AIDS. The study received final approval this week from
the National Institutes of Health's recombinant DNA advisory committee, the
Seattle Post-Intelligencer reported Wednesday.

   The study will be conducted jointly by scientists at Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center and Targeted Genetics Corp. It is scheduled to begin
immediately, with five to 15 patients in its first phase.

   Bone-marrow transplants have been unsuccessful in clearing HIV-infected
cells from AIDS patients. But the Seattle procedure will take the experiment a
step further, scientists said.

   The transplant will be followed by genetically modified cells that
specifically seek out and kill whatever HIV-infected cells remain in the
patient after the transplant.

   The study will be limited to people who are infected with HIV and suffer
from lymphoma. But researchers said last week that the experimental technique
possibly could be used to prevent AIDS in anyone with HIV.

   ``The approach is potentially applicable to all HIV-infected individuals,''
said Dr. Philip Greenberg, a nationally recognized immunologist at Fred
Hutchinson and professor of immunology at the University of Washington.

   A bone-marrow transplant, an accepted form of treatment for many kinds of
cancer, replaces a patient's diseased immune  with healthy donor marrow cells.
Some scientists believe these are the same blood-forming cells that can retain
HIV.

   For HIV cells that remain in a lymphoma patient after a transplant,
scientists will genetically reproduce and modify certain immune system cells,
called killer T-cells, to hunt down and destroy HIV.

   ``We hope these killer cells will eradicate the HIV infection,'' said Dr.
Robert Overell, director of Targeted Genetics.

   About 10,000 people nationwide are expected to be diagnosed with
AIDS-related lymphoma this year. More than 200,000 in the United States have
AIDS, acquired immune deficiency syndrome.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1496 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           February 15, 1992 Saturday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: NEW MARROW, GENE THERAPY PROPOSED FOR AIDS PATIENTS

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   Saturday, February 15, 1992 NEW MARROW, GENE THERAPY PROPOSED FOR AIDS
PATIENTS

   Research scientists say a new combination of genetic therapy and  bone-marrow
transplants will be used to try to cure patients of AIDS-related  cancer and rid
them of the virus that causes the deadly disease.

   A clinical study to be conducted in Seattle is the first to use human gene
therapy as a potential treatment for the human immunodeficiency virus
infection, which causes AIDS. The study received final approval this week from
the National Institutes of Health's recombinant DNA advisory committee, the
Seattle Post-Intelligencer reported Wednesday.

   The study will be conducted jointly by scientists at Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center and Targeted Genetics Corp. It is scheduled to begin
immediately, with five to 15 patients in its first phase.

   Bone-marrow transplants have been unsuccessful in clearing HIV-infected
cells from AIDS patients. But the Seattle procedure will take the experiment a
step further, scientists said.

   The transplant will be followed by genetically modified cells that
specifically seek out and kill whatever HIV-infected cells remain in the
patient after the transplant.

   The study will be limited to people who are infected with HIV and suffer
from lymphoma. But researchers said Wednesday that the experimental technique
could possibly be used to prevent AIDS in anyone with HIV.

   ``The approach is potentially applicable to all HIV-infected individuals,''
said Dr. Philip Greenberg, a nationally recognized immunologist at Fred
Hutchinson and professor of immunology at the University of Washington.

   A bone-marrow transplant, an accepted form of treatment for many kinds of
cancer, replaces a patient's diseased immune  with healthy donor marrow cells.
Some scientists believe these are the same blood-forming cells that can retain
HIV.

   For HIV cells that remain in a lymphoma patient after a transplant,
scientists will genetically reproduce and modify certain immune system cells,
called killer T-cells, to hunt down and destroy HIV.

   ``We hope these killer cells will eradicate the HIV infection,'' said Dr.
Robert Overell, director of Targeted Genetics.

   About 10,000 people nationwide are expected to be diagnosed with
AIDS-related lymphoma this year. More than 200,000 in the United States have
AIDS, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, including nearly 3,000 Washington
state residents and more than 1,200 in Oregon.

   Targeted Genetics Corp., a biotechnology company that helped develop the
genetic therapy, had existed as a subsidiary of the Immunex Corp. The firm is
now an independent company, though Immunex will retain a 40 percent  ownership.

   In the new procedure, a patient's killer cells, called CD8 HIV-specific
cytotoxic T-cells, will be isolated from the patient's blood  Using the
techniques of genetic engineering, these cells are mass-produced in lab
culture.

   But before the cells are injected into the body to boost the immune system,
researchers must have a way to control them.

   Dr. Stephen Lupton at Immunex has created a ``suicide gene'' that can cause a
cell to self-destruct when exposed to the common herpes drug, ganciclovir.  By
inserting this suicide gene into the mass-produced killer cells, the
researchers believe they can control their behavior.

   Even if all active HIV cells are killed, Greenberg said, it's not certain
whether this new approach will eliminate all the cells that are infected. HIV
may be dormant long enough to escape detection, he said.

   Results of the treatment should be apparent within a month, but it may take
more than a year to see  HIV has been completely eliminated, Greenberg said.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1497 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   The Economy

   House Democrats began working on an alternative to Bush's tax legislation,
centered on temporary tax credits of up to $400 for 80 percent of all taxpayers,
a permanent one percentage point reduction in the corporate tax rate and a
modest cut in taxes on capital gains. [Page A1.]

   Retail sales rose 0.6 percent in January, the Commerce Dept. said, in one of
the first important reports to signal a possible economic rebound. The increase
was the largest in eight months in a crucial sector of the economy. [A1.]

   Sales of U.S.-built cars and light trucks rose 23.8 percent in early
February, auto makers reported, in what analysts called the strongest sign of
improvement since summer. [D1.]

   The cellular telephone industry is growing faster than ever, with an
estimated 7.5 million users last year. [D2.]

   The S.E.C. proposed that companies disclose executive compensation more
clearly and ordered them to give stockholders the right to vote on executive
pay. [D5.]

   The first commercial test of gene therapy, a potentially revolutionary
technique that could cure hereditary diseases and might also help in fighting
diseases like AIDS and cancer, has been cleared by a Federal review panel. [D1.]

   Most restrictions on farm chemicals shown to cause cancer in lab animals were
lifted by the E.P.A. [A14.]

   A judge struck down a San Francisco ordinance that was the only U.S. law
aimed at regulating the purchase and use of video display terminals in private
businesses. [A14.]

Companies

    Ford Motor lost $475.7 million in the quarter, it said, on revenues of
$21.98 billion, capping a year with its largest deficit ever. [D1.]

   Colgate-Palmolive agreed to acquire Mennen for $670 million in stock and
cash, a "strategic acquisition" to increase its presence in personal-care
products. [D1.]

   The New York Post's owner wants to buy The Daily News. The expected bid is
said to have the backing of Bankers Trust. [A1.]

   Revco agreed to pay Jack Eckerd $7.5 million to drop its takeover bid. [D4.]

International

   Daihatsu will stop importing vehicles to the U.S. because of mounting
financial losses. [D4.]

Markets

   There was a big selloff in the credit markets, helped by data carrying the
scent of economic recovery. Also contributing to the decline in prices was the
weight of unsold inventories of securities amassed by dealers during the
Treasury refunding. [D1.]

   Stocks fell sharply as hopes of a further Fed easing began evaporating. The
Dow fell 30.18, to 3,246.65. [D6.]

   Crude oil prices moved sharply higher as traders speculated that OPEC
ministers would soon agree to cut production. [D13.]

   The dollar climbed and gold prices fell after the Government reported
unexpectedly strong economic figures. [D13.]

Today's Columns

   The bad old 80's were a lot like the good old 60's, except for one vital
dimension: poverty did not ease as the economy grew. While poverty shrank by a
quarter in those golden Kennedy-Johnson years, it was actually higher at the end
of the Reagan boom than in 1979. Economic Scene. [D2.]

   Westmark International is the latest reflection of the theory that the sum of
the parts is greater than the whole. Floyd Norris: Market Place. [D6.]

   Pepsi is planning a marketing blitz for Diet Pepsi, eager to translate the
success of its Ray Charles campaign into sales. Stuart Elliott: Advertising.
[D19.]

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992


                             1498 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1488 words

HEADLINE: Commercial Test of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK,  Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 13

BODY:

   A Federal review panel has cleared the way for the first commercial test of
gene therapy, a potentially revolutionary technique that could cure hereditary
diseases and might also help in fighting diseases like AIDS and cancer.

   The Recombinant Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health,
which oversees gene therapy experiments, on Tuesday gave permission to
researchers associated with the Targeted Genetics Corporation of Seattle to
implant genetically modified cells into patients with AIDS in hopes of helping
them fight the disease. The test had already been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration.

Marking a Milestone



    Targeted Genetics, which is a subsidiary of the Immunex Corporation, a
biotechnology company, said it would be the first clinical trial of gene therapy
to be run by a company. The test would mark a milestone on the way to
commercialization, which could come in the second half of this decade.

   There have been several previous tests of gene therapy, but they have been
run by individual physicians, such as those associated with the National
Institutes of Health. Another company, Genetic Therapy Inc., while not having
organized its own clinical trials, has been collaborating with and supplying
materials to most of these researchers, such as Dr. W. French Anderson at the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   Gene therapy involves implanting genes, which provide the hereditary
instructions that control the body's features and functions, into patients. A
hemophiliac, for instance lacks the ability to produce factors that cause the
blood to clot. With gene therapy, such a patient could be given genes to allow
him to produce the clotting factor, thereby doing away with the need for
periodic injections.

   "If you're really doing the right kind of job, one kind of gene therapy
application would cure a patient for a lifetime," said K. Michael Forrest,
president of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a gene therapy company in Cambridge,
Mass.

   Sickle cell anemia and cystic fibrosis are other hereditary diseases that
gene therapy could potentially cure. Even for nonhereditary diseases, genes
could be implanted to allow the body to make chemicals that would otherwise have
to be given as drugs.

   "This is a whole new way of delivering medicine," said John Archer, executive
vice president of the Somatix Therapy Corporation, a gene therapy company in
Alameda, Calif.

   Gene therapy has attracted a host of start-up companies of which two --
Somatix and Genetic Therapy, of Gaithersburg, Md., -- have already issued stock
publicly. And some big drug companies, led by Sandoz Ltd. are also getting
involved, in part by alliances with smaller companies.

Others Plan Trials

    Others will enter clinical trials this year as well. Viagene Inc., based in
San Diego, plans to apply for permission to begin clinical trials on AIDS
patients in March and Somatix hopes to begin testing the technique in cancer
patients later this year. Vical Inc., of San Diego, also plans to begin a trial
on AIDS patients before the end of the year.

   But despite its promise, gene therapy faces an inordinate number of safety,
technical and marketing issues before it can become a successful treatment.

   "It's one thing to treat individual patients," said Cynthia Robbins-Roth,
editor of Bioventure View, a newsletter that follows biotechnology. "It's quite
another to come up with a commercially successful product."

   Ideally, for example, pharmaceutical companies would like to sell genes in a
jar or a syringe, like any other drug, that could be injected into a patient.

   But gene therapy as currently practiced is far more cumbersome. It involves
removing skin cells, blood cells or other types of cells from a patient, growing
those cells in a culture, putting genes into them and then putting the cells
back into the body.

   Such a complex procedure is not likely to be used except for serious
diseases. Moreover, such a procedure makes gene therapy more of a service
business than a traditional pharmaceutical business, perhaps requiring gene
therapy companies to set up their own clinics.

   Another looming business issue is the ownership of genes. Many of the
companies working on gene therapy do not have patent rights to genetic sequences
that could be useful in treatment, forcing them to license them from companies
that do.

   But perhaps a bigger obstacle is safety. As now generally practiced, viruses,
which have the ability of inserting their own genetic material into target
cells, are used as genetic delivery vehicles. The virus's own genetic material
is removed and replaced by the therapeutic gene, like the gene to produce the
blood clotting factor needed by hemophiliacs. The virus is also rendered
incapable of reproducing and causing an infection.

   There are two main risks with this. One stems from the fact that the virus
inserts the new genetic material at random into the chromosomes of the target
cell. There is a chance that the viral genes could land on top of a
cancer-suppressing gene and inactivate it, or land on top of a cancer-causing
gene and turn it on.

   A second risk is that the viral delivery van could somehow become active
again, or become contaminated with active viruses. Researchers say that both
risks are extremely small.

   Concerns were stirred in December when Dr. Arthur Nienhuis, chief of the
clinical hematology branch at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
reported that three of eight monkeys involved in a gene therapy experiment
developed fast-growing cancers, apparently because of the virus used.

   Dr. Nienhuis and other experts said that the disabled viruses were known in
advance to be contaminated with viruses capable of replication. In human trials,
testing is done to make sure the viruses cannot replicate themselves. Still, the
results were disquieting because it had always been believed that the viruses
used, while capable of infecting mice, would not cause disease in humans and
other primates.

   "The Achilles' heel of this gene therapy thing is the safety issue," said
Richard Bock of Sutro & Company in Los Angeles, who thinks it will be hard for
companies using the virus approach to win approval for their therapies. These
companies are Genetic Therapy, Somatix, Viagene and Targeted Genetics, which
will be spun out into a separate company in which Immunex will retain a minority
stake.

   These companies point out that all medical treatments carry some risks and
that they are confident safety problems can be overcome.

   In the trial approved Tuesday for Targeted Genetics, doctors at the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle will remove white blood cells from
patients with AIDS who have undergone bone marrow transplants. The cells, known
as killer T cells, will be genetically altered, multiplied and put back in the
body to attack the AIDS virus.

   But the genetic alteration of the T cells will not make them better at
fighting AIDS, although that is the ultimate goal. In the first trial the cells
will be given a marker gene to allow them to be traced in the body. The
implanted gene will also serve as a "suicide gene" that will make those cells
susceptible to being killed by a common antibiotic. That way, if the implanted
cells cause harm, they can be destroyed, said Dr. Philip Greenberg, who is the
lead investigator.

   Viagene also hopes to use genetic therapy to fight AIDS. If plans to
genetically alter skin cells so that they produce a protein found on the outer
coat of the AIDS virus. The skin cells, once introduced back in the body, would
produce the AIDS virus protein and stimulate an immune response.

   Somatix plans to begin clinical trials this year of a treatment for cancer.
Cells from a patient's tumor would be genetically altered to produce certain
immune-stimulating chemicals in hopes of stimulating a stronger immune attack on
the cancer.

   Other companies are working on gene therapies that do not involve viruses.
But these are in an earlier stage of development.

   Transkaryotic Therapies and Cell Genesys of Foster City, Calif. are
developing nonviral ways of implanting genes into cells taken from the body. ,

   Vical has found that genetic material can be injected directly into muscle
cells, doing away both with viruses and with the need to remove cells and
reimplant them.

   Targetech Inc., based in Meriden, Conn., is developing a technique to allow
genes to be injected and to find their way to a proper organ. The company hopes,
for instance, to implant genes to make the liver more effective in cleaning
cholesterol out of the bloodstream.

   But injecting genes directly into the body could also pose risks because it
might not be easy to control what the genes do. When cells are removed from the
body to be genetically altered it is possible to study what happens to the cells
first before putting them back.

CORRECTION-DATE: February 21, 1992, Friday

CORRECTION:

   An article about gene therapy in Business Day on Feb. 14 referred incorrectly
to the relationships of the parties in a clinical trial of the technology
approved last week by the Recombinant Advisory Committee of the National
Institutes of Health. The trial will be run by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center in Seattle. The Targeted Genetics Corporation is providing
financial support and collaborating with the center; the company received the
approval from the Food and Drug Administration to test the genetic transfer
mechanism used in the trial.


GRAPHIC: Chart/Diagram: The following companies are developing gene therapy
techniques that initially will use disabled viruses.

Genetic Therapy Inc., Gaithersburg, Md., publicly traded.
   Targets: ADA deficiency, cancer, hemophilia, cystic fibrosis

Somatix Therapy Corporation, Alameda, Calif., publicly traded.
   Targets: Cancer, neurological diseases, hemophilia

Targeted Genetics Corporation, Seattle, Owned by Immunex, which is publicly
traded, the company will be spun out as a privately held company.
   Targets: AIDS, cytomegalovirus infection

Viagene Inc., San Diego, private.
   Targets: AIDS, cancer, hepatitis-B

How Viruses Are Used In Gene Therapy

    1) Cells are collected from the patient.

    2) In a laboratory, disabled viruses are used to introduce genes into the
cells.

    3) The genetically altered cells are reinjected into the body.

    4) Once in the body, the cells will produce the needed protein or hormone.

Other Approaches to Gene Therapy

    The following private companies hope to inject genes directly into the body
or to modify cells outside the body without viruses.

Cell Genesys, Inc., Foster City, Calif.
   Approach: Modifying cells as they divided.
   Targets: AIDS, Macular degeneration (eye disease)

Targetech, Inc., Meriden, Conn.
   Approach: Injecting genes directly into the bloodstream.
   Targets: Hemophilia, high cholesterol

Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., Cambridge, Mass.
   Approach: Using chemical or physical means to introduce genes into cells that
have been extracted
   Targets: Hemophilia, short stature, anemia

Vical Inc., San Diego
   Approach: Injecting genetic material directly into muscle cells.
   Targets: AIDS, muscular dystrophy.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992


                             1499 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 14, 1992 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D-3

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firms like plan to patent genes;
Some view NIH move as an opportunity

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The National Institutes of Health's move to file patent applications for
2,375 newly identified human brain genes has drawn support from a sampling of
San Diego biotechnology executives. In the wake of the NIH announcement earlier
this week, Nature, a British journal, reported news of a possible shortcut for
gene identification developed by NIH scientists. "This technique is so rapid, we
expect by the end of this year 20,000 human genes will have been identified
worldwide," said Craig Venter, the NIH scientist who is leading the gene
identification project. The work significantly advances research toward improved
diagnosis, treatment and eventual prevention of genetic diseases.

   The technique and data will be shared with other researchers, Venter said.
The method is likely to speed work on the Human Genome Project, a worldwide
effort, sponsored in the United States by the departments of Health and Human
Services and Energy, to identify and map all the genes in the human body. Every
person has between 50,000 and 100,000 genes, which contain the blueprint for
everything from eye color to disease risk.

   Gene therapy involves inserting genes with correct information into cells
with defective genes, or putting in new genes that carry instructions for
production of disease-fighting substances. "We at NIH are concerned that the
public benefits from these recent discoveries through the rapid development of
health care products," said NIH Director Bernadine Healy.

   "Our patent applications may provide an incentive to industry to maintain
costly research for product development. "NIH has an obligation to ensure the
public benefits from discoveries funded through tax dollars," she said. There
have been concerns in some segments of industry and academia about the
government monopolizing genetic patents.

   However, local biotech officials contacted yesterday supported the NIH patent
policy. "It is a method by which the taxpayers who financed this research can
claim ownership by licensing it out in an orderly fashion and recoup the costs
(of development)," said Jerry Caulder, chief executive officer of Mycogen Corp.
and chairman of the Industrial Biotechnology Association." Caulder added that
with an growingly competitive world economy, it was increasingly likely that
unprotected technology developed at U.S taxpayer expense might be developed
abroad. "Technology is the raw material of today," said Caulder.

   "If we're going to be the technology (source) for the world, we've got to
figure how to retain the value added to that technology rather than just give it
gratis to someone else." Robert Abbott, chief executive of Viagene, Inc. a
company developing gene therapeutics, said government patents could broaden
commercialization of genetic technology. "The government has a long history of
favoring non-exclusive licenses," said Abbott. "On the other hand, I'd be
concerned if a business or a small company got ahead of everyone else and (was
patenting genes)," said Abbott.

   He explained that corporations would be more likely to offer exclusive
licenses -- access for just one party -- to the patented genes, limiting
commercial exploitation. Similarly, Robert Zaugg, vice president of Vical Inc.,
also developing gene therapeutics, agreed that NIH patents will likely broaden
commercial access to genetic information.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1500 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           February 13, 1992 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 209 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE OF REGROWING HEARTNOTEBOOK

BYLINE: From wire reports

BODY:

   Thursday, February 13, 1992 GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE OF REGROWING HEART

   NOTEBOOK

   Researchers have triggered the growth of new blood vessels in  animals'
hearts by injecting genetic material directly into the cells of the  heart wall.

   The genes, which produce a chemical that promotes blood vessel growth,
produced a 30 percent to 40 percent increase in capillaries in the heart wall,
one of the researchers said.

   In related research, the scientists also reported that injection of genes
directly into skeletal muscle cells turns the cells into protein factories  that
can produce insulin for diabetics or make the clotting protein that
hemophiliacs are lacking, said Dr. Eliav Barr of the University of Michigan  and
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

   Barr said the ability to promote the growth of new blood vessels in the
heart could potentially be a useful treatment for the 750,000 Americans who
have heart attacks each year as a result of narrowing of their coronary
arteries.

   The theory is that if new arteries could be grown to supply the heart, then
the heart muscle would not lose its blood supply.

   It is also conceivable that the technique could be used to insert genes  that
would trigger the growth of new heart muscle after a heart attack.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1501 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 13, 1992, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A16

LENGTH: 867 words

HEADLINE: NIH Seeks Patent Protection for Human Genes;
Move Renews Controversy Over Control of Commercial Uses of Key Biotech Research

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Malcolm Gladwell, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The National Institutes of Health yesterday filed patent applications on
2,300 human genes, in an extension of its controversial attempt to control the
commercial exploitation of federal genetic research.

   The applications, which will be added to a much smaller patent filing made by
NIH last summer, mean that the U.S. government is now laying claim to about 5
percent of the genes found in the human body.

   The move was criticized by some scientists, who said that the government's
policy is an abuse of the patent system and could hinder development of new
genetic therapies.

   But NIH Director Bernadine P. Healy said yesterday that the patent filing was
only a "defensive" measure to preserve the agency's legal options while it
decided what is in the best interests of science.

   "We would like to foster and encourage the debate over gene patenting," she
said. "This is something that needs to be debated in the international
community." Because the genes under consideration are likely to be the basis of
a new generation of genetic therapies and drugs, she said, "I don't think there
is any doubt that the biotech industry is going to be as important to this
country as the car industry was."

   The government action yesterday resulted from the work of a team headed by J.
Craig Venter, a scientist at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke. Venter and his colleagues, like numerous scientists around the
world, are engaged in the process of decoding the strands of DNA that make up
the estimated 50,000 to 100,000 human genes.

   Venter, however, has taken a shortcut. Instead of decoding the entire genetic
sequence and then determining exactly where each gene lies and what function it
plays in the body, he has decoded only one critically distinctive fragment of
the gene that can be used to identify and explain the entire gene much as a
fingerprint can be used to identify a man or woman.

   Last summer, Venter published 347 of these fragments in the journal Science.
Today, in the journal Nature, he published another 2,300 fragments; by the end
of this year, he predicted that both his lab and others will have a reading on
about one-fourth of all human genes.

   Under patent law there is no prohibition against patenting something that
occurs naturally, so long as it is packaged in something man-made. That is what
Venter has done, by taking the key fragment of genetic code and placing inside a
man-made molecule. The patent application is filed on the entire compound
molecule.

   A more difficult issue concerns the requirement that an inventor prove his
creation has "utility" and precisely describe its practical use. In the case of
a gene, for example, a complete description would detail the functions that
strand of DNA plays in the body. But because of Venter's shortcut, he and his
team do not yet know what each of the genes actually does. It is not known what
utility the patent applications claim, although attorneys speculated that the
applications will stress the material's use as laboratory reagents or some
similar function.

   Whether this will be a problem at the patent office is unclear. One factor in
NIH's favor, according to Washington patent lawyer Iver Cooper, is that U.S.
patent law "doesn't ask for much in the way of utility," compared with laws in
other countries.

   But while the utility requirement may end up not being a problem for NIH,
many biotech industry officials and scientists say that it should.

   They say that if the patents are granted on such flimsy utility grounds, the
system will be flooded with vague patent claims, resulting in rewards for those
who may not have done the work to actually prove a gene's specific usefulness.

   "It's premature to give them a patent," said Norton Zinder, a geneticist at
Rockefeller University. "They don't even know what they have."

   Other scientists worry that giving NIH control over so many genes would give
the agency undue power over the future of the biotechnology industry,
discouraging some companies from pursuing certain projects and allowing NIH to
decide who gets access to which promising genes.

   "If you're in the business of making therapies or diagnostic tools," said
John McLaughlin, general counsel for Genentech, a genetic-research firm, "you
could find yourself in a tough position if Uncle Sam's got [the patent] or wants
to give it to someone else."

   However, Healy said that such fears are unfounded. Under international patent
law, the NIH had to file for patents on the genes at the same time as Venter's
paper was published or the agency would forever lose any claim to the material.
The filing, she said, was an interim "defensive" measure while the NIH
negotiates with other countries and scientists about how best to "foster the
growth of the new and emerging biotech industry."

   Reid Adler, head of the NIH office of technology transfer, also pointed out
that if the NIH did not apply for patents on the Venter sequences, and the
information entered the public domain, even greater problems might result.
Companies could be dissuaded from pursuing certain gene research because they
would be unable to get patent protection for their products.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, BERNARDINE P. HEALY.


                             1502 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 8, 1992, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: Biologists see ways to cheat death

BYLINE: By David L. Chandler, Globe Staff

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:

   Death may not be as sure as taxes after all.

   Biologists have found that there may be virtually no inherent limit to the
human life span and that there may someday be ways of dramatically increasing
the length of life by techniques such as gene therapy. But they warned that such
practical applications of their research are still a long way off.

   While the findings are controversial, the scientists reporting their work
here at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science are convinced that their work with fruit flies, roundworms and mammals
shows that what have been seen as natural limits to longevity are just the
predictable result of evolutionary selection. They say those limits can be
greatly expanded by tampering with the selection process.

   In one study, selective breeding produced fruit flies with almost twice the
normal life span, and in another, altering a single gene in roundworms doubled
their life span.

   "Aging is a problem that in its most basic sense has been solved," said
Michael Rose, professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of
California, Irvine. His research, Rose said, shows "how you can use the forces
of molecular evolution to delay aging" under laboratory conditions.

   Rose explained that the basic problem of aging stems from the fact that
"evolution doesn't care how long you live, it only cares about your fitness,
which really means your reproductive fitness," he said. "The deterioration of
aging begins when you reach reproductive age."

   But that can be changed, he said, based his conclusion on his work with fruit
flies. Thomas Johnson of the University of Colorado has done similar research
with a species of roundworm.

   If genes responsible for aging can be identified, they say, it might
eventually lead to gene replacement therapy that could increase human life
spans. Rose said he does not expect that to happen in his lifetime.


   The question of whether or not there is an inherent upper limit to human life
spans has been the subject of a raging debate among biologists. Leading the camp
of those who believe in such inborn limits is James Fries, a rheumatologist at
Stanford University, who has written that for humans the limit is about 85
years.

   In a telephone interview yesterday, Fries agreed that the kind of genetic
manipulations proposed by Rose and Johnson to increase longevity are a
theoretical possibility.

   The idea of isolating genes that could confer longer life is "less fanciful
than some of the immortality theories." While he said "I wouldn't hold my breath
waiting for it," the limits he has claimed exist are based on "the human genetic
state as we know it. If someone unlocks the secrets of genetic aging, all bets
are off. We're in a new world."

   That's just the world that Rose believes we are entering. "Aging used to be
mysterious, and now it isn't," he said. "For the first time in human history,
there is a real possibility of affecting the aging process with biomedical
intervention."

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992


                             1503 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    February 8, 1992, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS DRAW BACK VEIL ON THE MYSTERY OF AGING;
MEDICINE: SUCCESS IN EXTENDING ANIMALS' LIVES THROUGH 'METHUSELAH' GENES MAY
LEAD TO LONGER HUMAN LIFE SPAN.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:

   A growing body of animal evidence suggests that it eventually may be possible
to extend normal human life spans beyond the currently accepted norm of about 70
years.

   Findings presented Friday give new perspective to the mystery of aging, a
research field that has yielded only isolated clues over the years. But recently
the findings of scientists have begun to mesh with one another.

   At a meeting of the American Assn. for the Advancement of Science, scientists
from California and Colorado reported that they have been able to extend the
life spans of fruit flies and the common roundworm by manipulation of what some
call "Methuselah" genes.

   Intriguingly, one of these genes seems to operate by the same mechanism as
the caloric restriction that many scientists, including UCLA pathologist Roy
Walford, have shown will increase the life span of rodents and even some
primates. Until recently, such restriction of food intake was the only way known
to extend life spans.

   That gene is the blueprint for an enzyme that destroys highly reactive
molecules called free radicals, which form naturally in the body and are thought
to speed aging by hastening the breakdown of normal cells. The new work suggests
that eventually the life span of humans could be manipulated by drugs or genetic
engineering.

   "Aging is something that we can manipulate, analyze and understand," said UC
Irvine biologist Michael R. Rose. "Aging can be changed."

   In fact, Rose and his colleagues have been able to double the life span of
flies, giving them the equivalent of a human life span of 150 years. They
achieved this by reversing the rules for natural selection, which is the
fundamental basis for the process of evolution.

   Evolution typically favors members of a species that reproduce at an early
age. Early reproduction increases the odds that the parent-to-be will have
eluded death by predators or disease and hence that their genes will be passed
on. But an abundance of evidence shows that delaying reproduction actually
prolongs life, according to evolutionary biologist Steven N. Austad of Harvard
University.

   By genetic manipulation in crossbreeding experiments, Rose and his colleagues
repeatedly delayed the reproduction of flies and their offspring until later in
life than usual. After multiple generations, they found that the average life
span of the flies had increased by 80%.

   They also found that they could increase life span by restricting the amount
of food the flies ate and, separately, by exposing the flies to extreme
environmental stress and mating only those who survived.

   In addition, the researchers found that the flies with the extended life
spans had unusually high concentrations of an enzyme called superoxide
dismutase, or SOD, which breaks down the age-inducing free radicals. Many
researchers believe caloric restriction prolongs life by reducing the number of
free radicals formed from food, so the two approaches appear to be
complementary.

   Further evidence of the importance of SOD was presented here by molecular
biologist James E. Fleming of the Linus Pauling Institute of Science & Medicine
in Palo Alto, Calif. Fleming used genetic engineering techniques to insert extra
copies of the gene for SOD -- one of the Methuselah genes -- into fruit fly
embryos and found that the flies lived as long as Rose's.

   Molecular geneticist Thomas E. Johnson of the University of Colorado has been
studying a completely different system, but has obtained surprisingly similar
results. He works with the common roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, an
extremely simple organism with a normal life span of about three weeks. He has
found that he can double the life span of the worms by chemically mutating
another Methuselah gene, which he calls "age-1."

   Roundworms with the mutated gene reproduce at a later age than normal
roundworms and have fewer offspring. Johnson originally thought that was why
they lived longer. Recently, however, he has found that the roundworms with the
mutated age-1 gene have an increased ability to destroy free radicals.

   This suggests that a normal age-1 gene may limit life span by suppressing the
SOD Methuselah gene and that it may be possible eventually find drugs that will
block age-1, prolonging life. If a similar gene exists in humans, he added, then
the drug would also prolong their lives.

   Rose said human life span could probably also be extended by using genetic
engineering techniques to insert the SOD gene into blood cells. But because of
the potential ethical dilemmas involved in gene therapy, such a possibility
seems highly unlikely.


                             1504 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 6, 1992, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: Defect key to finding MD cure

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Gene hunters have found a gene defect responsible for adult muscular
dystrophy -- a clue that should lead to discovery of the gene itself before the
end of the year, experts say.

   The finding is important because ''once the gene is found, scientists can
begin to develop drug treatments or gene therapy'' for the disease called
myotonic muscular dystrophy, says Norine Stirpe of the Muscular Dystrophy
Association.

   The condition:

   - Is marked by muscle loss and weakness.

   - Affects one in 7,000 to 8,000 births worldwide.

   Symptoms appear in early adulthood; patients die in their 50s or 60s when the
heart and lungs fail.

   The gene defect is reported by three separate teams in today's Nature.

   The defect causes a segment of gene coding to be repeated - much like
repeating a word over and over in the middle of a sentence, says Stirpe.

   The repeats cause instability of gene function; the more often the repeat,
the more severe the symptoms, she says. And the effect is magnified in
succeeding generations.

   Using the defect as a red flag, researchers predict the gene should be
identified in less than a year. The search is narrowed to three genes on
chromosome 19.

   The gene for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which primarily affects children,
was located in 1986. Human studies with experimental drugs and gene therapy have
been under way since 1990.


                             1505 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 January 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Equity Issues This Week

BODY:

   The following equity offerings are expected this week:

   Advacare Inc., 4.4 million shares. Robertson, Stephens.

   Advanced Magnetics Inc., 1.75 million shares. Paine Webber Inc.

    American United Global (formerly Alrom) Inc., 1.43 million shares. Laidlaw
Inc.

   AMR Corp., 5 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.

   Cellular Inc., 2.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.

   Corvas International Inc., 2.5 million shares. Paine Webber.

   Electrocom Automation Inc., 11.5 million shares.  Merrill Lynch.

   Fleet Call Inc. 7.5 million class A shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. 1.5 million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co.

   Henley International, 2.2 million shares. Kemper Securities.

   Immunomedics Inc., 2 million shares. Allen & Co.

   Infinity Broadcasting Corp., 6 million class A shares. Lehman Brothers.

   Margaretten Financial Corp., 15 million shares. Salomon Brothers.

   Matrix Pharmaceutical Inc., 2.5 million shares.  First Boston.

   Medical Diagnostics Inc., 1.35 million shares. First Albany.

   National Re Holdings Corp., 9 million shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Noel Group Inc., 7.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.

   Nova Pharmaceutical Corp., 3.4 million shares.  Tucker Anthony.

   Nutrition Management Services Co., 1 million class A units (one class A share
and one warrant). Stratton Oakmont.

   Olympic Financial Ltd., 1.6 million shares. John G. Kinnard & Co.

   Oncor Inc., 3 million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham.

   PCI Services Inc., 2.875 million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham.

   Protein Design Labs Inc., 2.5 million shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Sayette Group Inc., 1.6 million shares. Thomas James Associates.

   Scotts Company, 10.5 million class A shares. Goldman, Sachs.

   Staff Builders Inc., 1 million units (four shares and four redeemable
three-year warrants). Whale Securities.

   Syspower Technologies Inc. 1.1 million units. First New England.

   TSI Corp., 2.3 million shares. Cowen & Co.

   Value Health Inc., 2.5 million shares. Alex. Brown & Sons.

   Varsity Spirit, 1.22 million shares. Stephens Inc.

   Zynaxis Inc., 2 million shares. Penn Merchant Group.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1992


                             1506 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     January 26, 1992, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1952 words

HEADLINE: WHAT WILL BE IN THE PRESIDENT'S BUDGET PACKAGE;
BUSINESSES HOPE TO MAKE GAINS IN SEVERAL KEY AREAS

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. ROSENBLATT, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Business executives and investors are anxiously awaiting President Bush's
election-year budget proposal, hoping that it will be replete with tax breaks
and other goodies designed to help boost the economy and get voters smiling
again.

   The budget, to be previewed Tuesday in the State of the Union address and
unveiled Wednesday, will set the stage for a months-long political drama. The
denouement comes with a White House signing of a document for which both parties
will try to claim partial credit.

   Typically, a Republican President's budget would be greeted with disdain by a
Democratic Congress. But with the backdrop of recession and a presidential
election, there is a growing consensus that the 1993 budget will contain major
tax provisions that will overall aid business and industry.

   "Both parties are talking a lot about doing something for business," says
Rachelle Bernstein of the Washington office of Arthur Andersen & Co., a major
accounting firm.

   While the details are still being worked out, broad outlines of major policy
initiatives have surfaced in Washington in recent days. Administration
officials, business lobbyists and others say these business-related issues are
likely to emerge from the Bush budget:

   * A determined White House push for a capital gains tax cut. The President
will argue forcefully that investment will be promoted and jobs created by
trimming taxes on profits from the sale of stocks, bonds, real estate and other
assets.

   * A temporary speed-up in tax writeoffs for business equipment. The faster
depreciation is aimed at spurring immediate purchases of new equipment and
machinery.

   * A boost for the beleaguered real estate industry, particularly the
overbuilt commercial sector, in the form of a tax break for developers, brokers
and builders. Those who spend more than half their time and get more than half
their income from real estate would be allowed to take full deductions for their
losses on real estate investments.

   * In another real estate measure. the President will propose a tax credit --
at least $2,000 and perhaps as much as $5,000 -- for first-time home buyers. It
is hoped that this will spur housing demand and construction.

   * The Administration will propose rules liberalizing Individual Retirement
Accounts, encouraging more Americans to open tax-free accounts. This could help
banks, which have suffered the loss of billions of dollars in deposits because
of low interest rates, and other sellers of savings products.

   * A 90-day freeze on the imposition of new federal regulations on business.
The White House would use the time to review new rules ready to be imposed by
the executive branch and discard those considered to be financially onerous for
business in a difficult economic climate.

   Of course, not all the budget proposals will be beneficial to business
interests.

   The defense industry, heavily represented in California, is resigned to the
prospects of significant reductions. The President will offer a slimmed-down
Pentagon spending plan, and the Democratic Congress will try to make even deeper
cuts.

   Competition will be intense for the use of the post-Cold War "peace
dividend," with the White House and Congress disputing whether the savings
should be used to expand domestic spending or to reduce the budget deficit.

   Then there is the complex health care issue. While business is concerned with
the steady increase in health care benefit costs and growing numbers of
uninsured workers, it is also concerned with many proposals to solve these
problems.

   The President is likely to propose limiting the deductibility of health
benefits for some upper-income workers. Businesses have traditionally opposed
any effort to tinker with benefits, regarding it as the "camel's nose under the
tent leading to greater government interference later," says Ellen Goldstein, a
spokeswoman for the Assn. of Private Pension and Welfare Plans, which represents
firms with extensive benefit programs.

   The proposal would be a disappointment for larger firms and some of their
workers, but could easily be offset politically by the prospect of bigger tax
breaks for small businesses and the self-employed to buy health insurance. The
Administration also will propose measures to make it easier for small firms to
band together to bargain for low-priced health insurance.

   Some segments of the health-care industry expect to benefit from the
Administration proposals, notably insurers hoping to sell policies to people and
firms now lacking coverage. Health maintenance organizations, which provide
medical services for groups at a monthly rate fixed in advance, also hope they
could gain customers as the Administration tries to encourage cost-saving
approaches to health care.

   Despite these problem areas, the business community largely is upbeat about
getting significant help from Washington this year. This is influenced by the
dire state of the economy and the need of both parties to make friends and
influence interests in an election year.

   The President has talked over and over about the need for a capital gains tax
cut, an article of Republican faith. Democrats always dismissed it as a sop to
the rich. This time, however, many Democrats are listening to the appeals of
worried business executives troubled about the economy. And they may craft their
own version.

   "There will obviously be a broad-based capital gains proposal" in the Bush
budget, says Ed Hatcher, director of Congressional relations for the American
Electronics Assn.

   "We won't oppose what they are doing -- our efforts will be complementary,"
says Hatcher, who is busy enrolling bipartisan support for a narrow measure to
make tax-free half the profits for those who buy new issues of corporate stock
and hold the shares for five years. The high-tech community, ranging from
computer-makers to companies involved in developing gene therapies for cancer
treatment, is aggressively promoting this idea on Capital Hill, where the
campaign has enrolled liberals such as Rep. Robert Matsui (D-Sacramento) and
conservatives such as Rep. Hank Brown (R-Colo).

   For the first time, a capital gains tax cut appears to be generally supported
by both Democrats and Republicans, says Benson Goldstein, manager of tax policy
for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. "They will argue how to define it, but in the
end they will do something," he says.

   "The odds are extremely high there will definitely be a capital-gains tax
cut," agrees Mark Bloomfield, president of the American Council for Capital
Formation, which traditionally represents big, heavy-industry firms interested
in lower tax rates.

   "The question is not if but when the capital gains initiative will become
law," he says.

   The Democrats might try to trump the Administration by offering business a
further fillip in the form of a special investment tax credit, promoted as an
anti-recession tool, Bloomfield suggests.

   But the White House fears this type of tax credit could be too costly,
cutting deeply into revenues at a time of huge federal budget deficits,
according to Administration officials. Instead, the President is likely to ask
for a more modest incentive for business spending -- an acceleration in the
depreciation schedule used by corporations. This would allow companies to write
off the cost of equipment over several years through federal tax deductions. The
White House plan is expected to ask Congress to allow firms to take a bigger
deduction in the first year, according to knowledgeable sources.

   The proposals for a capital gains tax cut and faster writeoffs for equipment
are broad-based life-lines to business, struggling with hard times. But the
Administration also is developing special medicines for some grievously wounded
industries.

   "We've just got to do something for real estate," a high-ranking Treasury
official said recently.

   Office vacancy rates are 20% or more in many major metropolitan areas, and
federal regulators are selling into an already depressed market billions of
dollars worth of properties from failed banks and savings and loan associations.

   To help stabilize prices, the Administration wants to allow people active in
the real estate business to take tax deductions for losses on their real estate
investments, and apply the losses against other income to reduce their overall
tax bill. The 1986 tax act sharply limited the deductions for these passive
losses.

   These new deductions, if approved by Congress, could raise the price of
distressed real estate by as much as 5% to 7%, estimates Stephen Driesler,
senior vice president for government affairs at the National Assn. of Realtors.

   The tax savings would make properties more financially attractive. "It may
mean the difference in whether a building sells at a profit or goes into
foreclosure at a big loss," he says.

   Prospects are good for easy Congressional approval of the Bush
Administration's special real estate tax deduction. Jeffrey DeBoer, general
counsel for the National Realty Committee, a group composed of builders,
developers and other real estate interests, notes a bill providing the passive
loss provision has already enlisted backing from more than 300 members of the
House and more than 40 Senators.

   Real estate's second boost from the Administration will be a call for a tax
credit for first-time home buyers, a sales promotion technique that hasn't been
used since 1975. A tax credit of $2,000 to $5,000 would boost sales and new home
building.

   The proposal comes after one of the industry's worst years ever. Housing
starts plunged last year to the lowest level since World War II. In addition,
the home ownership rate has been declining among Americans aged 25 to 34, the
period when most people traditionally buy their first home.

   Realtors welcome the Administration plan, but they want to take it a step
further. "The biggest single barrier is that people don't have the cash for the
down payment and the closing costs," says Driesler of the realtors group.

   The tax credit could be as much as a year away when the federal return is
filed, Driesler noted. His group is trying to figure out a plan under which a
person could get the money up front -- perhaps from a bank or savings and loan
by signing over the credit in return for cash now.

   The Bush budget also is likely to have some help for financial institutions.
Specifically, banks and S&Ls support an Administration proposal to promote
savings through new variations of the tax-free Individual Retirement Accounts.

   "Bankers want a chance to catch up with some of the money" that is now
flowing into tax-deferred savings bonds and annuities, according to Henry
Ruempler, director of tax and accounting policy for the American Bankers Assn.
conference.

   Currently, funds can be deposited tax-free in an IRA, with the account holder
paying taxes when the money is withdrawn. The Administration is considering a
new plan to stimulate savings with a different type of IRA. There would be no
deduction for the current deposit, but the earnings on the account would be
tax-free at the time of withdrawal. This could appeal to comparatively affluent
Americans with incomes too high to qualify under current IRA rules.

   Another proposal generally supported by business is the expected three-month
moratorium on new federal regulations. The Administration proposal is part of a
broad effort to revive the economy by reducing the burden on federal regulation
on business.

   It is difficult to determine how much the moratorium could save business. The
areas most likely to be affected are environmental protection, energy,
transportation, exports, communications, biotechnology and finance.


                             1507 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1741 words

HEADLINE: New Cancer Clue: How Cells Talk To Each Other

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

BODY:

   SEVERAL times each day, a normal cell in the body mutates into a cancerous
one but is knocked out by the body's defense mechanisms. Occasionally, however,
the mutant cells take hold and grow uncontrollably into a malignant tumor.

   Uncontrolled growth is distinguishes cancerous cells from normal ones. But
precisely what goes awry in the cell and the defenses to permit the cancerous
cells to take over is one of the great mysteries of science.

    Now findings from a team of scientists at the University of Miami headed by
Dr. Werner R. Loewenstein suggest that the uncontrolled growth results from a
genetic defect that leaves cells unable to communicate with each other. The
failure involves defects in the tiny tunnels that connect cells and presumably
allow normal cells to inhibit one another's growth, the scientists reported in
The Journal of Membrane Biology, which Dr. Loewenstein edits.

   If gene therapy based on the new findings can someday be achieved for cancer,
and if the Miami team's conclusions are confirmed, scientists might develop a
specific treatment that ends cancerous growth without killing normal cells, Dr.
Loewenstein said.

   And while other researchers called the new work interesting, the history of
science has shown repeatedly that what works in the laboratory may not work in
people. And even if Dr. Loewenstein's test-tube experiments do bear fruit, it
will take years before the harvest comes for cancer treatment.

   The research involves connections, or tiny channels, about two-billionths of
a meter in width in cell membranes and visible only through electron
microscopes. Clusters of such channels are known as membrane channels and gap
junctions.

   In recent years, gap junctions have been found to be one of the main channels
of electric and metabolic communication between cells, allowing small molecules
to pass directly from the interior of one cell to another without ever having to
get outside the cell.

   The junctions are made of proteins known as connexins that align to form a
continuous channel.

   In normal cells, chemicals bearing regulatory messages of one kind or another
are constantly passed through these communicating tunnels. One of the messages
is presumably a signal that regulates or inhibits cell growth, and loss of this
signal, through a defect in the tunnels, may be at the root of the uncontrolled
growth of some cancerous cells.

   In test-tube experiments, the Miami team reported that it had taken cancerous
cells that had a genetic defect in their ability to communicate with each other,
and then corrected the defect to restore the cancerous cells to apparent health.

   Unlike the communicating cells of normal organs and tissues, which somehow
stop growing at the right time and the right place, the defective cells had lost
control over their growth.

Possible Cancer Defense

    But by using gene therapy to replace the defective gene with a normal one,
the Miami scientists said, the cells made large amounts of the connexin proteins
that allowed normal communication with neighboring cells. Correction of the
communication defect corrected the growth defect and the cancerous cells behaved
like normal cells under laboratory conditions.

   The findings shed light on a possible first line of defense against cancer
and could lead to new therapies, Dr. Loewenstein said.

   One possibility is gene therapy to correct defects in cancerous cells, an
approach that has not been tested in cancer. The first human trials of gene
therapy for noncancerous defects began recently and results have not been
evaluated.

   The word cancer describes more than a hundred different types of malignant
tumors that share the ability to kill by uncontrolled growth.

   Dr. Loewenstein said that the diversity of cancer meant that his team's
findings could be expected to apply only to those types of cancers in which cell
communication was deficient. For example, laboratory studies show the findings
do not apply to two types of liver cancer.

Not a Panacea

    "It opens up considerable hope, but by no means will this be a panacea for
all cancer," Dr. Loewenstein said.

   The next step, he says, is to scale up laboratory experiments to screen
various types of cancers broadly to determine which ones might be susceptible to
new types of cancer therapy.

   Dr. Loewenstein's work is very important and "well worth further
exploration," said Sir Michael Stoker of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund and
Cambridge University in England, a pioneer in the field.

   There is general agreement that cancer develops from a normal cell in a
stepwise process. If defects in gap junctions turn out to be an important step,
development of cancer could be blocked by finding ways to encourage the
formation of gap junctions, Dr. Stoker said.

   Dr. Loewenstein's findings and those reported recently by other scientists
like Dr. Ruth Sager at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston show that
there is something about gap junction communication that suppresses the
spontaneous formation of tumors, experts said.

   But few cancer researchers have paid much attention to the field of gap
junctions, said the experts, who predicted that the new findings would raise the
profile of this type of research and probably capture the attention of some
cancer researchers who had not been interested in gap junction.

   Dr. Daniel A. Goodenough, an expert in gap junctions at Harvard Medical
School in Boston, said he did not believe Dr. Loewenstein's data were compelling
enough to "prove his point."

   Nevertheless, Dr. Loewenstein's study "used an approach that a lot of others
will follow up on," Dr. Goodenough said. "Clearly there is an effect.  Something
is happening that needs to be followed up, and he certainly could be on to
something."

   Dr. Norton B. Gilula, who heads the department of cell biology at the Scripps
Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif., and who is editor of The Journal of Cell
Biology, said the types of studies that Dr. Loewenstein and others had recently
reported could not have been done until the last few years.

New Avenue of Research

    To explore how gap junctions are related to growth control, scientists
needed to work with the genes that lead to the production of the various
connexins. Only when scientists could clone connexin genes did that new avenue
of research open up.

   Both connexin genes and cell-to-cell channels are widely present in nature,
starting with some of the simplest organisms. They are found in large numbers in
most tissues and in practically all animal species, and normally large
populations of cells are constantly and directly exchanging vital signals that
control their activities.

   Because of the intricate network of gap junctions, molecules can spread
through whole organs or parts of organs. At the same time, the network makes the
tissue and organ highly vulnerable to damage from a single cell. One abnormal
cell could spell doom for all cells if the abnormal one is not held
incommunicado.

   The channel is therefore endowed with a protective mechanism that is
triggered whenever a cell leaks or its energy metabolism is depressed. Under
such circumstances, the channels of the cells close, sealing the borders of the
cellular community.

   Dr. Loewenstein said the channels might have evolved in parallel with other
substances that control development, particularly those known as growth factors.
Gap junctions and growth factors regulate communication and growth in different
ways, and scientists are just getting the first glimpses into their
interactions, Dr. Loewenstein said.

Parallels With Fetus's Growth

    Scientists have long drawn analogies between cancer and the normal growth
and development of a fetus and infant.

   In a fetus and infant, cells normally reproduce millions of times in just a
few hours or days. But when an organ, for example, reaches a characteristic
size, the cells suddenly stop reproducing and growing. What causes the sudden
cessation is not known. Dr. Loewenstein said he believed such controlled growth
resulting in an organ's ending up with a predetermined number of cells was due
to the channels in gap junctions that transmit regulatory signals to one
another.

   He said he found that in a variety of cancers the communicating channels were
defective -- either absent, or closed and nonfunctioning.

   Unlike the communicating cells of normal organs and tissues, which stopped
growing at the right time and the right place, the cancer cells of the type that
he studied lost control and grew rampantly, he explained.

   Dr. Loewenstein said his team had traced the communication defect to a single
connexin gene.

   The key question was whether correction of the defect would restore
communication and normal growth in the test tube. To test the theory, the
researchers used techniques to transfer the normal gene into 75 percent of the
cancerous cells. The cancer cells made the correct channel protein and made
cell-to-cell channels just as normal cells do.

   In a further step, the Miami team mixed genetically manipulated cancer cells
with normal cells; the cancer cells rapidly outgrew the normal ones in the
laboratory, mimicking what they do in the body.

Cancerous Growth Halted

    But after gene therapy was used to correct the defect, the cells were not
only capable of communicating with each other but also with the normal cells.
The gene therapy restored junctional communication and completely arrested their
cancerous growth.

   Dr. Loewenstein has been a leader in this branch of cell biology for 30
years. Articles in the journal he edits are reviewed by experts before they are
published and are cited in the standard international scientific index,
indicating that researchers consider the journal a reliable source of
information.

   Some experts suggested that Dr. Loewenstein might have published the paper in
his own journal because he was not able to publish it elsewhere. But Dr.
Loewenstein said he had not submitted the paper to another journal. He said he
was not involved in the process of reviewing his paper and the decision to
publish it in The Journal of Membrane Biology. And many experts said the paper
was credible and would stand on its own merits no matter which journal published
it.

   Dr. Loewenstein said he was "flabbergasted" by the criticism because it was
standard practice for researchers to publish their findings in scientific
journals that they edited.

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "A Failure to Communicate"

Normally, tiny channels in cell membranes allow passage of signal molecules
directly from one cell to another, presumably allowing cells to inhibit one
another's growth. A genetic defect leaves cells with insufficient connexins, the
proteins that form the channels, so the cells cannot communicate. Correcting the
defect stopped cell proliferation in the test tube.

(Source: Dr. Werner R. Loewenstein) (pg. C8)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1992


                             1508 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 21, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; PAGE B3

LENGTH: 910 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Sufferers See Ray of Hope;
Possible Cure Eases The Shadow of Death

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Jane Seaberry, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Several days ago Kathryn McGowan's son John, 8, ran to her exclaiming,
"There's some big stuff" about the lung disease cystic fibrosis in the news.

   John, who suffers the constant coughing and frequent hospitalizations of the
disease, told his mother a new discovery meant someday he could "breathe some
medicine" and he wouldn't need the twice daily poundings on his back to loosen
the thick and deadly mucus in his lungs.

   "I burst into tears," McGowan said. "But I also stay really guarded. It's
hard to take in that yes, your child's going to live. It's not that we think
about it all the time, but to see in print that your child's going to live is
remarkable."

   A week ago medical scientists announced a major advance that they say
eventually could cure cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited disease
in the country. Researchers have developed a form of gene therapy in which
modified cold viruses, when sprayed into the lungs, deliver new genes to replace
the defective ones that cause the disease, which affects about 250 people in the
Washington area and an estimated 30,000 nationwide.

   The gene therapy breakthrough is the latest in a series of advances that,
since 1960, have pushed the average life expectancy of cystic fibrosis patients
from age 4 to 28.

   For example, two drugs are being tested that thin the thick and sticky mucus
lining the lungs of cystic fibrosis sufferers. The mucus leads to frequent
infections that scar the lungs, reducing their ability to function.

   The disease kills when the lungs are destroyed by recurring infections or
because the heart, which has to work harder, fails.

   News of the breakthrough comes as McGowan, of Waldorf, is expecting her
fourth child in March. Two of McGowan's children, John and Jimmy, 5, have
inherited the disease. The eldest child, May, 11, has not.

   Despite the odds that the baby will have cystic fibrosis, McGowan said she is
not worried. She said she could find out if her unborn child has cystic fibrosis
through prenatal testing, but she doesn't want to know. It doesn't matter
anyway, she said, because her beliefs would prevent her from aborting the child.

   "When I was pregnant with Jimmy, people would question it," McGowan said of
her youngest child. "When I take a look at Jimmy, he has a beautiful life. He's
brought an awful lot of joy to an awful lot of people."

   Besides, she said, research has increased the life expectancy eight years
since John was born, and now there is the possibility of a cure.

   Ian Ferguson, a Rockville architect, has nearly reached that average
life-expectancy age. He is 27.

   "It gets scary once in a while," Ferguson said from his hospital bed in
Baltimore. "I try not to dwell on it. Anybody who is faced with a disease termed
fatal with no cure, you have to be a little concerned."

   Ferguson has been at Johns Hopkins University Hospital for two weeks, first
with the flu, then with a collapsed lung, a common result of the disease. The
medical news excited Ferguson, but his fervor was muted by years of failed hope
for a cure.

   "Ever since I've had cystic fibrosis, every year there's been some
announcement" of a breakthrough, Ferguson said. "You get a little skeptical, a
little cynical.

   "While I'm excited at the prospect for [a cure] and look forward to it
happening, I'll be much happier when it's sitting in front of me in an aerosol
thing, ready to inhale," Ferguson said, "with a list of 100 people who tried it
and are doing fine."

   About twice a year, many people with cystic fibrosis must enter a hospital
for a "tune-up" that takes a minimum of two weeks. During that time they are fed
large doses of antibiotics intravenously and undergo intensive therapy to clear
their lungs.

   Mitchell Greenberg, 18, a University of Florida student from Rockville,
pledged Alpha Epsilon Pi fraternity last fall, his first semester in college,
and compiled a 3.5 grade-point average. He said he can feel himself degenerate
every year as his coughing and medications increase.

   "I'm not going to get my hopes up high about it and then be crushed," he said
of the possible cure. "If it happens, it happens. Then sign me up."

   Scientists say a cure for cystic fibrosis is several years away. The gene
therapy technique was successful with laboratory rats and now must be tested
further on monkeys before it is used by humans.

   News of the breakthrough has excited McGowan, who was "scared to death" when
she learned John had the disease, but has since incorporated it into her
family's daily life.

   The morning and evening therapy of thumping the boys on the back for 45
minutes to loosen the mucus clots "kind of fits into your lifestyle," McGowan
said. "The kids are just so used to the therapy that it's sort of our bedtime
ritual."

   But there is always a shadow of death.  A teenage girl with cystic fibrosis
who used to baby-sit for Jimmy in the hospital when John was in for therapy died
three or four years after the boys met her. Another youth, who visited McGowan's
husband on his patrols as a U.S. Capitol Police officer, died too.

   "It's really hard," McGowan said about watching the children die. "But most
of the ones that died were pulling so hard for every breath, they almost made
you wish they were at peace."

   But with the dawning of a cure, McGowan has new hope. "Now I think about the
things that have happened with cystic fibrosis," McGowan said, "and the years
that have been added to John's life."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, KATHRYN MCGOWAN ADMINISTERS THERAPY TO HER SONS JIMMY, 5, AT
LEFT, AND JOHN, 8. ANNALISA KRAFT FOR TWP


                             1509 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 21, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z7

LENGTH: 1313 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Is No Longer a Rarity;
Applications for Experiments Are Expected to Quadruple in the Next Two Years

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Last Thursday in Memphis, Tenn., a 2-year-old boy suffering from a
neuroblastoma tumor was treated with genetically altered bone marrow cells --
and little attention was paid to the use of this novel technique that a year ago
made medical history.

   Gene therapy -- the alteration of a patient's genetic material to combat
disease at its cellular source -- has become a viable strategy for medical
researchers striving to uncover new approaches to incurable diseases. Gene
therapy or a variation called gene marking has been performed so far on 22
patients.

   "People have become more blase about it," said Malcolm K. Brenner, director
of bone marrow transplants at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis.
He has now treated four children with bone marrow cells that are genetically
marked to trace their activity in the body and will treat three more patients
next month. "Like anything new, at first it all looks weird and wonderful and
then people realize it's just another technique," he said.

   "The feasibility has been demonstrated" that genes can be inserted into human
cells and perform their usual function, said Gerard J. McGarrity, former
chairman of the panel that approves gene therapy trials at the National
Institutes of Health. "Especially in diseases where there is no effective
alternate therapy, this is a reasonable and apparently safe approach."

   In 1982 when it was first debated in a congressional hearing, the idea of
altering human genes was revolutionary, fraught with ethical implications and
unimagined dangers.  Religious leaders expressed concern. Ethicists wrote about
the potential for changing the nature of man. A president's commission issued a
report called "Splicing Life" that prompted NIH to set up an exhaustive review
process for anyone proposing to do gene therapy on people.

   Then a milestone in medical history was declared in September 1990, when a
4-year-old girl suffering from an immune system disorder received the world's
first gene therapy. Now, not even a year and a half later, a total of 11 gene
therapy trials have been approved by the NIH panel known as the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee (RAC) and seven more are under consideration. Members of the
panel expect a quadrupling of applications to do gene therapy within the next
two years.

   Opponents of gene-altering technology who feared an unleashing of an
Andromeda strain have been reassured by the scientific as well as regulatory
restraints on gene experiments. So far, genetic alterations have only been made
in specific cells. There have been no mutations in the general genetic blueprint
of the patient -- nor can these genetically-altered cells be passed on to future
generations.

   What began as a highly scrutinized and controversial procedure is on the
verge of becoming an almost familiar, if still experimental, therapy.
Consequently, the RAC committee, which was formed in 1975 to set standards for
recombinant DNA experiments on plants, animals and microorganisms, is moving to
streamline the review process in human therapy. Panel members foresee the day
when all but the most radical gene therapy would simply be studied by local
institutional biosafety committees and not have to be reviewed at the federal
level. That is the case now for almost all recombinant DNA experiments on lower
organisms.

   "Since the RAC was constituted, we have had no untoward reaction in any form
of recombinant DNA research," said McGarrity, now vice president of Genetic
Therapy Inc., a biotechnology company that provides materials to gene therapy
trials. "As some of these procedures become more routine, the review can be
expedited."

   Toward that end, at its meeting in November, the Human Gene Therapy
subcommittee of RAC, which had been charged primarily with setting guidelines,
voted to dissolve in a year. Researchers applying to do genetic engineering in
humans will now go only to the full RAC committee for review.

   The geographic range of the applications to RAC is another sign that gene
therapy is rapidly becoming an accepted experimental strategy. Gene therapy and
gene marking began at NIH, but participants or applicants now include: the
University of Michigan, which received RAC approval to use gene therapy in the
treatment of an inherited high cholesterol disorder; M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
and Baylor College of Medicine, both in Houston; St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital in Memphis; the University of Rochester Medical Center; Indiana
University Medical School, the University of Washington in Seattle and the UCLA
School of Medicine.

   "Essentially, we're coast-to-coast," said Nelson A. Wivel, director of the
Office of Recombinant DNA Activities at NIH. "Academic medical centers want to
be as multifaceted as they can, to do all the latest modes of treatment. It's
just a matter of keeping pace with developments."

   "It's like the old days of organ transplantation," he continued. "Twenty-five
years ago, only a few places did it. Then it began to spread to the point where
we have four hospitals in the larger Washington area alone that do heart
transplants."

   Gene therapy is taking hold abroad as well. A gene-marking experiment has
started in Lyon, France, and other clinical trials have been proposed in Italy
and Canada. China and Japan have recently begun to establish review committees
for human gene therapy proposals.

   In some gene therapy experiments, the technique does not seem such a radical
departure from previous research but rather an extension of other strategies for
changing how cells respond to disease. Immunologists, in particular, have been
experimenting for years with bolstering patients' own disease-fighting cells in
the laboratory.

   In a gene therapy experiment at the NIH last October, for instance, Steven A.
Rosenberg reinjected patients with their own tumor cells that had been
genetically altered in the laboratory to contain a toxic compound against the
tumor. He hoped to provoke a significant immune response with this cancer
"vaccine."

   Among the assortment of recombinant DNA experiments in humans, gene marking
techniques are most likely to be the first given over to local review committees
for approval, according to RAC members. In these experiments, the inserted gene
performs no therapeutic function but provides a way of tracking the infused
cells in the body.

   For example, Brenner's 2-year-old patient in Memphis was given his own bone
marrow after it had been "purged" of cancerous cells and the cells were marked
with the insertion of a gene to monitor the course of the disease. The inserted
gene confers resistance to the neomycin antibiotic. Should the boy go into
relapse, researchers can test samples of his tissue to see if the new cells are
resistant to neomycin. That will tell them whether the new cancer cells came
from the bone marrow or originated elsewhere in his body.

   But just because the novelty has worn off human gene therapy experiments,
they are far from routine. After a review of the RAC committee, each technique
must receive approval from the Food and Drug Administration, which regulates new
biological agents.

   Suzanne Epstein, who frequently reviews gene therapy applications to the FDA
and helped develop the FDA guidelines, does not see a simplification of the
case-by-case review at the federal agency in the near future. She warned
biotechnology companies at a genetic engineering conference in Washington last
week that even the smallest changes in the character of the viruses carrying new
genes into cells would have to be approved by the FDA because of safety
questions.

   Still the applications keep coming. Next on the list for scrutiny by the NIH
and FDA are proposals to use gene therapy to fight ovarian cancer, to mark cells
in AIDS patients who have lymphoma and to mark cells in patients with leukemia
and melanoma.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, ALTERING HUMAN GENES (DATA FROM GRAPHIC WAS
UNAVAILABLE.), TWP


                             1510 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   January 16, 1992, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D10; DIGEST

LENGTH: 254 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   AMR, parent of American Airlines, recorded its worst year ever in 1991, when
it lost $ 239.9 million, compared with a loss of $ 39.6 million in 1990. For the
final quarter of 1991, AMR had a loss of $ 124.9 million, compared with a
year-earlier loss of $ 215.1 million.

   Business sales rose just 0.1 percent in November, providing little spark for
greater production and new jobs, the Commerce Department said. Businesses
increased their inventories 0.2 percent in November, but that pace was slower
than the 0.4 percent advances of the previous two months.

   Allen Sinai, chief economist for the Boston Co., said that "as things now
stand, the economy looks to be in an extended recession." In testimony before
the Senate Banking Committee, Sinai said, "There is no recovery from the
recession in sight. ... Worse, the economy has now entered a secondary
'downwave,' led by the consumer."

   SEC Chairman Richard Breeden said he did not influence the writing a
controversial report on the causes of last November's stock market drop and
denied the study was politically motivated.

   Gene Therapy of Gaithersburg announced an agreement with British Technology
Group that gives Gene Therapy the exclusive right to manufacture products for
genetic therapy of hemophilia.

   AT&T said it will use a building it already owns in Manhattan as its new
headquarters, replacing its current home, which has been leased to Sony. The new
headquarters is a 60-year-old, art deco-style building in the city's financial
district.


                             1511 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 15, 1992, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: The secrets of the deep

BYLINE: By Alex Beam, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The only personal memento on my desk is a framed invitation to the funeral
of Margaret Morris, a young friend of mine.  I keep the invitation in the same
spirit that the foppish Romantic poet Gerard de Nerval explained why he kept a
lobster as a pet: "Because he knows the secrets of the deep."

   Whatever secrets lie ahead, Margaret already knows them.

   We had a colleague here named Teresa Mullin, who died last year after a long
struggle with cystic fibrosis. The secret of the deep is that we will all die,
but young people with CF, a degenerative genetic disease that disables the
lungs, die more quickly. CF allows no survivors, no grace periods of remission,
and no miracle cures.

   Since age five, Terri kicked and struggled and scraped with the disease,
outliving many of her friends. She died in England, hoping for a life-saving
heart and lung transplant, at age 22.

   Terri left us an extraordinary book about growing up with CF in Allentown,
Pa., and about her years at Children's Hospital, the Phillips Exeter Academy and
at Harvard. As she entered each new stage of her life, some authority figure - a
doctor or a school administrator - assured her she would fail, telling her, in
effect, why didn't she just go home and die?

   In a narrative that is alternately revealing, emotionally wrenching, funny
and at times darkly cynical, Terri discusses her refusal to surrender to the
disease and to society's low expectations for CF patients.

   Terri learned of her mortality at nine from a television broadcast. She had
just ridden in the Lehigh Valley CF Bike-a-Thon (she was rewarded for her
troubles with a collapsed lung) and was watching a news account of the event. A
newscaster mentioned "the killer disease, cystic fibrosis." Terri turned to her
mother and said, "Hey, mom, the lady just made a mistake. Didn't she?"

   There was no mistake, and the moment marked the beginning of Terri's odyssey
through her personalized medical hell. Each day, she required several hours of
"chest percussion" from a physical therapist pounding at her rib cage. Much of
adult life she wore baggy turtlenecks to hide the catheter tube protruding from
her jugular vein.

   By 20, she had spent two years at Children's Hospital, where she retired for
grueling pulmonary "cleanups" during most school vacations. Friendships forged
in the CF ward didn't last long. One day Terri left Children's to do an
interview for the Exeter student newspaper. On her return, a fellow patient
greeted her with: "Guess who died while you were gone?"

   Friendships outside the hospital were no less ephemeral. Terri's best friend
at Harvard reneged on a promise to share a suite, citing concerns about her
grades.

   Her book has a lovely voice that caresses the heroes of her personal
cosmology. Perhaps the greatest among them was Dr. Harry Shwachman of
Children's, a pioneer in CF treatment who nudged his patients out of their
hospital beds and into the mainstream of life.

   Terri was no saint - she fit in well at the Globe - and in her book she
remembers everyone who treated her with dignity, and many who didn't. She loved
soap-opera star Susan Lucci, many of her Exeter teachers, the Harvard Crimson,
and people who didn't glare at her when she coughed, which was almost all the
time.

   An impatient patient, she became disenchanted with clipboard-toting medical
residents who spent half an hour jabbing at her weak veins to lodge an
intravenous needle, or inquired officiously "how long" she had been suffering
from cystic fibrosis.

   I thought of Terri again last week when researchers announced the discovery
of a new genetic therapy thay may someday cure CF. Terri always greeted such
announcements with a cold eye, suspecting that the prospective "someday" would
arrive too late for her. Unfortunately, she was right.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1992


                             1512 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 14, 1992, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: Gene injection could create new blood vessels in human hearts

BYLINE: KEVIN MORAN; Staff

DATELINE: GALVESTON

BODY:

   GALVESTON -- Before the year 2000, scientists hope to create new blood
vessels in ailing human hearts by injecting the hearts with cloned genes.

   Testing of the gene therapy on humans who suffer from atherosclerosis, or
narrowing of the coronary arteries and blood vessels, is at least five years
away.  But laboratory tests have shown remarkable increases in the number of
capillaries in the heart walls of rats injected with a gene that generates
production of ""fibroblast growth factor 5,'' or FGF-5, said University of
Michigan scientist Dr. Eliav Barr.

   ""In the rats, we found that three weeks after injection, there was a 30 to
40 percent increased level of capillary density,'' said Barr, who was in
Galveston Monday to address the American Heart Association's 19th Annual Science
Writers Forum.

   ""So since there are more vessels, we suspect there is more (blood) flow. ''
Barr said Michigan researchers, led by Dr. Jeffrey Leiden, associate professor
of internal medicine and microbiology, hope the gene therapy eventually will
reduce the need for invasive heart bypass surgery and improve and lengthen the
lives of people who can't be helped by bypass operations.

   ""Most heart failure is due to destruction of heart tissue from lack of blood
supply,'' said Barr.  ""We hope to prevent heart failure by preventing the dying
off of heart muscle tissue that occurs in heart attacks.

   ""In patients who have blockages, you would prevent heart attacks by making
them have new blood vessels to supply an area of the heart that's in danger of
dying off,'' he said.  ""The bottom line is saving heart muscle.  The more you
save, the longer the patient lives and the better the life of the patient while
they're living. '' Ideally, the cloned genes would be put in the heart through
long catheters that probably would enter patients' bodies through small
incisions in their arms or legs, Barr said.

   He said the gene therapy will have to be tested on larger animals to confirm
its long-term effectiveness and to make sure the therapy has no harmful side
effects.

    ""From a perspective of generating blood vessels, I think it's very
promising,'' he said.  ""But for safety concerns, there's still a lot of work
that needs to be done.

   ""If we can show that the blood vessel generation (in animals) results in
augmentation of blood flow to the treated region, then we could try to use
injections in humans to improve blood flow where vessels are diseased,'' he
said.  ""I'm not talking about completely replacing blood flow, just about
helping it. '' Barr said the gene therapy research began in 1990 at the
University of Michigan.  He said Leiden and his staff will move to Chicago this
summer, when Leiden will become chief of cardiology at the University of
Chicago.

   Scientists still don't know why heart muscle cells absorb the gene used in
the therapy, said Barr, but they do know it causes the cells to produce the
growth factor protein that spurred blood vessel growth in the rat hearts.

    ""The gene is just the messenger,'' he said.


LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1992


                             1513 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 14, 1992 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-11

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: Genes may cheat heart disease;
Clone injections lift hope of healing without surgery

BYLINE: From Tribune News Services

DATELINE: GALVESTON, Texas

BODY:

   GALVESTON, Texas -- Doctors testing clones of healthy human genes believe
they have found a new way to rebuild diseased heart tissue without surgery,
researchers reported yesterday. By injecting cloned genetic material into a
living heart, scientists found that the body became stimulated into growing new
blood vessels in the heart muscle, according to Dr. Jeffery Leiden of the
University of Michigan. Writing in a paper delivered at an American Heart
Association forum here, Leiden said new vessels can resupply oxygen to diseased
areas, strengthening the tissue. "At this point we are most enthusiastic about
using the gene therapy approach to directly stimulate new blood vessel growth in
areas of the heart that are currently not receiving sufficient blood or oxygen,"
he wrote.

   Leiden and his research team directly injected a concentrated solution of
genetic material containing a single cloned gene into the beating heart wall of
normal 6-week-old rats. "Following injection of the gene ...we were able to show
a 30-40 percent increase in the number of capillaries in the injected heart
wall," he said. "Microscopic examination revealed that the structure of the
capillaries in the injected hearts was normal, thus suggesting that these new
capillaries can supply increased blood flow to the heart," Leiden wrote, adding
that "much work remains to be done." "First we must know more about the
longevity of the capillary response," he said.

   "Our current experiments have examined hearts at a single time point, three
weeks after injection." Leiden said several million Americans have dangerous
narrowings of the coronary arteries or blood vessels supplying the heart with
oxygen. The ability to promote the growth of new blood vessels in the heart
could potentially be a useful treatment for the 750,000 Americans who have heart
attacks each year as a result of narrowing of their coronary arteries, which
supply the heart muscle, said Dr. Eliav Barr of the University of Michigan and
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. The theory is that if new arteries could be
grown to supply the heart, then the heart muscle would not lose its blood supply
and the heart attacks would not occur. Dr. Jan Breslow of Rockefeller University
in New York, an authority on the genetics of heart disease, said of Leiden's
work, "It's absolutely amazing that they can directly inject genes into the
heart, and the genes express (continue working) for months. "It really opens up
the whole question of regrowing heart muscle," Breslow said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1514 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    January 14, 1992, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 164 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy can rebuild heart vessels

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: GALVESTON, Texas

BODY:

    Genes injected into heart muscle cells can stimulate the growth of new blood
vessels, animal studies show.

   The studies, led by Dr. Jeffrey Leiden at the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, may one day benefit thousands who have severely blocked heart arteries.
In fact, many different types of muscle cells could be used in the future to do
gene therapy for a variety of diseases such as diabetes and growth retardation.

   Findings, reported Monday to a meeting of the American Heart Association:

 - Genes that turn on the growth of blood vessels were inserted into the heart
wall of rats and stimulated a 30% to 40% increase in capillaries.

   - Genes for making human growth hormone were inserted in muscle cells of mice
where they set up shop and began pumping out the hormone.
   Co-researcher Dr. Eliav Barr says human studies for   blood vessel

growth are still many years away, but those on other muscle cells could begin in
about three years.


                             1515 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 13, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: OPINION EDITORIAL; PAGE A16

LENGTH: 466 words

HEADLINE: Stalking Cystic Fibrosis

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   THOUGH THE number it afflicts is relatively small -- 30,000 sufferers in the
United States -- cystic fibrosis is one of the truly miserable diseases that
remain uncured. Genetically transmitted and frequently affecting more than one
sibling in a family, it gives its victims progressively worse bronchial and
respiratory diseases, which are eventually -- in every case -- lethal. Thirty
years ago, children who got it rarely reached school age. Now, with better
antibiotics, the average victim lives until about age 27, but treatment consists
merely of staving off the worsening symptoms. The last few years, though, have
seen a heartening succession of breakthroughs, coming mostly in the brand-new
and sometimes intimidating realms of gene mapping and genetic therapy. The
newest breakthrough, heralded in the journal Cell, uses genetic engineering for
a technique that, if safety tests check out, could conceivably offer by next
year a treatment that not only alleviates the disease's symptoms but actually
reverses their cause.

   The step-by-step progress on this front has been a notable scientific success
story. It started when gene-mapping techniques were still primitive, and it took
eight years of searching along the human genetic code -- a chain of some 3
billion pairs of amino acids that make up human genes and chromosomes -- for
researchers to zero in on the precise one that goes wrong in those who have the
disease. This was in 1989. It was a mind-boggling achievement in itself, one
previously confined to the pages of science fiction: What if we could read the
human genetic code directly and fix it where it was abnormal? Now, altering the
cystic fibrosis gene is precisely what scientists have done.

   Specifically, they developed a technique for splicing an engineered cystic
fibrosis gene that is normal -- one that can produce the essential protein that
the genes of cystic fibrosis sufferers can't make -- onto a common cold virus
that has also been altered to suppress its usual disease-causing reproductions.
The cold virus, acting as a "delivery van," carries the new normal gene into the
respiratory tract, where it reproduces normally. The result, at least so far in
tests on rats: the working gene takes over the functions the defective one can't
perform, in this case producing an enzyme that controls sodium transport in
cells and prevents the lethal mucous buildup in the lungs.

   This isn't the first foray into what's called genetic therapy, but it's the
first that promises to ameliorate such a dramatic and well-known category of
human suffering. If the safety tests go well, 12 to 18 months from now we could
see clinical trials with some of the many volunteers already waiting -- waiting
for what could be, quite literally, a new lease on life.



                             1516 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 10, 1992, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1130 words

HEADLINE: Key gain reported on cystic fibrosis treatment

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    In the first practical indication that gene therapy will work against deadly
cystic fibrosis, scientists reported today that they have enlisted a common cold
virus to deliver a key human gene into the lung cells of experimental rats.

   Once inside lung cells, the gene manufactured a protein that cystic fibrosis
patients lack. Production of the missing protein persisted for at least six
weeks.

   The experiments, which leading figures called a landmark in the fast-moving
field of cystic fibrosis research, raise the prospect that the most lethal
effects of the disease could be banished by having patients periodically breathe
aerosols containing such genetically engineered cold viruses.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common lethal genetic disease in North America
and Europe, afflicting one in every 2,500 Caucasian newborns - up to 40,000
Americans at any given time. The hallmark of the disease is abnormally thick
respiratory secretions that cause scarring of the lungs and make sufferers
susceptible to infections. Despite recent improvement in care from better
antibiotics and respiratory therapy, the average cystic fibrosis patient dies at
the age of 27.

   The cold virus, called an adenovirus, is genetically disabled so it cannot
replicate and cause cold symptoms. Otherwise, the virus could be dangerous for
CF patients, who cannot clear lung secretions normally. Researchers chose
adenovirus, the cause of perhaps 10 percent of all colds, because it prefers to
infect the lining of respiratory passages - exactly where the normal variant of
the cystic fibrosis gene needs to be.

   "This is an important step toward eventual treatment and cure of the
disease," said Dr. Ronald G. Crystal of the National Institutes of Health, who
led the project. Particularly for younger CF patients who have not yet suffered
irreversible lung damage, Crystal said, "I think this offers real hope."

   "This is exceedingly important," commented Dr. Henry Dorkin, director of the
cystic fibrosis center at the New England Medical Center. "I'm gratified with
the speed with which this field is moving. It's one of the hottest topics in
pediatrics today."

   Robert Beall of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation said the gene therapy results
and several new drugs now undergoing human testing give cystic fibrosis patients
and their parents reason to hope that the disease may be conquered sooner than
any had dared to hope until recently.

   Some of the new drugs are showing promise, Beall and others said, in thinning
the sticky lung secretions that plague cystic fibrosis patients. This could be
important when and if aerosol gene therapy is ready for human testing, since it
would make it easier for the aerosol to penetrate patients' airways.

   "We're treating the whole spectrum of CF," Beall said in an interview. "It's
a very exciting time."

   The gene defect responsible for cystic fibrosis was discovered only 30 months
ago, and many researchers believed effective gene therapy for the disease would
be many years away. As a result of the success with rats, however, Crystal's
group at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute expects to begin
experiments with nonhuman primates within weeks.

   If primate studies indicate it is safe, Crystal anticipates human trials in a
year to 18 months.

   The new report, published in the journal Cell, marks the first time gene
therapy has been shown to work in intact living animals. Up to now, gene therapy
experiments in humans and animals have involved removing target cells and
tissues, doing genetic manipulation outside the body and then reinfusing them,
an approach scientists call "ex vivo," or out-of-body.

   Such a strategy was used, for instance, in pioneering gene therapy
experiments launched in late 1990 in patients with a rare immune-system defect
called adenosine deaminase deficiency.

   The ex vivo approach is not feasible for treating the lungs of cystic
fibrosis patients, since the missing gene needs to be delivered to lung cells
spread along thousands of tree-like branching passages.

   The CF work also differs from earlier gene therapy in using a different type
of virus, one containing DNA in its nucleus rather than RNA, as the
gene-carrying delivery vehicle.

   Other human gene therapy trials now underway have employed so-called
retroviruses, which insinuate the desired gene into the DNA of the target cell.
However, this raises concerns about inadvertently causing cancer by interfering
with normal cell control mechanisms.

   "We're really now getting to the era where gene therapy is expanding to other
fields where retroviruses won't be appropriate and ex vivo strategies are not
possible," said Alan E. Smith of the Cambridge biotechnology firm Genzyme, a
leader in cystic fibrosis research. "It's going to be a very powerful therapy, I
don't think anyone doubts it."

   Some research groups, such as one at the University of Michigan lab of Dr.
James Wilson, are working on a retrovirus vehicle to repair the cystic fibrosis
gene defect. Others are reportedly working on nonviral strategies to deliver the
normal gene, which directs the production of a protein necessary for cells to
excrete chloride ions.

   One of the reasons cystic fibrosis may yield to gene therapy, scientists
said, is that it requires extremely tiny amounts of the normal gene product,
called CF transmembrane conductance regulator, or CFTR, to liquefy the stiff
secretions within patients' lungs.

   People who inherit only one defective copy of the gene for CFTR, and thus
have only half the normal amount of the critical protein, escape the symptoms of
CF. But recent studies suggest that as little as 10 percent of normal CFTR
levels may be enough to reverse symptoms, said Crystal, who is chief of the
pulmonary branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   The most important safety question surrounding the use of adenoviruses for
cystic fibrosis gene therapy, scientists said, is whether repeated
administration of the engineered virus will essentially make the patient immune
to the treatment.

   Repeated administration will probably be necessary, because lung cells have a
lifespan of 40 to 80 days. When Crystal's experimental rats were examined six
weeks after the engineered adenoviruses were administered, they were producing
about 40 percent of the initial level of CFTR.

   Another possibility is that the crippled adenovirus could become infectious
if some of the lung cells it infected contained the genes it needs to replicate,
possibly from current or prior infections with "wild-type" adenovirus. If this
happened, Crystal said, the resulting new viruses would also be defective, so
they should not set up a full-blown infection.

   However, Crystal said, "safety issues are the big hurdle, there's no
question."

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1992


                             1517 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               January 10, 1992, FRIDAY , FIVE STAR SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 426 words

HEADLINE: Scientists close in on cystic fibrosis cure

BYLINE: Boyce Rensberger

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:
Medical scientists said Thursday that they had taken "an exciting step" toward a
new form of gene therapy that could "cure" the lung disease cystic fibrosis.

   Using modified cold viruses sprayed into the lungs, they were able to deliver
new genes to replace the defective ones that cause the disease. The method, they
said, works in rats, and tests in humans could begin late this year.

   "I have no doubt at all that if we were to put this in the lungs of patients,
we would correct the cystic fibrosis now," said the research team leader, Ronald
G. Crystal, chief of the pulmonary branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, one of the National Institutes of Health.

   "The major question," Crystal quickly added, "is whether it's safe."

   Crystal said the results of safety tests under way in rats and monkeys should
be available within months.

   He and 14 other scientists published their results in the journal Cell. The
other scientists are from the Heart Institute, the French biotechnology company
Transgene, the Gustav Roussy Institute, also in France, and the Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal inherited disease in the country,
arising in about one in every 2,500 births. An estimated 30,000 Americans have
the disease. They face an average life expectancy of 27 years.

   The disease's most debilitating effect is to make the mucus that lines the
lungs so thick and sticky that patients suffer frequent infections that scar the
lungs, rendering them progressively less able to function.

   The fundamental problem is that the cells lining the lung have defective
portals, called chloride channels, through which they can excrete excess
chloride atoms.

   Scientists have long known that if they could find the defective gene and
insert undamaged copies of it into lung cells, they could, in principle, cure
cystic fibrosis.

   There is no practical way to remove cells from the tens of thousands of tiny
air sacs in the lung and put them back in place.

   "That's what's attractive about adenoviruses," Crystal said, referring to one
kind of cold virus. "They like to infect lung cells preferentially. Our idea was
to let them deliver the gene."

   Molecular biologists took natural cold viruses, removed genes they need to
reproduce (rendering them unable to cause a cold) and inserted a copy of the
chloride channel gene. Early tests on cystic fibrosis patients' lung cells
growing in a culture dish showed the viruses invaded the cells and released the
needed gene, curing the cells.

GRAPHIC: Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1992


                             1518 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    January 10, 1992, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: "Trojan horse' therapy may cure cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II; Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   Federal researchers have developed a bold new form of ""Trojan horse'' gene
therapy for cystic fibrosis that they say could cure the disease, eliminating
the characteristic lung congestion and infections and greatly prolonging
patients' life spans.

   Cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal genetic defect in the United States,
impairs lung function, rendering the victim more susceptible to potentially
fatal infections. The new treatment could be tested in humans within a year.

   The researchers say they have inserted a healthy copy of the gene that is
defective in cystic fibrosis into a common cold virus that has been defanged so
that it no longer produces colds.  The advance is reported in today's edition of
the journal Cell by a team headed by molecular biologist Ronald Crystal of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   When the researchers sprayed this ""Trojan horse'' virus into the lungs of
rats, it carried the gene inside lung cells, which then began producing the
healthy protein.  The researchers are now testing the safety of the virus in
larger animals.

   The treatment would most likely have to repeated many times over a patient's
life, but ""it is a cure,'' Crystal said Thursday.

   ""This is the next logical step in developing gene therapy for cystic
fibrosis, and it's a very important one,'' said biochemist Ronald J. Beall,
executive vice president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.  ""This is a
potential therapy that could restore these people to normal health, and that's
what we want for our CF patients. '' About 12 million Americans carry the
defective gene that causes cystic fibrosis, and one in every 1,800 children
suffers from the disease, which impairs breathing.


LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1992


                             1519 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     January 10, 1992, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS CURE SEEN IN GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   Federal researchers have developed a bold new form of "Trojan horse" gene
therapy for cystic fibrosis that they say could cure the disease, eliminating
the characteristic lung congestion and infections and greatly prolonging
patients' life spans.

   Cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal genetic defect in the United States,
impairs lung function, rendering the victim more susceptible to potentially
fatal infections. The new treatment could be tested in humans within a year.

   The researchers say they have inserted a healthy copy of the gene that is
defective in cystic fibrosis into a common cold virus that has been defanged so
that it no longer produces colds. The advance is reported today in the journal
Cell by a team headed by molecular biologist Ronald G. Crystal of the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute

   When they sprayed this "Trojan horse" virus into the lungs of rats, it
carried the gene inside lung cells, which began producing the healthy protein.
The researchers are testing the safety of the virus in larger animals.

   The treatment would most likely have to be repeated many times over a
patient's life, but "it is a cure," Crystal said Thursday.

   "This is the next logical step in developing gene therapy for cystic
fibrosis, and it's a very important one," said biochemist Ronald J. Beall,
executive vice president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "This is a potential
therapy that could restore these people to normal health, and that's what we
want for our CF patients."

   About 12 million Americans carry the defective gene that causes cystic
fibrosis, and one in every 1,800 children suffers from the disease. It is
characterized by the buildup of a thick mucus in the lungs that impairs
breathing and leaves the victims unusually susceptible to respiratory
infections. The disease also affects the pancreas in about 75% of victims,
blocking secretion of enzymes necessary for digesting and absorbing fats in the
diet.

   Most victims succumb to repeated infections, and earlier in this century
virtually all died in their first year of life. But the development of improved
antibiotics to control the infections has extended the median life span to 27,
and many patients now live into their 30s and 40s.

   There has been no therapy for the disease itself, but two new drugs called
Amiloride and DNase, now undergoing clinical trials in humans, have shown
promising results. Both dilute mucus in the lungs so that it is less likely to
harbor infectious agents. Both drugs would probably work well in combination
with the new therapy, Beall said.

   Researchers have held out hope for gene therapy for cystic fibrosis since the
defective gene that causes it was discovered in 1989. But it has been clear that
the task would require an unusual way to approach the problem.

   In conventional gene therapy, cells are removed from the body, genetically
engineered to alter their characteristics and then reimplanted.

   That approach is not practical in the lungs because the intricate structure
of the lungs prevents the removal of cells.

   A cold virus called an adenovirus is ideal for the job because it attacks
only lung cells, passing through the outer membranes of the cells and releasing
its DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid, the genetic blueprint of life) inside them. The
virus could thus be an effective "Trojan horse" that would sneak the gene into
the cells in the same fashion that, according to legend, Greek warriors were
sneaked into the ancient city of Troy in a large wooden horse.

   Crystal and his colleagues at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in
Baltimore and Transgene SA in Strasburg, France, selected one of the many
adenoviruses that infect humans and removed the genes that produce the symptoms
of a cold.

   In place of the deleted genes, they inserted the healthy form of the cystic
fibrosis gene. Then they used an aerosol of the virus to expose it to the lungs
of rats. They were able to demonstrate that the human protein was produced in
the animals' lung in concentrations higher than those found in healthy humans
and that it persisted in the cells for at least six weeks. The scientists said
these levels would be sufficient to cure the disease.

   Since no animals develop cystic fibrosis, however, the researchers were not
able to show that the gene therapy actually eliminates the disease. But they are
confident that it will do so in human experiments because they have already
found that the virus "cures" human cystic fibrosis cells grown in the
laboratory.

   "I have no doubt that if we were to (use the altered virus) now in a person
with cystic fibrosis that we could . . . reverse the abnormalities in the lung,"
Crystal told the Associated Press.

   But first, they must demonstrate its safety in animals. They are studying
safety in rodents and other small animals, Crystal said, and within a few weeks
will begin testing in monkeys. If it proves safe there, they will be able to
begin testing in humans, perhaps in as little as a year.

   Among researchers' concerns are whether the altered virus can produce side
effects, whether it might combine with other adenoviruses and become infectious
and whether the animals will develop immunity to the virus. "Our studies so far
suggest that these are not problems," Crystal said, but the virus has not been
administered repeatedly to the animals, as would be required in human therapy.


                             1520 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 January 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A2-11

TOO FEW SOUVENIRS FROM TOKYO

    President Bush headed home with a suitcase of concessions that car makers
pronounced inadequate. Even Administration officials admitted the trip fell
short of U.S. goals.  A1

AUTOMOTIVE SUMMIT

    The heads of the world's largest automakers, Japanese and American, met for
the first time in a Tokyo hotel, and everyone walked away dissatisfied.  A1

GREAT EXPECTATIONS FIZZLE

    Contrary to expectations that the President's visit to Tokyo would
jump-start relations, the trip may have exacerbated antagonism.  A11

Europe wants equal treatment after U.S.-Tokyo auto accords.  A11

'THE FLEET IS RUSSIA'S'

    President Boris N. Yeltsin bridled at Ukraine's claim on the Black Sea
Fleet, and, invoking history to back him up, declared it the property of Russia.
A1

UKRAINE HOLDS ITS GROUND

    President Leonid M. Kravchuk debated for four hours with senior military
commanders on the future of armed forces in independent Ukraine.  A8

A CASUALTY OF WAR

    Rustaveli Prospekt was the heart of the Georgian capital of Tbilisi, and one
of the most tragic victims of the fighting there.  A9

YUGOSLAVIA SPLINTERS AGAIN

    The Serbian minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina has proclaimed a sector of
the republic as an autonomous region.  A2

PEACE DELEGATIONS ARRIVE

    The Palestinian and Jordanian delegations arrived in Washington for peace
talks, but the path is paved with questions.  A3

ETHIOPIA 6 MONTHS LATER

    The prognosis is not promising six months after Ethiopia's new Government
took over.  A6

Michel Rocard, ex-French Prime Minister, makes a comeback.  A3

NEW ATTENTION FOR P.O.W. ISSUE

    Alan C. Ptak will be the nation's first Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs.  A5

Daqiuzhuang Journal: Where capitalism and Communism meet.  A4

Beirut sets out to silence the militias it has disarmed.  A6

National A12-16, A28

WHY WELFARE ROLLS KEEP RISING

    After showing little growth for almost two decades, the nation's welfare
rolls now routinely reach a record level with each passing month. And there is a
growing belief among analysts that factors more enduring than the current
recession will keep the number of caseloads high well into the future.  A1

BUSH'S RATING SLIPS FURTHER

    At the dawn of the election year, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found that
the President's approval rating had dipped to 48 percent. But the poll also
found that voters knew little about the Democrats who would challenge him.  A1

Reporter's Notebook: The Vice President on the stump.  A15

Four networks agreed to pool resources in New Hampshire.  A14

The drug policy chief acknowledged a campaign finance impropriety.  A14

THE POLITICS OF HEALTH CARE

    Two Cabinet members held a news conference intended to show conclusively,
with a major new study, that Democratic efforts to revamp the nation's health
care system would saddle employers with huge new costs and increase
unemployment. But the chief author of the study immediately charged that the
Administration was misrepresenting the results of her research.  A12

A JUDGE'S COMMENTS, A CITY TORN

    Inflammatory remarks by the top state judge in Jacksonville, Fla., have
brought racial tensions that local officials and community leaders are trying to
ease, with only limited success so far.  A12

FURTHER CURBS ON POLLUTION

    Taking aim at ever-smaller sources of air pollution, California adopted
regulations controlling the ingredients in aerosol disinfectants, household
adhesives, fragrances and other consumer products.  A12

GAIN ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS

    Scientists delivered healthy copies of a gene whose defect causes cystic
fibrosis into the lungs of animals, where they blazed to life and stayed robust
for six weeks. That success was another step toward human gene therapy for the
most common lethal hereditary disease.  A16

NEW FINDING ON HEART RISKS

    Researchers said people with normal cholesterol levels but high amounts of
blood fats might be four times as likely as others to suffer a heart attack, and
could be wrongly given a clean bill of health.  A16

Congress and the Administration settle a census dispute.  A14

Law Page B16

How a defendant in Florida can get a rebate if he is acquitted.

At the Bar

Metropolitan Digest, B1

VICTIMS OF CASH CRUNCH

    Business that are surviving the recession are being strangled by cash
shortages, as their customers, also strapped for cash, drag their feet when
paying their bills. The vicious cycle has raised the prospect of even more
bankruptcies.  A1

Neediest Cases B2

Business Digest, D1

Weekend C1-28, B14-15

Touring the Intrepid.  C1
Films from the Depression.  C1
Eavesdropping: urban sport.  C1
For Children C5
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
Film: At the Movies C10
"The Hand That Rocks the Cradle." C8
Music: A Chicago blues legend.  C3
Dance: By Randy Warshaw.  C3
Restaurants C24
Art: Here comes Abstraction.  C28
The Art Market C19
Video collages by Marcel Odenbach.  C21
Word and Image: "The Pursuit of Pleasure." C23
TV Weekend B14

Obituaries B6

Peter Gray Meek, executive of National Health Council.

Sports B7-12

Baseball: Who's on third for Yankees?  B7
Basketball: Rattled Knicks need to roll now.  B9
Lafayette High up against tough competition.  B9
Column: Lipsyte on hockey.  B7
Football: Redskins' Ervins finds his footing.  B7
Hockey: Devils win; stop Hull.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials A26
Lost in Tokyo.
Why Governor Wilder failed.
Women at work.
Sadness, shame in the Bronx.
Letters A26
A. M. Rosenthal: 10 choices, 10 errors.  A27
Leslie H. Gelb: Call me juror.  A27
M. J. Akbar: At the center of the world.  A27
Jessica Litwak: Pregnant? Stick to the rules and relax.  A27

GRAPHIC: Photo: A tug-of-war over Ukraine's armed forces.  A8 (Associated Press)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1992


                             1521 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 January 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 116 words

HEADLINE: INSIDE

BODY:


   A Key Price Measure Falls

   With the economy still weak, prices received by producers fell two-tenths of
1 percent in December and one-tenth of 1 percent for 1991. Page D1.

Health Care and Politics

    The Administration cited a new study to attack Democratic health care
proposals. But the study's author said it was being misrepresented. Page A12.

Gain on Cystic Fibrosis

    Scientists reported a major advance toward human gene therapy for cystic
fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disease. Page A16.

New Marching Orders

    Mayor Dinkins has taken the St. Patrick's Day march from its traditional
organizers, as the controversy over gay marchers continues. Page B1.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1992


                             1522 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 January 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

HEADLINE: Test Hints at Cystic Fibrosis Therapy

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   Advancing smoothly and swiftly toward human gene therapy for cystic fibrosis,
the most common lethal genetic disease, scientists have delivered healthy copies
of the gene whose defect causes the disease into the lungs of experimental
animals, where they blazed to life and stayed robust for six weeks.

   Should the new method prove safe in further tests, the scientists said they
could begin human trials within the next 12 to 18 months, thus offering cystic
fibrosis patients the most promising treatment yet for their disorder.

    It would be the first treatment to prevent the buildup of mucus that cystic
fibrosis causes in the lungs. Enzyme treatments can ease the other symptoms of
cystic fibrosis, but intractable lung problems have been the leading cause of
death for people with the disease. About 30,000 Americans suffer from the
disease, and their average life span is 28 years.

Ideal Treatment Method

    "This is extremely encouraging, and we're very excited," said Dr. Robert J.
Beall, executive vice-president for medical affairs of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation. "Gene therapy is the ultimate therapy for cystic fibrosis, and if we
can get through the safety experiments, we'll be in great shape."

   Dr. Ronald G. Crystal of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in
Bethesda, Md., and his colleagues performed the experiment by infecting
laboratory rats with a genetically altered version of a common cold virus, which
harbored a copy of the gene that is missing or deficient in patients with cystic
fibrosis. The virus had also been deactivated so that it could no longer cause
respiratory disease, but merely served as a molecular delivery van.

   To the scientists' delight, the cold virus successfully entered the animals'
lung and airway cells and began propagating significant amounts of the vital
cystic fibrosis protein. The new results are being published today in the
journal Cell.

   "I think it's fantastic," said Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick
Children at the University of Toronto, who helped discover the cystic fibrosis
gene in 1989. "There are many concerns, but this is definitely a big step
forward."

   The animals did not suffer from cystic fibrosis, and so the treatment could
not be expected to cure the disorder. But previous experiments in a test tube
have shown that adding back the missing gene to diseased lung cells of cystic
fibrosis patients corrects the cellular defect, and scientists see no reason why
the approach should not work in a living patient.

Questions About Safety

    The new research demonstrated that the cold virus, called an adenovirus,
would introduce the desired gene into a live animal's lungs, and that the gene
would generate the vital protein in a quantity believed to be more than
sufficient to essentially cure a human patient's disease.

   "I have no doubt that if we were to take a modified adenovirus, and put it
down into the lungs of an individual with cystic fibrosis, we'd get expression
of the gene and correction of abnormality," Dr. Crystal said. But he emphasized
that many concerns about the safety and long-term effectiveness of the approach
must be resolved before any human patient will receive the treatment.

   Last spring Dr. Crystal showcased the potential of the new approach to gene
therapy by inserting a small gene, called the alpha-1 antitrypsin gene, into a
cold virus. But until the latest report, nobody knew whether the adenoviral
scheme would work for the cystic fibrosis gene, which is a large and unwieldy
molecule.

   "This certainly deserves a lot of attention," said Dr. Francis Collins of the
University of Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor, another pioneer in cystic
fibrosis research. "It's the most impressive evidence thus far that one can
transfer the C.F. gene into the airway with fantastic efficiency, and you get an
awful lot of DNA and protein into the right tissues."

   Cystic fibrosis is the most prevalent hereditary illness among whites. One in
20 Americans is a silent carrier of the defect, and if two carriers have
children, they have a one-in-four chance of bearing a child with the disease.

   The disease results when a child lacks working versions of the cystic
fibrosis protein, which normally orchestrates the flow of chloride molecules
across the cell membrane.

   As a result of the defect, the trafficking of chloride and sodium molecules
in the body begins to falter, the body's water balance is disrupted, and mucus
builds up to dangerous levels in the lungs. Infectious bacteria thrive in the
mucus and destroy the fragile tissue there, eventually leading to pulmonary
failure and death.

Genetic Engineering Method

    In the new experiment, Dr. Crystal and his colleagues took the adenovirus,
which causes colds, bronchitis and other respiratory diseases, and removed the
genes that allow it to multiply and kill cells. Using recombinant DNA
techniques, they stitched in a copy of the human cystic fibrosis gene and
administered the altered virus to the rats in liquid dripped down a bronchial
tube.

   The viruses flourished for six weeks, prompting the rats' lung cells to
produce human cystic fibrosis protein. In theory, the introduction of the
missing gene into the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients would work to restore
chloride balance and prevent lung destruction.

   The scientists must still assure that the crippled virus could not somehow
regain its ability to multiply and then begin dividing wildly and generating
uncontrollable amounts of cystic fibrosis protein in the process. But they said
other recent experiments had indicated that excess protein was not harmful to
the body.

   Researchers also worry that in human patients the immune system might over
time rally a defense against the altered adenoviruses, killing the delivery
vehicles and rendering the method useless.

GRAPHIC: Photo: "There are many concerns, but this is definitely a big step
forward," said Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto,
on the progress made in gene therapy for cystic fibrosis. (Agence France-Presse)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1992


                             1523 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    January 10, 1992, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 246 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis cure may be within reach

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Researchers have cleared a major hurdle on the road to successful gene
therapy for cystic fibrosis by getting a normal gene into the lungs of lab
animals.

   ''I have no doubt if we did this in a patient today it would correct the
abnormalities of the lung,'' says Ronald G. Crystal, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. ''But first we must confront several safety issues.''

   He says tests in humans could begin within a year.

   Cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal genetic disease in the USA, occurs in
1 in 2,000 births. It causes a protein deficiency that results in mucous in the
lungs, infection and damage.

   In a study out today in Cell, Crystal used a cold virus as a ''delivery van''
for a CF gene - which produces the deficient protein - to the lungs of lab rats.

   If studies succeed, an aerosol inhaler might be used periodically to
''infect'' patients with the cure.

   ''This is a very important step forward in developing a treatment,'' says
Francis Collins of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, who helped discover
the CF gene.

   The next steps:

   - To ensure the virus won't cause harm.

   - To make sure the virus will remain a reliable delivery system. The body may
develop immunity, as it does to ordinary cold viruses.

   But Dr. Robert Beall, of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, says parents of
children with CF should be encouraged: ''CF researchers have accomplished what
was only dreamed about in the first 30 years of the organization.''


                             1524 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 10, 1992, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Breakthrough;
Inhalant Could Replace Defective Lung Genes

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Boyce Rensberger, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Medical scientists, calling their work "an exciting step" toward a new form
of gene therapy that could "cure" the lung disease cystic fibrosis, say they
have modified cold viruses so that when sprayed into the lungs, they deliver new
genes to replace the defective ones that cause the disease.

   The researchers have shown that the method works in rats and say human tests
could begin late this year.

   "I have no doubt at all that if we were to put this in the lungs of patients,
we would correct the cystic fibrosis now," said the research team leader, Ronald
G. Crystal, chief of the pulmonary branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, one of the National Institutes of Health. "The major question,"
Crystal quickly added, "is whether it's safe."

   Crystal said safety tests are underway in rats and monkeys and that results
should be available within months.

   He and 14 other scientists are publishing their results in today's issue of
the journal Cell. The other scientists are from the Heart Institute, the French
biotechnology company Transgene, the Gustav Roussy Institute in France and the
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal inherited disease in the country,
arising in about one in every 2,500 births. An estimated 30,000 Americans have
the disease and face an average life expectancy of 27 years.

   The most debilitating effect of the disease is to make the mucus lining the
lungs so thick and sticky that patients suffer frequent infections that scar the
lungs, rendering them progressively less able to function.

   The fundamental problem, which the gene therapy would correct, is that the
cells lining the lung have defective portals, called chloride channels, through
which they can excrete excess chloride atoms. The channels cannot be properly
regulated by the cell because their structure is wrong. That, in turn, is the
result of errors in the gene that dictates their structure.

   Scientists have long known that if they could find the gene in question and
insert undamaged copies of it into lung cells, they could, in principle, cure
cystic fibrosis. The gene was isolated 2 1/2 years ago and since then
researchers have been racing for a way to put the gene into lung cells.

   Previous attempts at gene therapy for other diseases have focused on
conditions for which it would be practical to remove cells from the patient's
body, alter them in the lab, then return them to the patient.

   But there is no practical way to remove cells from the tens of thousands of
tiny air sacs in the lung, then put them back.

   "That's what's attractive about adenoviruses," Crystal said, referring to one
kind of cold virus. "They like to infect lung cells preferentially. Our idea was
to let them deliver the gene."

   Molecular biologists took natural cold viruses, removed genes the viruses
need to reproduce (rendering them unable to cause a cold) and inserted a copy of
the chloride channel gene. Early tests on cystic fibrosis patients' lung cells
growing in a culture dish showed that the viruses invaded the cells and released
the needed gene. They also showed that the cells followed the gene's code to
make proper chloride channels. The cells were, in effect, cured.

   In the step reported today, the scientists put altered viruses into the lungs
of laboratory rats. The rats did not have cystic fibrosis (there is, in fact, no
animal model of the disease), but the scientists could still prove the method
worked. They removed lung cells from the rats and found they had taken up the
gene and were making human chloride channels.

   Even six weeks later, the human chloride channels still could be found in rat
lung cells. This finding reduces the fear that cells would discard the genes or
die off quickly.

   It remains to be seen whether those new cells will have inherited the new
gene from their progenitors. If not, repeat inhalations of modified cold viruses
may be needed periodically.

   "What we have to show now is that this is safe," Crystal said. "I really
don't foresee any problems."

   Tests on rats and monkeys are expected to look for ill effects, for signs
that the virus may be getting into tissues other than the lungs and to see
whether a treated animal can infect an untreated one.

   "We have some hurdles down the road," Crystal said, "but it's remarkable how
fast this field is moving. I think we're going to cure this disease."


                             1525 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     JANUARY 6, 1992, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1981 words

HEADLINE: Biotech IPOs Raised a Billion In '91 Market
 Promising new drugs in pipeline

BYLINE: ALEX BARNUM, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    In the largest wave of initial public stock offerings in the history of
biotechnology, more than 35 fledgling companies graduated into the rough-and-
tumble world of Wall Street last year.

   Dubbed the Class of '91, this new generation of companies took advantage of
the boom in biotech stocks to raise more than $ 1.1 billion, nearly four times
the $ 266 million raised during the 1983 surge that followed the successful
public launches of Genentech Inc. and Cetus Corp.

   In addition, many biotech companies that were already public -- including
some that began trading just last year -- used the buoyant market to bolster
their cash reserves with a record number of secondary offerings that raised an
additional $ 1.5 billion.

   ''It is by far the most significant window in the history of the biotech
world,'' said G. Steven Burrill, national director of Ernst & Young's high-tech
industry services. He estimates the total raised by biotech companies in 1991 at
about $ 3 billion.

   The reasons for the wave of new biotech offerings are many: Wall Street's
appetite was whetted by the industry's strong performance in 1990 and by the
emergence of Amgen Inc. as the new industry leader. Young biotech companies, for
their part, were gasping for new capital to finance their expensive drug
development efforts after three years of drought on Wall Street.

   The IPO boom also reflects the coming of age of biotech, a recognition that
the industry has begun to deliver the blockbuster drugs it promised a decade
ago. ''The fundamental impact of the science is unquestioned, and the
profitability is now proven,'' said Dan Case III, executive vice president of
Hambrecht & Quist Inc. investment bankers in San Francisco.

   A decade ago, the only public biotech companies were Genentech Inc. and Cetus
Corp. By comparison, there are nearly 250 public biotech companies today with a
total stock market value of about $ 40 billion. That is nearly equivalent to the
market value of Merck Co., the world's largest pharmaceutical company.

   ''The industry as a whole is not that much smaller than Merck as a single
company,'' Burrill points out. ''Yet the industry has 120 products under
development,'' far more than the number of products in Merck's pipeline.  ''This
industry may be one Merck this year and two Mercks next year.''

   The Class of '91 is a precocious group of fledgling companies that hope to
use their large sums of capital to deliver -- sometime around the turn of the
century -- treatments for some of medicine's most vexing problems.

   The new generation differs significantly from the first crop of biotech
companies in that genetic engineering is only one tool among an array of
avant-garde technologies. Among those technologies are anti- sense, a way of
blocking the genetic mechanisms of disease; gene therapy, a means of treating
disease by tinkering with the body's genes; and rational drug design, a high-
tech approach to discovering promising new drugs.

   Another distinction of the Class of '91 is that unlike the first generation
of biotech companies, which focused a single technology against an array of
ailments, it includes many companies that are betting on a single disease.

   Among them are COR Therapeutics, a South San Francisco company developing
treatments for cardiovascular diseases, and more than five companies that are
focused on diseases of the central nervous system.

   Most of the Class of '91 are trading well above their initial offering
prices. At the head of the class in terms of stock performance are:

   * MedImmune Inc., a Gaithersburg, Md., company that is developing an AIDS
vaccine and signed a development agreement with Merck. The stock, which opened
at 9 1/4 a share, rode the wave of interest in AIDS stocks in the fall, closing
the year at 43 3/4.

   * Systemix Inc., the Palo Alto company that developed a mouse with a human
immune system and has isolated bone marrow stem cells, which spawn all the cells
of the blood and immune system. The company's stock, which sold initially at 18,
soared to 54 3/4 after Sandoz Ltd. announced it would buy a 60 percent stake in
the company.

   * Cygnus Therapeutic Systems Inc., a Redwood City company that is developing
skin patches as a means of administering drugs. Cygnus launched its IPO in
January at 9, the first in the wave of biotech IPOs, and the stock closed the
year at 22 3/4.

   The largest biotech IPO was also the biggest '91 fiasco. Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals Inc., which is developing treatments for diseases of the central
nervous system, raised $ 99 million in April. The offering, widely seen as
overpriced, temporarily soured Wall Street on biotech offerings. The stock,
which opened at 22, closed the year at 18 1/8.

   Analysts say the new generation of public biotech companies will face its own
special set of problems. Although IPOs are virtually the only way to raise the
more than $ 100 million it typically takes to bring a new drug to market, going
public can be a double-edged sword.

   Once public, companies must endure the capriciousness and the short attention
span of Wall Street. The quarterly profit orientation of the stock market often
clashes with the 10-year product cycles of the biotech industry. Indeed,
Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco sold a majority stake to Hoffmann-La Roche
Inc. in part to escape the pressures of Wall Street.

   Members of the Class of '91 are hitting the public market at much earlier
stages in their development than their predecessors, fearing that such an
opportunity to raise cash may not come again for years.

   As a result, observers say, investors often have no clinical results on which
to base their investment decisions. And it will be eight to 10 years, as opposed
to five or six, before these companies have marketable products and profits.

   ''It's going to be hard to sustain the market value in face of the day-to-day
rigorous analysis of Wall Street,'' Burrill said.

   In the wake of the latest biotech offerings, there are likely to be a new
round of mergers. Some analysts argue that the technology base in biotech has
been spread too thin among too many companies, and that companies will look to
acquire others that have complementary technologies.

   Mark Edwards, managing director of Recombinant Capital Inc. in San Francisco,
said acquisitions would increase as the larger, cash-flush concerns buy up
smaller companies with attractive new technologies.

   In addition, there will likely be another round of investment in
next-generation biotech ventures as venture capitalists reinvest the windfalls
from the companies that went public last year.

   ''We will see an unprecedented level of venture backed start-ups,'' Edwards
said. ''It will be a landmark year.''

   Analysts expect biotech IPOs to continue into 1992 at the rate of three to
five a month for the first several months. Among the companies waiting to go are
Gilead Sciences Inc. of Foster City, which is developing ''anti-sense'' drugs,
and Protein Design Labs Inc., a Mountain View company that is using
sophisticated computer technology to help design human antibodies.

    CHART:

      THE CLASS OF '91
     Biotechnology companies that went public in 1991
                                   AMOUNT         COMPANY/     PRODUCT     IPO
      RAISED     INITIAL   12/31  PERCENT
 LOCATION     FOCUS       DATE  (IN MILLIONS)   PRICE   PRICE  CHANGE
 .
 Affymax      Drug        12/17      $80.0        $20     $28 1/2     43
 Palo Alto    discovery
 .
 Alkermes     Neurological 7/16       17.5         10      18         80
 Cambridge,   diseases
 Mass.
 .
 Alteon        Diabetes,  11/1        45           15     30         100
 Northwalk,    aging
 N.J.
 .
 Anergen       Autoimmune  10/10      14            8     10 5/8      33
 Redwood City  diseases
 .
 Aphton        Immune       3/21       7            7      7 3/4      11
 Woodland      disease
 .
 Applied Immune Immune-cell  5/2      31.2         12     23 1/2      96
 Sciences       therapy
 Menlo Park
 .
 Athena        Neurological 11/7      54           12     14 5/8      22
 Neurosciences diseases
 S. San Francisco
 .
 Biomatrix     Soft tissue   8/6      28           10     22 3/4     128
 Ridgefield, N.J. biomaterials
 .
 Biomira       Cancer      12/18      44           11     11 3/4       7
 Alberta, B.C.
 .
 Cambridge     Neurological  6/6      24           12      9 1/2     -21
 Neuroscience  diseases
 Cambridge, Mass.
 .
 CellPro       Immune cell  9/24      33           11      15 1/2     41
 Bothell, Wash. therapy
 .
 Cephalon      Neurological 4/25      59.4         18      13 3/4    -24
 Westchester, Pa. diseases
 .
 COR       Cardiovascular   6/27      15            7 1/2  15        100
 Therapeutics  diseases
 S. San Francisco
 .
 Cygnus     Drug delivery   1/31       27           9      22 3/4    153
 Redwood City
 .
 Cytel         Immune      11/22       52          13      14 1/4     10
 San Diego     disorders
 .
 Dianon        Cancer       7/31       13.2         8      13 3/4     72
 Stratford, Conn. diagnostics
 .
 DNX       Blood products, 12/11       32.5        13      11 1/2    -12
 Princeton,   drug testing
 N.J.
 .
 Genelabs      Infectious  6/13        25.6         9 1/8   9         -1
 Redwood City  diseases
 .
 Genetic Therapy  Gene     7/31        14.4         9      15 1/4     69
 Gaithersburg, Md. therapy
 .
 Genta        Anti-sense  12/17        25.0        10       9 3/4     -3
 San Diego     drugs
 .
 Glycomed    Carbohydrate  6/13        16.1         7      17 1/2    150
 Alameda       biotechnology
 .
 ICOS       Inflammatory    6/5        36           8      11 1/2     44
 Bothell, Wash. diseases
 .
 IDEC          Cell        9/16        45          15      13        -13
 La Jolla      therapy
 .
 IDEXX         DNA         6/21        24          15      22 1/4     48
 Portland, Me. probes
 .
 ImClone  Cancer, immune  11/19        35          14      18         29
Systems disorders

   New York, N.Y.

   .

   ImmuLogic Autoimmune 5/22 20 10 19 90

   Cambridge, Mass. diseases

   .

   ISIS Anti-sense 5/17 25 10 13 3/4 38

   Carlsbad drugs

   .

   Magainin Infectious 12/11 18 9 9 3/4 8

   Plymouth Mtg., diseases,

   Penn.  cancer

   .

   Medarex Immune 7/16 13.8 6 13 1/4 121

   Princeton, N.J. therapies

   .

   MedImmune Infectious 5/8 23.1 9 1/4 43 3/4 373

   Gaithersburg, Md. diseases

   .

   Osteotech Bone transplant 7/17 9.4 7 1/2 17 1/2 133

   Shrewsbury, N.J. products

   .

   Regeneron Neurological 4/2 99 22 18 1/8 -18

   Tarrytown, N.Y. diseases

   .

   Sepracor Process 9/20 40 10 8 1/2 -15

   Malboro, Mass. technology

   .

   Somatogen Blood 8/2 38 19 43 126

   Boulder, Colo. substitutes

   .

   Systemix Cell 8/6 36 18 54 3/4 204

   Palo Alto therapy

   .

   Vertex Rational drug 7/24 27 9 14 3/4 64

   Cambridge, Mass. design

   .

   Sources: Burns, Mc Clellan Inc. and Chronicle research EC:

GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE END


                             1526 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     JANUARY 6, 1992, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 2839 words

HEADLINE: Good Quarter for Bay Stocks
 Local firms outperformed S&P index

BYLINE: KATHLEEN PENDER, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Bay Area stocks, on average, trounced the broader market indexes in the
fourth quarter of 1991, and for the year as a whole.

   For the three months ending December 31, the average Bay Area stock rose 11.6
percent compared to 7.5 percent for the Standard & Poor's 500, according to a
survey compiled by Davis, Skaggs Investment Management.

   For all of 1991, the Bay Area stock average gained 56.3 percent vs. 26.3
percent for the S&P 500.

   The Bay Area survey includes companies with market value over $ 3 million and
a share price of $ 3 or more at the beginning and end of each period.  There
were 199 companies in the fourth quarter survey and 164 companies in the annual
survey. Limited partnerships and real estate investment trusts are excluded.

   For the first time in many years, small companies, in the aggregate,
outperformed big ones and since the Bay Area has so many small companies, the
local averages surged.

   Unlike past years, when technology stocks dominated the Top 10 list, last
year's best performers include firms involved in a wide array of endeavors,
ranging, literally, from stocks (Charles Schwab) to socks (Gap Inc.)

   THE YEAR'S TOP 10

   The top three Bay Area stocks all more than tripled last year.

   No. 1 Electronic Arts, the largest independent supplier of software for Sega
video games, ''really caught a tailwind'' from Sega's dominance in the hot new
16-bit-system category last year, according to Chip Morris, manager of T. Rowe
Price's Science & Technology Fund. The company, which also supplies games for
Nintendo systems, stands to benefit from the rollout of the SuperNintendo
systems as well. Its other video and computer games also did well.

   After languishing below its initial public offering price for more than three
years, shares in No. 2 Charles Schwab suddenly exploded in 1991. The discount
brokerage firm's trading volume was up more than 30 percent, thanks to a
reinvigorated stock market. But the biggest gains from an increase in the
company's client-asset base, which grew from $ 30 billion at the end of 1990 to
$ 45 billion today. Much of the increase came from mutual funds.

   A mortgage bank, First Republic Bancorp, took the No. 3 slot. The company,
which ended 1990 in a depressed state, benefited from lower interest rates and a
pickup in home-mortgage activity, according to Chief Financial Officer Willis
Newton. It also raised $ 25 million in fresh capital, positioning it to take
advantage of weaker competitors in the bank and savings and loan industry.

   No. 4 Solectron not only saw its stock nearly quadruple last year, it also
nabbed the prestigious Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award. The company
specializes in making high-quality circuit boards for computer manufacturers.
This approach is increasing popular for computer makers, who must introduce new
systems rapidly and want independent contractors like Solectron to share the
production costs.

   No. 5 Advanced Micro Devices introduced its version of Intel's hugely
successful 386 microprocessor in March and by yearend had sold an estimated 2
million units. Even though the company announced it was laying off 330 workers
and closing a manufacturing plant in Santa Clara, revenues and earnings
consistently exceeded Wall Street expectations. Revenues from the chip will
probably exceed $ 90 million in the fourth quarter alone.

   Given the fact that biotech/ medical tech was the market's hottest sector
this year, it's not surprising that two such firms made the Bay Area's top 10
list.

   No. 6 Visx, which makes surgical lasers to correct bad vision, indirectly
benefited from a publicity blitz by its major competitor, Summit Technologies.
Investors looking at both companies ''found Visx cheaper by comparison,'' said
Jim McCamant of the Medical Technology Stock Letter.

   No. 7 Escagenetics almost tripled in one week when it announced that it had
produced taxol, a drug that fights ovarian and breast cancer, using plant tissue
culture. Other firms are making taxol from the bark of rare Pacific yew trees,
which worries environmentalists.

   No. 8 Symantec was the only Bay Area stock to make the annual Top 10 list
twice in a row. The company, which makes productivity software, embarked on an
''aggressive acquisition program to fill in the product line'' and has an
''extremely rich and deep management team,'' said analyst Bill Welty, a partner
in Volpe, Welty & Co.

   Rounding out the top 10 are Gap Inc., which racked up stunning sales and
earnings gains while many retailers languished; and Informix, a database
software company that rebounded smartly from 1990, when it was the Bay Area's
second-worst performer.

   THE YEAR'S BOTTOM 10

   Turning to the worst 10 stocks for the year, it is not surprising to find
three stocks that were among the Bay Area's Top 10 performers in 1990. This
year's riches-to-rags stocks are Laserscope, SynOptics Communications and Conner
Peripherals.

   The surge in medical technology stocks didn't prevent bottom-ranked
Laserscope, which makes surgical lasers, from tumbling nearly 70 percent.
Laserscope, which was the Bay Area's third-best performer in 1990, ''went from
rapidly growing profits to temporary losses and investors abandoned the stock,''
McCamant said. Its chief problem was increased competition in the fast-growing
laproscopic surgery market from another Bay Area company, Coherent Inc.

   Children's Discovery Centers, a chain of child-care centers, suffered
continuing losses in 1991, although they were smaller than the previous year's
and revenues actually increased. Nevertheless, the thinly traded stock sank 41
percent as investors in the firm's secondary offering in October became
disillusioned, according to CFO Randall Truelove.

   Next in line was SynOptics Communications, which makes computer-networking
products. The company, which was 1990's second-best Bay Area performer, suffered
a steep drop in earnings, blaming it on sluggish economic conditions,
competition that forced price cuts and product development expenses.

   Fourth-ranked Digital Microwave, which makes communications equipment, was
also plagued by losses.

   Two banks on the Worst 10 list, Bank of San Francisco and Pacific Western
Bancshares, were both hurt by real-estate loan losses. Pacific Western was
dogged by other controversies as well, including restatement of earnings,
embezzlement by a loan officer and a check- kiting scheme than cost the small
bank $ 1.2 million.

   Other worst performers included: disk-drive maker Conner Peripherals, which
couldn't sustain its astonishing growth rate when the personal computer industry
slumped; Autodesk, a former Wall Street darling that found itself in a maturing
market with less successful new software products; Software Publishing, which
suffered from intense new competition; and Inmac, a mail order distributor of
computer peripherals and other add-ons that encountered ferocious competition
from office supply stores.

   FOURTH-QUARTER WINNERS

   For the fourth quarter, the Top 10 list was, as usual, dominated by volatile
high-tech and biotech stocks.  No. 1 Liposome Technology rose 160 percent after
its secondary stock offering in November sparked interest in the company and
generated a few Wall Street buy-recommendations. The offering also gave the
company $ 26 million to continue its research.

   Liposome stock would have been the year's top performer as well, with an
astounding 722 percent increase for 1991, except that its year-opening price of
2 1/4 did not meet the survey's $ 3-per-share cutoff.

   Stock in No. 2 SBE, a $ 20 million manufacturer of computer boards for
communications equipment, shot up when the company reported that sales increased
32 percent and per-share earnings doubled for the year ended October 31. The
thinly traded stock popped again following a brief mention in Forbes magazine.

   No. 3 Somatix Therapy, formed in March by the merger of Hana Biologics and
Somatix Corp., subsequently acquired privately held GeneSys TherapeuticCorp.,
making the firm a leader in gene therapy.

   Two companies jumped on news of a full or partial merger:

   No. 5 Valid Logic Systems agreed to be acquired by rival Cadence Design
Systems in a $ 198 million stock swap that will create a leader in software used
to design microchips and circuit boards.

   Stock in No. 10 Systemix, which has developed a mouse with a human immune
system, jumped almost 60 percent in one day after it announced it was selling a
60 percent stake to Swiss drug giant Sandoz Ltd. for $ 392 million.

   Other fourth-quarter winners include: Andros Inc., which makes infrared gas
analyzer systems and surged following a buy recommendation by a New York
analyst; Advanced Micro Devices, whose chief executive predicted that fourth-
quarter profit margins will be in the double digits for the first time since
1984; Zilog Inc., which reported a 65 percent surge in third quarter earnings;
Informix, which shot up another 13 percent on Friday after an analyst raised his
fourth-quarter earnings estimate; and Borland International, which was suddenly
perceived as the nation's No. 2 independent software maker (after Microsoft)
based on its acquisition of Ashton-Tate and booming sales of its spreadsheet
program.

   FOURTH-QUARTER LOSERS

   Among fourth-quarter losers, Good Guys led the list with a 50 percent drop.
But the stock still managed to end the year with a 62 percent increase. Even
though fourth-quarter profits were up 68 percent, intense price competition
during the Christmas season led several analysts to cut their ratings on the
consumer electronics retailer.  The second-worst performer was Communications
Intelligence, which makes handwriting- recognition software. The company started
trading on Nasdaq in September.  That, and the company's role in the hot
pen-based computer market, caused the stock to surge from 4 1/4 to 10 1/8 in the
third quarter. It fell back to 1/2 in the fourth quarter, ''which is more
reflective of where we are today,'' a company spokesman said.

   Scorpion Technologies Inc., a Los Gatos-based software company, had a 1-for-3
reverse stock split in late November that raised its stock price from under $ 1
to around $ 3. As a result, ''we lost support from some small (brokerage) firms
who play in penny stocks, but haven't yet picked up support from bigger firms,''
said CEO Terry Marsh. The company is also in the midst of a stock offering that
will dilute current shareholders' ownership positions, he said.

   Komag, which makes components for disk drives, fell in sympathy with Conner
Peripherals, one of Komag's largest customers. Conner was down 18 percent in the
quarter.

   Software maker Autodesk slipped after several analysts reduced their earnings
estimates following a worse-than-expected third-quarter earnings report. The
weak economy apparently has slowed purchases of Autodesk's design software by
architects and engineers.

   Children's Discovery Centers and Inmac were among the year's as well as the
quarter's worst stocks.

   Adia Services reported a modest drop in revenues and a steep drop in earnings
for the third quarter. The recession is depressing demand for the company's
personnel services.

   Other fourth-quarter losers include BEI Electronics, a thinly traded company
that makes electronic components and instruments; and TCI International, a maker
of communications products that has been hurt by defense-budget cutbacks.

   CHART:

      THE BEST AND WORST OF BAY AREA STOCKS
    BEST OF THE YEAR
    The average Bay Area stock gained 56.3 percent in 1991, compared to 26.3
percent for the S&P 500.
                                  Close            Close         Percent
    Stock                        12/31/91         12/31/90        change
  1. Electronic Arts Inc.         38 1/4            9 3/8         308.0%
  2. Charles Schwab Corp.         30 3/8            7 5/8         300.6
  3. First Republic Bancorp. Inc. 18                4 1/2         300.0
  4. Solectron Corp.              34 3/4            8 7/8         291.5
  5. Advanced Micro Devices       17 1/2            4 7/8         259.0
  6. Visx Inc.                    16 5/8            4 3/4         250.0
  7. Escagenetics Corp.           10 1/2            3 1/8         236.0
  8. Symantec Corp.               44 1/2           13 3/8         232.7
  9. Gap Inc.                     53 1/2           16 5/8         223.0
 10. Informix Corp.               13 3/4            4 1/2         205.6
 .
       BEST 4TH QUARTER STOCKS
    The average Bay Area stock rose 11.6% in the fourth quarter vs. 7.5 for
the S&P 500.
                                  Close            Close         Percent
    Stock                       12/31/91          9/30/91         change
  1. Lipsome Technology Inc.      18 1/2            7 1/8         159.6%
  2. SBE Inc.                     11 1/2            4 1/2         155.6
  3. Somatix Therapy Corp.        10 1/4            4 1/8         148.5
  4. Andros Inc.                  17 3/4            8 1/4         115.2
  5. Valid Logic Systems Inc.      8                4 1/4          91.0
  6. Advancd Micro Devices        17 1/2            9 3/8          86.7
  7. Zilog Inc.                   20 1/4           11 1/8          82.0
  8. Informix Corp.               13 3/4            7 3/4          77.4
  9. Borland Internatonal         82 1/4           46 7/8          75.5
 10. Systemix Inc.                54 3/4           32              71.1
 .
    WORST OF THE YEAR
    Three of this year's 10 worst stocks -- Laserscope, Synoptics, and Conner
were on last year's Top 10 list.
                                  Close            Close         Percent
    Stock                       12/31/91         12/31/90         change
  1. Laserscope                    7 5/8           25             -69.5%
  2. Children's Discovery          4 3/4            8             -40.6
  3. SynOptics Communications     21 1/8           34 1/4         -38.3
  4. Digital Microwave Corp.      11               17 3/4         -38.0
  5. Bank of San Francisco         3 1/8            4 3/4         -34.2
  6. Conner Peripherals           15 3/4           23 5/8         -33.3
  7. Autodesk Inc.                34 1/2           50 3/4         -32.0
  8. Software Publishing Corp.    16               22 3/4         -29.7
  9. Pacific Western Bancshares    6 1/4            8 5/8         -27.5
 10. Inmac Corp.                   3 1/8            4 1/4         -26.5
      WORST 4TH QUARTER STOCKS
    Good Guys was the worst stock in the 4th quarter but was still up 62
percent for the whole year.
                                  Close            Close         Percent
    Stock                       12/31/91          9/30/91         change
  1. Good Guys                    14 3/8           29             -50.4%
  2. Commun Intellegence           4 1/2            8 3/8         -46.7
  3. Scorpion Technolo             3 1/4            5 1/4         -39.3
  4. Komag Inc.                   15               23 1/2         -36.2
  5. Autodesk Inc.                34 1/2           49 3/4         -30.7
  6. Childrens Discovery           4 7/8            6 1/2         -27.0
  7. Inmac Corp.                   3 1/8            4 1/4         -26.5
  8. Adia Sevices Inc.            18               24 1/4         -25.8
  9. BEI Electronics Inc.          7                9 1/4         -24.3
 10. TCI International Inc.        3 1/8            4 1/8         -24.2
 EC:


CORRECTION-DATE: JANUARY 7, 1992, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

CORRECTION:

    An article in yesterday's BusinessExtra section incorrectly stated that
sales and earnings for SBE Inc. rose 32 percent and 100 percent respectively for
the year ended October 31. Those figures were for the quarter ended October 31.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, CHART,Stocks have surged in recent weaks, keeping traders busy
on the New York Stock Exchange floor , BY ASSOCIATED PRESS


                             1527 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  January 2, 1992, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 955 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE PROMISES ADVANCES

BYLINE: William Allen Post-Dispatch Science Writer

BODY:


   From the inner universe of human cells to the distant reaches of the Milky
Way, 1992 will bring important new discoveries in science, medicine and
technology, say leading St. Louis scientists and physicians.  In coming months,
they predict: Doctors may be able to replace missing or defective human genes,
some of the basic building blocks of life.  Researchers will move forward with
key tests of genetically engineered plants and animals, such as a form of cotton
that repels insects without the need for pesticides.  Scientists will begin
construction of a gravitational wave detector, which might finally allow them to
prove Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity.  But as the region enters
this brave new world, it will take with it some of the problems that have
plagued the past: growing mounds of garbage, an ailing health care system and
continuing competition for scarce research dollars.  Nonetheless, St. Louis
scientists say they are optimistic.  Dr. David Lagunoff, chairman of the
pathology department at St. Louis University's School of Medicine, said he
expects ''major advances'' in genetic therapy this year.  Researchers now have
precise ways of identifying defects in genes, which carry the information that
determines everything from eye color to the odds of getting certain diseases.
With that knowledge, Lagunoff said, doctors may soon be able to replace missing
or defective genes, allowing them to eliminate many hereditary diseases.  He
said medical scientists also will gain important new knowledge about what causes
cancer, a leading cause of death in the United States. To do this, they will
build on recent advances in understanding how cells divide, how parts of the
cell's genetic blueprint are turned on and off, and how cells develop into
different kinds of tissue, including cancerous tumors.  There actually are
several kinds of cancers, each one requiring a specific kind of treatment.
Better understanding of the common causes of cancer in cells may lead to
treatments that will work for a wide variety of cancers, Lagunoff said.  Dr.
William A. Peck, vice chancellor for medical affairs and dean of the Washington
University School of Medicine, said he would like to see more attention paid in
1992 to making sure all Americans have access to health care.  ''There's no
question that our current health-care system is dysfunctional,'' he said. ''It's
not reaching all the people it should.  This is the most important issue on the
domestic agenda.'' Peck also said the nation should increase its investment in
medical research and development, what he called the pathway to better health
now and for coming generations.  Peter Raven, director of the Missouri Botanical
Garden, said 1992 would see key tests of genetically engineered organisms as
scientists make use of their new-found prowess at moving genes from one living
thing to another.  ''It ought to be a big year in actually putting in place the
first medium-sized trials of things like genetically engineered cotton,'' Raven
said. ''That's extremely important because more than half the pesticides in the
world are put on cotton.'' Raven said global environmental problems could be
lessened as a result of a ''growing feeling of internationalism'' and a push for
free trade with Mexico and other Western Hemisphere countries.  The search for
effective alternative sources of energy - such as solar, wind and tidal energy -
should be ''investigated harder in '92 and brought into wider use,'' he said.
Scientists will make advances in turning garbage and other waste materials into
useful products, said David Garin, interim director of the Center for Science
and Technology at the University of Missouri at St. Louis.  Those useful
products include energy, synthetic soils and building materials, Garin said.
Clifford Will, chairman of physics at Washington University, said 1992 would
bring ''exciting results'' from various space-based telescopes that now orbit
the Earth.  These include the Gamma Ray Observatory, which Will said has already
produced ''some surprises,'' and the Hubble Space Telescope, which despite its
early bad press is making ''fantastic observations.'' Will also noted an
important milestone in 1992 - the start of construction of a gravitational-wave
detector. Scientists will use it to test Albert Einstein's general theory of
relativity, which says, among other things, that time is not constant but can
speed up and slow down.  Will said the detector may also help them learn more
about space mysteries such as black holes, where gravity is so strong that not
even light can escape, or neutron stars and gravity waves.  In engineering and
technology, major 1992 trends will be the laying of more fiber optic
communications lines and a healthy move of researchers from the shrinking
defense industry into civilian research efforts. That's the view of Christopher
Byrnes, dean of the School of Engineering and Applied Science at Washington
University.  The installation of fiber optic lines, spurred by a recent federal
ruling that lets telep hone companies compete with cable networks, ''will lead
to a new and amazing generation of electronic communications services,'' Byrnes
said. The services will include education and medical care delivered to remote
sites.  He said the addition of former defense researchers to non-military
projects ''will, in a very positive way, mean an increase in talent, effort and
new technology to be devoted to other areas of engineering and science.'' For
example, he said, Missouri-based researchers could use their expertise in
strong, lightweight, ''composite'' materials to develop them for use in new
bridges and other civilian structures.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993


                             1528 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 1, 1992 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: UCSD study raises hopes for treating cancer;
Genetically altered cells shown to be effective in fighting leukemia

BYLINE: Bruce V. Bigelow, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   In a study showing a potential new approach for treating leukemia, a team of
San Diego scientists genetically altered leukemic blood cells with a gene that
prevented the cells from multiplying out of control. The genetically altered
blood cells were human T-cell lymphocytes afflicted with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, a rare, lethal cancer that usually strikes children. Researchers at
the University of California in San Diego showed that mice injected with the
altered cells did not develop cancerous tumors. "This experiment offers
additional evidence that a genetic treatment for cancer may be feasible," said
Martin Haas, a researcher at the UCSD Cancer Center, in a statement released
yesterday . Haas cautioned, however, that medical researchers must still
overcome a number of hurdles before treatments relying on "gene therapy" could
be proposed for humans. Haas collaborated with Jian Cheng, a graduate student;
Theodore Friedmann, a pioneer in gene therapy at UCSD; and Jiing-Kuan Yee, who
developed methods of introducing genes into host cells.

   Their study was published in the January, 1992, issue of Cancer Research. The
study also was the first use of an enigmatic gene known as "p53" to treat
leukemia, the scientists said. The p53 gene is attracting increasing attention
from scientists because of the key role it appears to play in governing ordinary
cell division. The p53 gene, a part of chromosome 17, manufactures a protein
that appears to be crucial in maintaining cellular harmony. A normal p53 gene
seems to act as both a tumor-suppressor gene, which helps block unruly cell
growth, and as a so-called oncogene, which helps genes divide properly. But a
defect in the molecular structure of the p53 gene, which results in a
correlating defect in the p53 protein, can allow normal cells to run riot. The
defect in itself is not enough to foster cancer -- a number of other genes must
be derailed as well -- but a defect in the p53 gene appears to play a key role
as cell division spirals out of control. Scientists have discovered defects in
the p53 gene existing in a huge percentage of malignancies of the lung, breast,
colon, skin, blood, throat, brain and liver. For these reasons, scientists have
described the p53 gene as the "Jekyll and Hyde" gene.

   If it's mutated, it not only loses its original personality -- it takes on
new powers. Yet the restorative powers of a normal p53 gene are also impressive.
Scientists already have shown that the normal p53 protein is capable of
reversing cancerous cell growth, although they're not sure exactly how it works.
Now, by using genetic engineering techniques, the UCSD scientists have shown it
may be possible someday to reverse the course of certain types of human cancer
by supplying normal p53 genes to assert control over rampant cell division. The
researchers altered the leukemic blood cells through a technique used in many
genetic research projects at the UCSD School of Medicine. The scientists used a
type of virus called a retrovirus, which inserts its own genetic material into
the DNA of host cells that it infects. "The retrovirus has only a few genes,"
said Yee.

   "We removed all of the virus' own genes and replaced them with p53 genes."
The researchers then "infected" the leukemic blood cells with the genetically
engineered retrovirus, which permanently incorporated the normal p53 gene, into
the DNA of the leukemic cells. The UCSD scientists chose T-cell Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia, or T-ALL, to study the effects of gene therapy using the
p53 gene for several reasons, Haas said. For one thing, leukemia cells in the
patient's bone marrow can be treated more directly than solid tumors.

   Medical researchers also have a greater understanding of acute leukemia.

   Finally, Haas said, conventional treatment offers little chance of survival
for patients whose leukemia recurs after chemotherapy. "These patients can only
benefit from such a novel therapy," Haas said. Patients with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia have an abnormal increase of immature lymphocytes, which normally
constitutes no more than 5 percent of healthy bone marrow.

   The leukemic cells crowd the bone marrow, interfering with normal production
of blood cells, spill into the circulating blood and infiltrate other organs.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia accounts for 85 percent of leukemia in children,
according to the Cancer Sourcebook.

   The subtype of leukemia classified as T-ALL accounts for 15 percent to 20
percent of all ALL cases. In the study, the UCSD team injected leukemic human
blood cells that had been genetically engineered to express the normal p53
protein into the right side of mice.

   The mice have a deficient immune system that allows tumors to grow. Untreated
leukemic cells were injected into the left side of the same mice. After one
month, visible tumors had formed on the left side where the untreated cancer
cells were injected.

   On the right side, there were no tumors.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1529 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           December 31, 1991, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Section D; Page 4

LENGTH: 985 words

HEADLINE: ...AND A NEW MEDICATION FOR AIDS

BYLINE: By Mike Toner STAFF WRITERdisease; medicine; research; technology;
development; science; trends

BODY:

   A new drug for AIDS patients, new treatments for cancer, migraines and
hospital-acquired blood infections, even a promising new use for aspirin brought
new hope to the war on disease and human misery in 1991 - even as health
authorities fretted over setbacks at the hands of old enemies like cholera,
malaria and tuberculosis.

   As it has for 10 years, the burgeoning AIDS epidemic commanded the most
public attention. More than 45,000 new cases were reported in the United States
this year. Worldwide, the World Health Organization estimates that by the end of
the decade the number of cases - about 1.5 million currently - will pass the 12
million mark.

   Among the millions of victims, it was the stories of two people that
shattered what the National Commission on AIDS had called a "perilous
complacency" about the epidemic.

   Earvin "Magic" Johnson's decision to quit professional basketball because he
had been infected with the AIDS virus triggered a groundswell of public concern
over the virus's widely recognized - but widely ignored - ability to spread
through heterosexual contact. A surge of interest in AIDS testing and "safe sex"
- punctuated by daylong lines at clinics and a tenfold increase in calls to the
Centers for Disease Control's AIDS hotline - exceeded anything the CDC had been
able to generate with its AIDS awareness advertising.

   Similarly, the slow, widely publicized death of Kimberly Bergalis, a Florida
woman thought to have been infected with the AIDS virus by her dentist, fanned a
fractious national debate over how best to protect patients and doctors from
AIDS-contaminated blood. Among other measures, the CDC proposed testing the
blood of all hospital patients and tightening precautions for health workers.

   A new AIDS drug, ddI, finally reached the market in 1991 - joining AZT as one
of only two federally approved treatments. More than 80 other AIDS-related drugs
and vaccines are still undergoing tests.

   New drugs for other uses also edged their way through the research and
regulatory pipeline in 1991 - treatments for disorders as diverse as cancer,
heart disease and migraine headaches.

   Taxol, a derivative of the bark of the Pacific yew tree, proved so successful
in experimental treatments of ovarian cancer that the National Cancer Institute
declared it "the most significant new drug we've had for 15 years." Because
taxol is found only in trees a century or more older, it spurred new calls to
save the country's old-growth forests.

   The use of tamoxifen, increasingly a therapy to prevent recurring breast
tumors in some women, was expanded into a new arena. Tests began on the first of
16,000 women to see if the drug can also prevent the initial occurrence of
breast cancer in those at risk for the disease.

   Experimental results also showed that a class of drugs called ACE inhibitors
can arrest the development of congestive heart failure in the million Americans
at risk for the condition. Tests of an injectable drug called sumatriptan showed
that it relieved migraine headaches, a condition that afflicts 8 million
Americans. And a Food and Drug Administration panel found that a genetically
engineered drug, Centoxin, was safe and effective in treating a type of sepsis,
a blood infection that kills 70,000 hospital patients a year.

   Researchers even reported a possible new use for the "medicine cabinet in a
bottle" that the world knows as aspirin. On the heels of several studies showing
that aspirin can reduce the risk of heart attacks and some forms of stroke, the
latest research showed that it may sharply reduce the risk of death from colon
cancer.

   In a move that could open a new avenue in cancer treatment, researchers at
the National Institutes of Health infused patients with advanced melanoma, a
deadly skin cancer, with cancer-killing cells containing a foreign gene that
produces anti-tumor toxins. If the procedure works, gene therapy could be used
to treat a variety of cancers.

   Researchers also succeeded in diagnosing fetal genetic disorders, including
Down's syndrome, by taking blood samples from pregnant women, eliminating the
risk to the fetus from more invasive tests.

   Both diagnosis and gene therapy, of course, require knowing the identity of
the defective gene - and it was on that front that geneticists chalked up some
of their most dramatic achievements. Over the year, researchers have identified
genes responsible for fragile X syndrome, one of the most common causes of
mental retardation; for primary inherited deafness; for Marfan syndrome, a
potentially fatal heart disorder; and genes that play important roles in
Hodgkin's disease, lung cancer, colon cancer and schizophrenia.

   But there were unsettling signs of a new life for some of civilization's
oldest diseases - including some that health experts thought they had vanquished
years ago.

   An outbreak of cholera in Peru in January quickly spread through South and
Central America. By year's end, the outbreak had struck 300,000 people in a
dozen countries and showed no signs of slackening.

   Malaria, which kills up to 2 million people a year, has been making a
comeback in many of the 102 countries where it still occurs. International
health authorities blame the increase on growing chemical resistance of the
malaria parasite and the mosquitoes that carry it. Without new drugs and
pesticides, they fear that malaria control efforts will be increasingly
ineffective in the future.

   Even the United States has seen an unsettling resurgence of "old" diseases.
Outbreaks of a deadly new strain of tuberculosis in New York and Miami pushed
the country's TB rate back to where it was a decade ago. Although most cases are
concentrated among AIDS patients and others with weakened immune systems, health
authorities are concerned because some of the outbreaks are resistant to drugs
that have treated TB successfully for more than 40 years.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kimberly Bergalis: Before her death, the Florida AIDS patient
urged AIDS testing of health-care workers involved in procedures that expose the
blood / file

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1992


                             1530 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               December 25, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 53; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 8109 words

HEADLINE: Uncovered Short Sales Decline 0.7% on Nasdaq

BODY:

   After six consecutive months of increases, the number of actively traded
shares sold short and not yet covered on the Nasdaq fell by 2.2 million, or
seven-tenths of 1 percent, to 332.5 million for the month ended Dec. 15, the
National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.

   Until this month's reversal, the indicator had been climbing steadily, and
gained a total of 28.7 percent between mid-May, when it stood at 260 million
shares, and mid-November, when it set a record of 334.7 million shares.

    Open positions on short sales for 1,187 less active over-the-counter
securities also fell in the latest monthlong period, as they had the month
before. This time, they totaled 30.7 million shares, down 11.3 percent from the
prior month's 34.6 million.  In a short sale, investors, betting that a stock's
price will fall, sell borrowed stock in anticipation they will be able to buy
back an equal number of shares later at a lower price, thereby making a profit.
The numbers of shares in which a short position is still held by investors is
totaled by each exchange at the end of a reporting period and represents the
"short interest" for that period.

   The short-interest figures from the N.A.S.D. are made public seven business
days after the 15th day of each month.

   In the latest period, the following N.A.S.D. stocks showed changes in open
short positions of 10,000 shares or more:

Security Name                      12/15/91       11/15/91

0 Telefonos De Mexico*               123,876       402,610
3 D Systems Inc T                         0         25,000
3com Cp* T                          209,098        289,877
50 Off Stores Inc T               1,720,421      1,638,409
A D V A N T A Cp T                  598,805        810,756
A D V O System Inc T                 33,836         11,283
A E S Cp (The) T                     66,266         81,679
A P Green Inds T                        701         49,201
A S K Computer Sys T                  85,944       175,928
A S T Research Inc T              2,626,917      2,054,020
A T N N Inc                         102,579        116,109
A T R I X Labs Inc T                 95,977        133,191
Acorn Venture Cap Cp                    265         87,510
Action Staff Wts 91                  14,786              0
Action Staffing Inc*                377,047        153,935
Action Staffing Pfd*                 12,253              0
Action Stafing Wt A*                 32,105         53,560
Adaptec Inc T                        56,577         79,969
Addington Resources T                25,215         13,846
Admar Gp Inc (The)                   48,369            160
Adobe Systems Inc* T              3,420,744      2,898,758
Advan Interventional T               26,056         12,140
Advan Promotion Tech T              168,779        136,384
Advanced Enviro A                   210,717         115,595
Advanced Enviro Wt A*               157,460         90,196
Advanced Logic Res T                219,935        159,180
Advanced Mktg Svcs T                 18,622          5,620
Advanced NMR Sys Inc*                19,029        316,065
Advanced Polymer Sys T               85,831         45,246
Advanced Telecommun T                80,339        110,500
Advantage Life Prods                 21,348          7,748
Air Wis Services Inc T              103,314        139,748
Airship Intl Ltd*                    16,199          5,088
Ajay Sports Inc*                     26,622          3,956
Akorn Inc T                          15,209          1,175
Akzo N V ADR* T                      24,692         88,425
Alanco Resources Cp                  43,317          2,022
Aldus Cp* T                         631,281        492,969
Alex Brown Inc T                    498,107        436,680
Algorex Cp                           11,470             44
Alias Research Inc T                780,444        498,606
Alliance Imaging Inc T               28,885          1,051
Alliance Pharm Cp T                 401,149        323,823
Allied Capital Cp T                   4,799         16,311
Allwaste Inc* T                      89,673        192,989
Alpha 1 Biomed Wts B                  5,805         16,211
Alpha 1 Biomedicals*                130,297        142,183
Alpha Solarco Inc                   120,674        102,157
Alpine Lace Brands* T               138,079        124,365
Alta Gold Co T                       16,683          1,031
Alteon Inc T                         96,549         10,058
Altera Cp T                         130,608         82,591
Alter Sales Co Inc                        0        167,725
Amer Aircraft Cp A                   15,593         41,935
Amer Bankers Ins Gp T               319,897        240,627
Amer Biogenetic Cl A*                24,332         54,572
Amer Biogenetic Wt B                  1,377          14,007
Amer Biomed Inc                       3,000         32,062
Amer Biomed Inc Wts                       0         14,350
Amer Bus Comp Cp                    784,111        837,419
Amer Cons Growth Cp                  28,413         12,904
Amer Dental Laser T                 249,278        261,866
Amer Drug Screen WtsP                57,000              0
Amer Drug Screens*                  196,548        171,137
Amer Franchise Gp                         0         13,904
Amer Greetings Cp A* T               52,005         35,195
Amer Intl Pet Cp                    131,832        366,068
Amer Med Tech Inc                    51,468         70,130
Amer Mobile Systems                  12,490          1,415
Amer Plastics Chem                    8,626         22,746
Amer Power Convers T              1,635,759      1,522,245
Amer Republic Bncp T                 72,520         87,408
Amer Safety Closure*                 14,264              0
Amer West Airline* T              1,318,402      1,289,221
Ameritrust Cp T                     187,574         69,432
Amgen* T                          3,015,011      2,807,201
Amvestors Fin Cp T                  285,778        339,112
An Con Genetics Inc                  20,000         47,600
Analogic Cp T                         3,267         13,849
Anchor Bancorp Inc T                 12,081         44,173
Angeion Cp                          424,788        474,026
Anergen Inc T                        95,737         68,232
Anglo Am So ADR*                     14,783          1,344
Anglo Swiss Mining                        0         76,949
Apogee Entrpr Inc T                  78,080         63,105
Appian Technology                         0         11,058
Apple Computer Inc* T               867,844      1,898,989
Applied Bioscience T                 51,129          5,178
Applied Biosystems* T                45,811         73,867
Applied Extrusion T                  20,591          4,685
Applied Immune Sci T                162,231        109,307
Applied Materials* T                750,035      1,060,354
Applied Power Inc A T               208,193         29,472
Aquasciences Intl                         0         10,000
Archer Commun Inc                   295,617        395,397
Artagraph Reprod                     55,785         71,004
Artisoft Inc T                      372,840        188,546
Artistic Greetings T                 25,671         86,586
Aspect Telecomm Cp T                 35,460         58,798
Aspen Imaging Intl T                 34,659          3,225
Athena Neurosciences T                7,538         24,420
Atlantic Se Airlines TS              19,343         29,457
Atmel Cp T                          192,739        228,357
Au Bon Pain Cl A T                  796,881        636,572
Aura Systems Inc T                1,333,588      1,152,776
Autocam Cp T                          1,595        122,906
Autodesk Inc* T                     427,856        638,275
Atlantic Tele-Network, T N           15,000              0
B B T Finl Cp* T                    614,627        510,290
B G S Systems Inc T                  53,296          5,309
B I Inc T                           174,455         136,796
B L O C Dev Cp T                    743,126        957,964
B M C Software Inc T                278,037        170,952
B O K Fin Cp                         52,777         18,300
B P I Enviro Pfd A                   48,805          7,740
B P I Enviro Wts A                   23,972         52,527
B T U Intl Inc T                      1,307         11,347
Babbage S Inc T                     234,887        162,873
Bali Jewelry Ltd Wts*                     0         48,406
Bally Gaming Intl T N                16,520              0
Bank South Cp T                     383,260        502,269
Banponce Cp T                         1,342         12,597
Barringer Technology*                24,910         65,988
Base Ten Systems A T                 21,304          7,316
Baybanks Inc* T                   1,256,968      1,468,677
Be Avionics Inc T                   140,648         32,291
Bel Fuse Inc T                       15,864           3,398
Berger Hldgs Ltd                         31         13,031
Bertucci's Inc T                     27,334         14,501
Betz Labs Inc* T                    160,653        189,894
Big O Tires Inc T                    50,673         36,279
Bindley Wstn Ind T                  869,175        752,320
Bio Tech Gen Cp T                   727,272        479,538
Biogen Inc* T                       433,123        383,357
Biomedical Waste Sys                249,350        203,310
Biomerica Inc                         4,245         19,335
Biomet Inc* T                     1,493,731      1,304,187
Bioplasty Inc T                     212,122        149,729
Biospherics Inc T                   131,014        119,761
Biotechnica Intl Inc T               47,388          4,046
Birtcher Med Sys Inc T              117,377         34,181
Boatmen S Bancshares T              358,577        340,162
Bob Evans Farms Inc T               205,893        125,752
Boca Raton Cap Cp                   165,423          1,857
Bon Ton Stores The T                    565         27,223
Bonneville Pac* T                    35,565          4,913
Borland Intl Inc T                1,295,135      1,108,559
Bradley Pharma A S3 N                37,750              0
Bradley Pharma Wts A N               48,700              0
Bradley Pharmaceut N                120,000              0
Brand Cos Inc The T                 122,097        134,219
Bristol Hldgs Inc                     1,650         29,382
Brooktree Cp T                       19,530         46,177
Brunos Inc T                      2,373,257      3,031,171
Brush Creek Mining                    1,891         79,831
Buffets Inc TS                    2,609,988      2,945,952
Burmah Cast Plc ADR*                      0         13,069
Burnup And Sims Inc T               665,956        733,260
Bachman Info Sy T N                  51,394              0
Broderbund Software, I T N           25,588              0
C A P Rx Ltd*                       249,000        228,352
C C C Franchising Cp                432,741         90,986
C E C Industries Cp                   2,737         27,241
C I S Tech Inc T                  1,255,368      1,207,789
C O N M E D Cp T                     30,024          9,722
Cabot Medical Cp T                  821,703        796,773
Cadbury Schweppe Adr* T              57,870        355,501
Cadema Cp*                          164,845        183,199
Cal Biotech Inc R T C             1,639,330         83,210
Calgene Inc* T                      625,101        276,674
Cam Netrcomm Ntwk                     6,599         19,929
Cambex Cp T                          35,399          8,525
Cambridge Biotech Cp T              430,212        514,007
Cambridge Neurosci T                196,171        176,119
Candela Laser Cp T                  124,612        144,936
Cannon Express T                      2,569         18,282
Cannon Pictures Inc                       0         26,919
Canyon Resources Cp* T              134,620        111,575
Cardinal Distr* T                 1,520,400      1,537,800
Carmike Cinemas Cl A* T              24,211         11,910
Casey S Gen Stores* T               200,263        126,732
Cato Cp The Cl A T                  197,001         182,232
Cel Sci Cp                          100,228        284,911
Celebrity Resorts*                   68,728            400
Celebrity Resorts Wt*                55,095              0
Celgene Cp T                        271,617         68,271
Cell Tech Inc* T                      8,421         42,363
Cellpro Inc T                         18,270         5,674
Cellular Inc* T                     581,050        610,479
Celtrix Labs Inc T                  287,479        318,370
Centerbank T                        179,226        135,525
Centocor Inc * T                  5,923,752      5,735,885
Centocor Inc Wts 94 T                   462         14,800
Central Fidelity Bks T              316,628        617,484
Centurion Mines Cp                   28,368          1,574
Cephalon Inc T                      262,216        278,044
Cerner Cp T                          33,894         47,046
Cerner Cp T                          33,894         47,046
Chalone Wine Gp Ltd T                19,357          4,390
Chantal Pharma Cp                   121,631        192,161
Charming Shoppes Inc* T             532,297        278,136
Charter Fed Sav Bank                718,310         60,930
Checkpoint Sys Inc* T               173,426        117,200
Chemex Pharm Inc*                    15,551         40,239
Chempower Inc T                       4,400         14,457
Chips And Tech Inc* T               616,901        765,674
Chiron Cp* T                      2,166,682      1,205,448
Choice Drug Sys* T                   85,455         74,670
Cintas Cp* T                        238,614        196,658
Circon Cp T                         567,741        611,405
Cirrus Logic Inc T                  291,086        327,383
Cisco Sys Inc T                   2,640,024      2,486,391
Citizens Utilities B T               52,170         29,610
Clearly Canadian Bev T              838,920      1,018,335
Clinical Tech Assoc*                168,734        106,657
Clothestime Inc The T               170,923        210,336
Codenoll Tech Cp T                   61,633         95,815
Cognex Cp T                          66,135         47,582
Cognos Inc T                          3,240         14,662
Collaborative Res T                     111         14,551
Collective Bancorp T                 73,727        142,063
Cobdge Bound Inc T C              5,924,750              0
College Bound Inc T                 592,475        566,309
Colorado Natl Pkshs T                10,728         26,737
Colorocs Cp T                       424,000        458,145
Comcast Cp A* T                      638,300       675,534
Comcast Cpcd A Spcl* T            4,409,023      4,377,238
Comm World Intl A                         0         14,214
Commerce Bncp Inc NJ* T              16,133          36,832
Commerce Clearing A T               234,868        273,443
Commun Entertainment                 59,916         98,807
Commun Systems Inc T                 16,797         28,813
Comparator Sys Cp                    75,000         12,777
Compression Lab Inc T             3,157,428      3,117,988
Computer Prod Inc* T                 12,506         42,579
Comtrex Systems Cp                   10,626         21,610
Comverse Tech Inc                   110,054        503,973
Comverse Tech Wts 92*                68,771          3,418
Concord Camera Cp T                 288,804        259,032
Concord Computing Cp T               56,125         35,229
Conquest Airlines Cp                202,701         18,903
Cons Papers Inc T                   131,706        148,078
Constellation Bncp T                395,377        407,600
Consul Restaurant Cp* T             269,235        284,147
Convoy Capital Cp                       722         10,722
Cooker Restaurant Cp T               62,821         14,880
Coors Adolph Co B* T                142,469        103,762
Copytele Inc T                    2,187,860      2,271,825
Cordis Cp T                         224,961        102,762
Corestates Fin Cp* T                402,953        439,253
Cornucopia Res Ltd T                     60         10,128
Corrections Cp Amer T               427,566         679,19
Cortex Pharm Inc*                     4,886         57,451
Costco Wholesale Cp* T              997,888        869,257
Cracker Barrel Old* T               370,159        326,414
Cragin Finl Cp T                    151,131        278,577
Cray Comp Cp T                      608,067        662,120
Creative Tech Cp*                     7,121         39,795
Crestar Finl Cp* T                  522,798        490,939
Crestmont Finl Corp T                51,637         63,762
Criticare Sys Inc T                  26,696         44,642
Crop Genetic Intl Cp* T             131,014        141,333
Crowley Finl Pfd E                      480         18,377
Crowley Finl Svcs                    82,526      2,528,901
Crown Resources Cp T                104,044        115,259
Cullen Frost Bkrs T                   3,729         31,760
Curative Tech Inc T                 230,132        116,623
Custom Chrome Inc T                   4,650         27,500
Cybernetics Prods Wt                 24,314            500
Cytrx Cp* T                         111,071        453,729
Cytrx Cp Wts B 92 T                   6,288        417,180
Conceptronic, Inc. N                235,550              0
D E K A L B Genet B T                 5,244         21,040
D N A Plant Wts 92*                       0         10,850
D S C Commun Cp* T                1,073,700        873,495
D T I Medical Cp                        548         11,993
D V I Financial Cp T                242,328        470,831
D V I Finl Cp Wts T                       0         97,710
Daleco Resources Cp                       0         14,446
Danek Gp Inc T                      225,863        111,118
Data I O Cp T                         3,339         19,308
Data Switch Cp* T                    75,868        174,529
Dataflex Cp T                        14,157         26,347
Datascope Cp T                      734,064        550,916
Davstar Inds Ltd A                   25,648          6,495
De Beers Cons Adih*                     900         55,140
Deb Shops Inc T                      89,060         34,532
Delchamps Inc T                      65,640         45,380
Dell Computer Cp* T               2,322,220      1,905,781
Delphi Finl Gp Cl A T                 5,000         21,565
Deposit Guar Cp* T                  130,207        118,310
Deprenyl Research T                  56,659         31,047
Diamond Entertain Cp*                52,000         15,510
Digital Products Cp                 260,486        143,926
Digital Sound Cp T                   13,830         25,757
Digital Sys Intl Inc T              117,470        100,016
Dimensional Vis Gp*                 126,428        140,890
Dibrell Brothers Inc T              907,812        745,391
Digital Microwave Cp T              370,802        446,850
Dionex Cp T                           6,539         27,977
Diversicare Inc T                       100         66,000
Docucon Inc                         302,047        101,635
Dominion Bkshs T                    143,649              0
Doskocil Cos New Wi T                 2,612         35,848
Dress Barn The T                     51,489         26,352
Drexler Technology T                355,411        391,853
Driefontein Cons Adr*                12,600          2,200
Drug Emporium* T                     431,006       476,235
Drug Screening Sys                   41,700        202,143
Duriron Co Inc T                     38,199          9,095
Durr Fillauer Med R* N              180,457         82,727
Dynatech Cp T                        22,033          4,490
Dynatronics Laser Cp                    969         11,786
E C C Plc ADR Spon* T                     0         61,911
E C I Telecom Ltd T                  233,968        46,206
E N V I Rx Ltd N                     11,000              0
E N V I Rx Ltd Uts N                154,500          2,700
E R C Inds Inc                       71,582         53,094
Easel Cp T                          146,452        100,566
Eastland Fin Cp T                   130,840        113,400
Ecogen Inc T                        134,035         89,899
Edac Tech Cp*                        10,358              0
Education Alternativ                 19,796          4,658
Egghead Inc T                       801,426        817,761
Elbit Ltd T                             105         14,813
Elcotel Inc                          38,136         60,086
Electric Gas Tech T                  26,534         40,033
Electromagnetic Oil                  17,235         28,579
Electromagnetic Sci T                66,759         43,903
Electronic Arts Inc TR           15,954,430      1,535,564
Embrex Inc T                        362,200        102,100
Enclean Inc T                       470,309        425,685
Encore Computer Cp                   11,542          26,803
Energy Ventures Inc T                 2,000         28,034
Environ Diagnostics*                 13,533         66,370
Enzon Inc T                         164,527        232,379
Equitex Inc T                       185,150        444,612
Equity A U Inc                       17,000              0
Evans Sutherland* T                  49,878         13,293
Everex Ji Qems Inc* T                     1        213,848
Exabyte Cp T                        197,094        288,752
Executive Telecard T                489,449        450,974
Exploration Co The                   17,096              4
F H P Intl Cp T                   1,057,461        638,482
Fastenal Co T                     1,132,793      1,117,379
Fidelity Bnshs Inc T                    274         17,565
Fidelity Medical Inc* T             326,046         12,440
Filene S Basement Cp T              340,349        277,132
Filenet Cp T                         54,364         32,110
First Alabama Bcshs T                44,808             69
First Commer Bnc CO               8,006,700        211,406
First Commercial L R T               95,603         21,126
First Cons Fin Cp T                  96,786        116,836
First Fin Cp Wis T                   17,170          5,457
First Hawaiian Inc T                 72,284         43,205
First Interst Of Ia T               334,470        373,053
First Liberty Fin* T                  8,545         35,724
First Peoples Fin Cp* T              29,517         42,127
First Seismic Cp T                   13,534         39,801
First Team Sports T                 229,870        120,324
First Western Fin Cp T               34,190        169,959
Fischer Imaging Cp T                  9,602         29,778
Fonic Inc                                 0         36,900
Foreland Cp                          10,063         28,670
Foremost Cp Of Amer T                   708         15,000
Forest Oil Cp* T                    360,619        430,360
Forschner Group The T                52,088          4,566
Forum Group Inc T                    55,093         89,688
Fountain Pharm Wts A*                38,000        103,149
Fourth Financial Cp T                39,721         17,317
Framingham Savs Bk T                101,184        114,623
Free St Cons Gld Adr*                16,640          1,415
Fremont Gen Cp* T                     80,458        65,752
Fuller H B Co T                      18,490          4,717
Furon Co* T                          78,553        112,539
Future Commun Inc                    29,107         14,626
Future Med Prods                    171,023        238,927
Financial Data Systems N             40,979              0
G N W FinanciGcp T G                314,000          3,030
G V Medical Inc T                   140,835        154,118
Galagraph Ltd Ord*                      554         13,554
Gantos Inc T                         483,687       504,557
Garnet Resources Cp T                74,060         30,086
Gates/FA Distributin*                     0         10,855
Gen Binding Cp T                     41,016         26,874
Gen Computer Cp T                    14,606          4,509
Genelabs Tech Inc T                 170,775         88,333
Generation 5 Tech                    40,923              0
Genetic Therapy Inc T                77,780         66,570
Genetics Instit Inc* T              840,251        800,896
Gensia Pharm Inc T                  483,571        203,054
Gentex Cp T                          57,083         77,656
Gentner Commun Cp Ut                  9,895        104,870
Genzyme Cp T                        890,647        507,478
Genzyme Cp Wts 94 T                  12,989          1,247
Gerrity Oil Gas Cp T                 15,085         36,670
Giddings Lewis Inc T                 37,177        760,786
Gold Reserve Cp                      62,651         46,171
Goody's Family Cloth T                8,228         32,763
Goulds Pumps Inc* T                  52,796         32,193
Govt Tech Svcs T                     14,022          1,441
Grancare Inc T                        1,000         14,540
Grand Casinos Inc T                   23,138         3,245
Grant Tensor Geophys T              321,089        352,645
Grt Am Commun Co T                1,531,291      1,549,086
Great Amer Recreat T                 32,504         52,152
Great Oaks Finl Cp*                  72,320         95,987
Greenstone Roberts                    3,794         27,670
Greentree Software                    3,951         36,152
Greenwich Pharm Inc T             2,018,357      2,429,012
Grossman S Inc T                      5,572         19,307
Groundwater Tech Inc T               14,575         44,024
Grudge Music Gp                       8,258         37,858
Gynex Inc                            27,034          3,393
Great American Recreat N             92,109              0
H B O Co* T                         276,361        310,906
H M O America Inc T               1,860,736      1,700,686
Hadson Energy Res T                       0         10,287
Hancock Hldg Co T                       800         21,762
Handex Environmental T               15,312         43,474
Hanover Insurance Co T               78,016         31,718
Health Advance Svc*                   3,326         19,000
Health Club Tv Ntwk                  28,624            307
Health Mgmt Assoc A T                70,867         81,704
Healthcare Compare T                545,988         187,782
Healthcare Imagin Wt N               21,200          1,000
Healthcare Imaging N                 19,495              0
Healthcare Svcs Gp TS             2,742,921      2,799,318
Healthdyne Inc T                     79,896         68,515
Healthinfusion Inc T                 26,811          1,284
Healthwatch Inc Uts                     200         46,250
Hechinger Co Cl A* T              1,891,177      1,970,547
Helian Health Gp Inc* T                 192         14,242
Helix Biocore Inc T                  82,578         95,234
Hemacare Cp*                         41,633         16,524
Hemodynamics Inc                     33,797         44,283
Henley Gp Inc The T                  50,976         76,759
Highline Inds Uts 94                  7,635         32,985
Hilb Rogal Hamilton T                38,975          2,489
Hoenig Gp Inc T                      75,172         51,767
Hoenig Gp Uts                         1,000         25,700
Hoenig Gp Wts A T                        30         24,972
Hogan Systems Inc T                 146,986        167,840
Hologic Inc T                        12,319         26,180
Home Intensive Care* T              120,324        134,635
Home Nutritional T                   72,328         60,626
Homecall Inc*                             0         10,100
Homecare Mgmt Inc                     7,148         18,541
Homestyle Buffet Inc T               70,703         98,696
Hometrust Bank T                     21,542          2,535
Horizon Gold Cp* T                   19,001          4,804
Horsehead Res Dev T                  36,938         47,969
Howard Svgs Bank Nj T             1,231,427      1,186,999
Hutchinson Tech Inc T                12,103         66,702
Hmbgr Hmlt Resta T N                 57,160              0
I C C Tech Inc                        4,749         19,034
I C O S Cp T                        855,521        729,985
I D B Com Gp Inc                  2,209,600         11,519
I D E X X Labs Inc T                 33,447          8,322
I Flow Cp*                           19,590          1,375
I H O P Cp T                        973,024      1,072,561
I M N E T Inc T                      29,900          8,140
I N T E R S O L V T                 129,636        107,732
I P L Systems Inc A T               216,455        269,425
I P S Health Care                    26,925        104,859
Icot Cp T                           149,945          8,207
Image Entertainment T               112,522         79,766
Imatron IncP T                       88,603        103,669
Immucell Cp                         191,870        250,634
Immulogic Pharm Cp T                182,800         92,015
Immune Response Cp T                971,030      1,141,381
Immunex Cp T                      1,335,035      1,743,091
Immunex Cp Wts* T                    54,271         28,880
Immunogen Inc T                      95,932         28,369
Immunomedics Inc T                  575,431        388,167
Imperial Bancorp T                  641,945        620,102
Imre Cp                             161,918         90,531
Imre Cp Wts 96                       20,900         37,400
In Home Health Inc* T                 9,934        165,185
Inacom Corp T                        38,288         28,235
Informix Cp T                       105,138         81,802
Ingles Markets Inc A T               39,905         52,263
Input Output Inc T                   36,773         13,521
Insituform East Inc T                15,775          2,571
Insituform No Amer A T               65,482         24,589
Integra Fin Cp T                     29,979         11,877
Integrated Circuit T                 21,650         37,477
Integrated Devic Tec T              683,898        673,297
Integrated Sys Inc T                 63,705         42,480
Integrated Waste Svc T              532,787        558,463
Intel Cp* T                         816,635        892,366
Intelligent Elec T                2,319,704      3,142,118
Interactive Network T                11,470         38,100
Intercontl Enterpris                 25,106          1,630
Interface Inc A T                    738,585       713,903
Interferon Sciences T                94,305         81,656
Intergraph Cp* T                    193,601        290,322
Interleaf Inc T                     296,663        318,650
Intermagnetics Gen* T                 1,986         14,497
Interneuron Pharm*                   35,859         17,893
Interneuron Wts A*                   12,870             20
Interneuron Wts B 95*                26,205          6,760
Intl Bankcard Svc Cp*                34,215          9,780
Intl Bus Schools Inc                 20,000          5,300
Intl Cablecasting                    60,232         50,124
Intl Mobile Mach Cp* T            2,362,506      1,963,840
Intl Remote Imaging                   2,283         53,535
Intl Testing Svcs                     6,450         16,750
Intl Totalizator Sys T                2,182         15,724
Invacare Cp T                       205,166        160,494
Iomega Cp* T                         23,495             50
Ion Laser Technology                 29,475            825
Ipsco Inc. R(p 0 N                   12,170              0
Isis Pharm Inc T                    297,519        253,750
Isomedix Inc T                       29,497          6,479
Imclone Sys Incp T N                122,717              0
Info America, I T N                  10,200              0
Intervisual Bks, Inc N              127,530              0
J B Hunt Trans Svcs T               249,206        238,084
J Baker Inc T                     1,117,894        712,990
J J Snack Foods T                    40,094         19,238
J S B Financial Inc T               109,104         46,511
Jack Carl 312 Future                      0         12,000
Japan Airlines Adr*                 143,601        172,032
Jean Philippe Frag* T                23,762         13,457
Jennifer Convertible*                 9,311         29,842
Jones Intrcable A T                 678,710        640,882
Jones Medical Inds T                 34,961         48,677
Judicate Inc                         53,474          8,522
Juniper Features Ltd                  1,125         20,625
Jansko, Inc. N                       30,000              0
K L A Instruments T                 167,085        180,830
K Swiss Inc Cl A T                   74,290         85,029
Keith Gp Of Cos                      25,400          6,658
Kelly Services Cl A T               167,127        147,763
Kentana Development                  10,000              0
Kentucky Central A T                658,123        458,289
Kimball Intl Inc B T                 15,587          5,144
Kirschner Medical Cp T              292,969        306,100
Knowledgeware Inc T                 712,272      1,050,080
Komag Inc T                          57,250        105,283
L D D S Comm Cl A T                 291,896        382,645
L M Ericsson Tel Adr* T           1,848,529      1,868,797
L T X Cp* T                          90,973         53,599
L V M H Moet Adr* T                  91,488        109,913
La Teko Resource Ltd                 11,985          1,150
Ladd Furniture Inc T                263,694        277,317
Lancaster Colony Cp T                14,496         36,009
Lance Inc T                         130,922        115,568
Lancit Media Prod                    34,856          4,600
Landmark Graphic Cp* T              683,429        694,091
Larson Davis Inc                      4,472         16,059
Laser Record Sys Wts*                17,000              0
Laser Recording Sys*                150,609         51,486
Lasermaster Tech Inc T              322,721        380,445
Laserscope T                        338,105        317,266
Latin Foods Intl Inc                 54,265          34,365
Lawson Products Inc T               126,836         84,371
Leadville Min Mill                    4,000         58,739
Lechters Inc T                      288,747        269,834
Leeco Diagnostics                    10,133              0
Legend Foods Inc*                    62,108          2,814
Legent Cp* T                        289,983        234,753
Lep Gp Plc Adr* T                    14,569          3,077
Leslie S Poolmart T                  43,787         19,418
Liberty Natl Bncp* T                  6,331         23,444
Licon Intl Inc                       26,248         50,269
Licon Intl Inc Wts                    28,175        46,170
Lidak Pharm Cl A*                    91,777         41,025
Lidak Pharm Wts A*                   45,210              0
Life Technologies T                  34,554         17,869
Lin Broadcasting Cp* T              350,662        264,043
Linear Technology Cp T               62,394         73,152
Liposome Tech Inc T                 376,796        219,057
Little Switzerland T                156,450         70,467
Loewen Group Inc T                  975,151        992,373
Lomak Petroleum Inc                      57         16,254
Lone Star Tech Inc T                329,521        341,617
M C I Comm Cp* T                  1,316,766      1,104,522
M E T Capital Cp                          0         12,100
M G I Pharma Inc T                   37,440         25,794
M I P S Computer T                2,277,535      2,246,188
M L X Cp                             12,623          1,062
M T C Elect Tech New T              358,064         21,334
MacMillan Bloedel T               1,972,206      1,866,555
Magma Power Co T                     66,861         82,274
Magna Group Inc T                   263,906        176,623
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg T             1,199,775      1,052,074
Magnetech Cp Wts*                    41,365          4,000
Mail Boxes Etc T                    417,952        395,294
Main St Main Inc                     20,088          6,625
Marcam Cp T                         281,560        253,652
Markel Cp T                          14,063         28,922
Marquest Med Prod T                 148,597         43,157
Marrow Tech Inc Cl A* T             455,830        418,607
Mast Keystone Inc                    16,591          2,002
Matrix Service Co T                  41,090         52,485
Maxim Integrated T                   98,222         10,537
Maxtor Cp* T                        129,537        354,649
McCaw Cellular A* T               1,871,856      1,397,035
McCormick Co Nv* T                  141,372        183,923
Medarex Inc T                        59,326         11,300
Medarex Inc Wts 96 T                 28,925          3,300
Medco Containmnt* T                 759,610        699,248
Medex Inc T                           3,355         17,958
Medi Mail Inc                       130,196         74,800
Medical Care Intl* T                620,708        637,743
Medical Innov*                        3,549         88,245
Medical Marketing Gp T              359,415        298,843
Medical Tech Sys Inc*               510,621        102,914
Medical Tech Sys Wts*                 38,000        28,000
Medicis Pharm Cl A*                 876,276        605,452
Medicis Pharm Wts A*                927,745        842,825
Medimmune Inc T                     377,597        132,968
Medphone Cp*                        120,660        305,371
Mentor Cp The* T                  1,211,213      1,296,644
Mentor Graphics Cp* T                     0      1,127,239
Mercantile Bncpn Inc T                4,843         28,444
Merchants Natl Cp T                  48,692         91,675
Meridian Bncp Inc* T                 25,767         43,711
Meris Labs Inc T                     66,357         28,282
Merisel Inc T                        97,227        116,890
Merit Medical Sys* T                  56,273        67,881
Meritor Savings Bank T              799,376        879,493
Mesa Airlines Inc T                  44,348          6,336
Metalclad Cp                          1,280         96,414
Methode Electronic A T                6,296         28,046
Metropltn Fsl Seattl T                6,000         16,265
Miami Subs Cp                        24,045          1,563
Michael Foods Inc T               2,212,470      2,243,603
Michaels Stores Inc T                89,528        110,540
Michigan Natl Cp T                   36,136         58,208
Micro Energy Inc                    104,653        293,599
Micro Healthsys Inc T               530,088        577,818
Microcom Inc T                      162,245        187,261
Micrografx Inc T                    258,140        374,076
Micronetics Inc                         120         14,441
Micronics Computers T                34,197         55,806
Micropolis Cp* T                    477,329        502,175
Microprose Inc T                     28,284          6,630
Microsoft Cp* T                   2,231,020      2,357,418
Mid Atlantic Medical T              627,084        637,502
Middlesex Water Co T                 12,102          1,598
Midlantic Cp* T                   5,332,494      5,517,907
Miller Diversified                    1,668         22,500
Miller Herman Inc T                 319,052        299,976
Minorco ADR*                          26,170        15,520
Mirror Tech Inc                       1,058         15,638
Modern Controls T                    30,351         12,956
Molex Inc* T                         99,470         21,142
Molex Inc Cl A* T                    29,875         44,739
Monro Muffler Brake T                30,685         48,184
Mosinee Paper Cp T                    5,774         38,260
Mountaintop Cp*                           0         14,700
Movie Superstore*                       113         45,123
Mr Coffee Inc T                     195,662        213,976
Multi Solutions Inc                       0         16,766
Multibank Fin Cp T                    24,128        36,092
Multimedia Inc T                     79,500         57,618
Mycogen Cp T                         24,398         63,502
N A C Re Cp* T                      695,192        652,578
N D L Products Inc                   11,600            880
N E C Cp ADR* T                      17,157         65,507
N E S B Cp T                        123,225        175,588
N S Bancorp Inc T                    14,042         26,247
N T N Commun Inc                     10,604         21,089
N Y M A G I C Inc T                  31,474         15,723
Natec Resources Inc T               217,294        260,307
Natl Community Bks T                 49,272        148,517
Natl Comp Sys Inc T                  45,546         68,954
Natl Data Cp T                      436,609        462,034
Natl Health Care Sys                 18,856          6,672
Natl Medical Waste                   20,100         72,933
Natl Pizza Co Cl-a T                164,529        182,808
Nellcor Inc T                       188,627        140,933
Neorx Cp* T                         469,572        318,990
Network General Cp T                376,670        326,047
Network Systems Cp* T               680,850        716,346
Neurogen Cp T                       195,615        182,630
Neutrogena Cp T                     529,222        604,676
Newbridge Netwks Cp T               528,337        552,439
News Commun Inc*                    397,253          6,015
News Commun Wts A 95*                58,100              0
Nissan Motors Co ADR*                27,079         10,828
Nobel Insurance Ltd T                     0         11,140
Noble Drilling Cp T                 105,291         29,753
Noise Cancellation                  116,245        162,173
Noise Com Inc                           725        150,000
Non Invasive Mon Sys*               372,556        442,604
Nona Morelli S II                   156,373        320,652
Nordson Cp T                         65,328         42,947
Nordstrom Inc* T                    915,574        852,853
North Star Universal T               585,798       741,749
Northeast Bncp T                    166,118        149,016
Northern Tr Cp T                     27,516         41,182
Nova Pharm Cp* T                    224,354        195,904
Novell Inc* T                     1,205,884      2,486,956
Noven Pharmaceutical                 12,352          1,535
Nu West Inds Inc* T                 690,963        762,121
Nview Cp T                           47,736         30,438
Nytest Environmental                  1,600        452,623
O I S Optical Imgage*                12,615            385
O W Office Warehouse T              156,337        131,373
Occupational Urgent T               470,603        610,684
Octel Commun Cp* T                  216,794        205,507
Officeland Inc                      548,616        110,404
Old Stone Cp* T                     555,968        539,249
Onbancorp Inc T                       2,325         13,225
One Valley Bncp W Va T               23,023         11,251
Oracle Systems Cp* T              1,275,223      1,718,618
Oregon Metallurgical T               70,113         44,200
Oshkosh B Gosh Cl A* T              170,942        200,907
Outback Steakhouse T                249,538        161,842
Oxford Health Plans T               337,980        180,709
P L A T I N U M Tech T              563,248        486,963
Pac Rim Hldg Cp T                   505,510        195,765
Paccar Inc T                         79,654         68,407
Pacific Dunlop AdR* T               579,622        563,441
Pacific Intl Svc Cp* T                  246         18,361
Pacific Telecom Inc T                38,973         21,972
Pacificare Health T                 711,482        910,163
Pamet Systems Inc                     9,212         30,162
Pantheon Inds Inc                         0         10,177
Parametric Tech Cp T              2,025,942      2,131,170
Payco American Cp T                 114,661         52,178
Pentair Inc* T                      221,903        202,854
Pentech Intl Inc T                   79,395         64,204
Peoples Heri Fin Gp T               497,568        483,343
Peripheral Sys Inc                   76,209         45,911
Petro Global Inc                     24,432          3,440
Pharmatec Inc                        24,212         13,285
Pharmetics Inc                       20,653              3
Phoenix Advance Tech                 20,387         61,201
Phoenix Laser Sys*                   19,184         92,182
Phoenix Tech Ltd T                  220,215        232,216
Photographic Science T               60,858         32,868
Pic N Save Cp* T                    466,177         133,757
Piccadilly Cafeteria T              108,214         17,300
Picturetel Cp T                     140,735        103,414
Pioneer Hi Bred Intl T               75,514         90,923
Pioneer Std Elct* T                  82,290         92,501
Plants For Tomorrow                  15,700            126
Plastigone Tech Inc*                 78,884              0
Playorena Inc Wts*                   16,590            350
Polydex Pharm Ltd                       474         14,242
Pool Energy Svcs Co T                 1,774         28,324
Possis Cp T                         537,140        553,796
Power Spectra Inc                     1,602         13,316
Presidential Life Cp T              478,795        490,817
Presstek Inc T                      717,655        695,757
Price Co The* T                   3,450,872      3,388,954
Pride Pet Svcs Inc T                 20,000          4,757
Pro-dex Inc                             146         12,407
Production Oper* T                  380,085        322,689
Progress Fin Cp T                    72,567         32,043
Progress Software Cp T              115,549         62,345
Proteon Inc T                       179,185        206,497
Provident Life Cl B T                63,740         14,347
Puget Sound Bncp T                   60,970        170,993
Pulse Engineering T                  36,724          5,000
Puritan Bennett Cp T                496,198        551,588
Pyramid Technology T                206,263        226,161
Peer Review Analysis, N              23,400              0
Physcan Cmptr Nt T N                100,920              0
Q V C Network Inc* T                234,216        346,755
Quadrax Cp                           24,488          6,221
Qual Med Inc T                      104,413         89,626
Quantum Cp* T                     1,717,658      1,354,137
Quantum Hlth Res Inc T               77,051         41,713
Qurtrdck Off T                      391,516        415,781
Quidel Cp T                          17,473          1,237
Quiksilver Inc T                    306,471         478,120
Quixote Cp T                         75,386         61,744
R 2000 Cp                            36,360          1,345
R P M Inc* T                        651,477        611,414
Radiation Sys Inc TS                  3,247         22,806
Radius Inc T                          9,773         38,003
Rainbow Tech Inc T                   23,370          8,344
Rally S Inc T                       566,933        549,457
Randers Gp Inc (The)                    151         11,306
Random Access Inc*                    1,100         32,301
Rasterops T                          41,560        186,966
Ratners Gp ADR* T                   114,498         42,941
Rax Restaurants Cl-a                 12,471          1,000
Regal Comm Cp*                            1         11,875
Regency Cruises Inc T                10,866            200
Regency Equities Cp T                21,800         33,775
Regenex Inc                           6,260         25,495
Rentrak Cp T                        245,943        173,098
Repligen Cp T                       280,841        209,344
Republic Health Cp T                 81,690         32,345
Research Frontiers                  143,993         78,900
Research Industries T               422,923        657,451
Restor Inds Inc Wts                   1,835         27,610
Reuters Hldg Plc ADR* T           2,395,968      2,552,850
Ribi Immunochem T                   225,484         30,010
Riggs Natl Cp The T                 679,125        620,102
Roadway Services Inc T              302,233        193,344
Robern Apparel Inc                     9,490        49,191
Rochester Comm Sav* T                 7,887         37,311
Ross Systems Inc T                   68,820        108,929
Rotech Medical Cp T                 106,883        173,741
Rouse Co* T                       2,995,827      3,617,402
Royal Appliance Mfg T               121,009         21,023
Royal Gold Inc                       20,700         47,371
Royce Laboratories*                  51,822        133,275
Ryan S Family Steak* T               90,894         71,622
S A F E C O Cp* T                   171,342        213,701
S A N B O R N Inc                    27,916         42,165
S A N B O R N Wts                    21,925          1,995
S B E Inc T                          16,679               0
S C I Systems Inc* T                692,713        750,330
S G I International                 217,440        162,456
S H L Systemhouse T                  31,842         20,707
S K Tech Cp*                         17,308            231
Sage Alerting System                 14,965         89,840
Sage Alerting Wts 94                      0         30,000
Sandwich Co Op Bank T                32,785         19,000
Sanford Cp T                        190,525         86,149
Santos Ltd ADR*                      12,835         28,331
Saratoga Brands Inc                   3,275         29,527
Sasol Ltd ADR*                            0         11,955
Savannah Foods Inds T               852,041        826,872
Scan Graphics Inc                    20,287          2,196
Scientific Meas Sys*                 35,000            792
Scimed Life Sys Inc* T              931,168        401,752
Scitex Cp* T                        403,196        431,890
Score Board Inc The TS              653,098        738,373
Scorpion Tech Inc A S               109,169        131,241
Seafield Capital Cp T                19,226          8,361
Seagate Tech* T                   1,260,479      1,404,852
Seahawk Deep Ocean                1,418,065        221,296
Security Bancorp Mi T                88,614         13,865
Security Environment                 21,057          3,494
Sentex Sensing Tech                 501,100        589,050
Sepracor Inc T                      220,498        204,420
Sequoia Sys Inc T                   563,202         25,185
Sffed Cp T                           89,814         37,828
Shopsmith Inc T                       6,717         19,248
Shorewood Pkging Cp T                72,470         55,015
Showbiz Pizza Time T                166,391         39,434
Sierra On Line Inc TS               391,525        629,503
Sierra Semiconductor T              106,723        186,685
Sierra Tucson Cos T                 477,527        186,828
Siskon Gold Cp Cl-a T                 1,837         17,284
Site Based Media Inc                184,930        108,304
Slm International, Inc T N            24,721             0
Smithfield Foods Inc T               41,666         21,399
Society Cp T                      1,024,566      1,108,974
Software Publishing* T              746,761        679,492
Software Toolwks Inc* T             862,705        579,066
Somanetics Cp Wts A                  42,600         23,720
Somatogen Inc T                     371,196        287,914
Sonex Research Inc*                  86,125         60,300
Sonic Cp T                          452,666        302,998
Sonoco Products Co T                 67,205         52,920
Southern Pac Pet ADR*                     0         50,136
Southland Cp                         10,320         58,295
Southtrust Cp T                      78,900         66,987
Sovereign Bancorp T                  33,312        241,920
Sparta Surgical Cp                    1,000         22,070
Spartan Motors Inc T                244,293        263,879
Spear Fin Svcs Inc T                 26,560            225
Sport Of Kings Inc                   27,830         50,260
St Jude Medical Inc* T              411,317        399,015
St Paul Bancorp Inc T                29,776         10,832
Staar Surgical Co                    21,653         10,880
Staff Builder Del T                       0         10,453
Stake Technology Ltd                  2,315         13,865
Stansbury Holdings T                 29,456          1,384
Staples Inc* T                    2,802,121      2,165,312
Star Technologies T                  10,817              0
State O Maine Inc T                   8,749         34,354
State Street Boston T               640,607        747,537
Statesman Gp Inc The T               33,462          8,301
Stateswest Airlines                  89,666        159,173
Stewart Stevenson T                 129,160         77,282
Stratford Amer Cp                     1,262         22,263
Strings Ltd                          76,010         91,010
Structural Dynamics T               358,777        126,282
Stryker Cp* T                       319,717        413,512
Stuart Hall Co Inc T                 21,020          7,304
Sulcus Computer Cp T                272,047        695,507
Sulcus Computer Wt B T                  326        122,470
Sumitomo Bank Of Ca T               241,319        215,798
Summagraphic Cp T                    17,759         50,270
Sun Microsystems Inc* T           2,734,645      2,686,179
Sunrise Tech Inc T                   417,893       351,197
Sunward Tech Inc T                   16,147             73
Supercuts Inc T                      71,156         17,445
Supermail Intl Inc                    2,247         16,944
Surety Capital Cp                   120,209          5,798
Surgical Laser Tech T               578,427        537,460
Survival Tech Inc T                 122,621        108,178
Sybase Inc T                         82,306         66,020
Sylvan Foods Hldgs T                 20,064          2,040
Synergen Inc T                    2,301,527      2,359,848
Synetic Inc T                       148,094         43,721
Synoptics Commun Inc T            1,057,663        778,232
Synthetech Inc                        4,875         52,073
System Software T                   311,723        124,659
Systemix Inc T                      197,507         41,432
Sam & Libby, Inc. T N                26,837              0
Sports Heroes, Inc. N               133,175              0
Sterling Savings Assoc T N              311              0
Synalloy Corporation T N             27,992         15,084
T Cell Sciences Inc* T              148,930        137,813
T E T R A Tech Inc T                232,210        308,643
T G X Cp                            332,519        386,885
T J Intl Inc T                      305,545        340,301
T Rowe Price Assoc T                 23,248         40,485
T S I Cp* T                         227,351         87,626
T S S Ltd*                          181,202         71,594
T S S Ltd Wts 94*                         0         10,043
T*hq Inc T                           50,494         66,774
T2 Medical Inc T                  1,711,860      2,492,908
Tandon Cp T                          52,965         83,785
Tanknology Environ T                119,559          9,066
Technical Commun Cp T                 4,062         14,334
Telco Systems Inc T                 127,076         48,391
Tele Commun Inc A* T              4,392,920      9,718,996
Telebit Cp T                             59         13,034
Tellus Inds Inc                       2,210         16,999
Telxon Cp* T                        546,630        560,433
Teradata Cp* T                       87,343        126,784
Teva Pharm Ind ADR* T                58,105         38,499
Thermodynetics Inc                   428,674       461,024
Tide West Oil Co                      7,053         22,052
Tokio Marine ADR* T                  85,734         45,714
Tokos Med Cp Del T                  241,553        226,599
Top Source Inc                       81,675        106,019
Topps Co Inc The* T               1,145,238      1,075,692
Trans Finl Bncp Inc T                30,199          1,902
Transmedia Ntwk Inc                  19,271         34,349
Trenwick Group Inc T                 23,805         41,061
Tricare Inc TS                       60,214         17,604
Trimble Navigation T                860,984        739,789
Trimedyne Inc T                     770,276        714,026
Triple Threat Enterp                 36,755          1,000
Trust Co Bncp The T                 207,408        221,697
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A* T           2,010,966      2,052,236
U S A Waste Service T               100,807         72,342
U S Alcohol Testing S               264,481        140,901
U S Bancorp Oregon* T               326,993        291,087
U S Facilities Cp T                 287,948         131,540
U S Healthcare Inc* T             2,410,358      2,014,676
U S Homecare Cp T                    38,806         28,360
U S Long Distance Cp T               45,792         67,249
U S Pawn Inc*                         1,719         79,321
U S T Cp T                          559,423        571,624
U S Trust Cp T                       32,444         18,870
Unico Inc                            16,307          2,307
Unigene Labs Inc* T                  49,469        153,010
Unigene Labs Wts B                  158,354        237,854
Unimed Inc                           12,504         24,538
Union Bk T                        1,932,394        287,184
United Medicorp Inc                       0         10,776
Unity Healthcare                          0         68,699
Us Trans Sys Inc*                   129,548        222,226
Utah Medical Inc T                  101,729        118,445
Utilitech Inc*                       21,422          8,867
V L S I Tech Inc T                  131,497        199,809
V M X Inc T                         134,756        124,484
Valley National Cp T              1,341,970      1,439,129
Valley Systems Inc T                107,463         21,398
Value Health Inc T                  799,843        774,664
Value Merchants Inc T               665,492        140,860
Vegas Chips Inc New                  13,812         25,235
Vencor Inc T                         43,071         16,231
Ventura Motion Pict                   3,271         14,123
Verifone Inc T                      903,275        855,321
Vermont Fin Svcs Cp T               340,706        371,737
Vertex Pharmaceutic T                18,419          8,294
Vestar Inc T                        115,195         65,020
Vicor Cp T                          279,807        123,040
Vicorp Resta* T                      49,658         86,148
Video Lottery Tech T                657,766        631,402
Videocart Inc T                   2,134,745      2,434,689
Viking Office Prods T                 1,617         14,927
Vimrx Pharm Inc*                    123,881         34,622
Viratek Inc T                       492,158        543,563
Vision Ten Inc                       71,350         23,000
Vision Ten Inc Wts                   31,843          1,000
Volvo Ab Cl B ADR* T                  9,301         28,567
Washington Energy Co T               54,029      1,028,584
Washington Mut Sv Bk* T             533,280        640,588
Water-Jel Tech Inc*                  16,436         32,006
Watts Industries A T                411,478        349,743
Wavetech Inc                         47,200         69,810
Weitek Cp T                         342,105        368,716
Wellfleet Commun Inc T              349,582        161,729
Werner Enterprises T                 15,550         28,252
West Newton Sav Bank T                  267         13,345
West One Bancorp T                  124,653         270,716
Western Accept Uts                  105,000         94,000
Westmark Intl Inc T                 121,489        132,665
Westmoreland Coal Co T               19,939          4,575
Wet Seal Inc Cl A T                 137,023        232,526
Wetterau Inc* T                     605,813        572,148
Wheatley T X T Cp T                  13,024            154
William So-kgrn                  73,540,028          6,120
Williams Controls                         0         14,680
Wolf Financial Gp T                 437,220        146,730
Work Recovery Inc                    36,908          5,846
Worthington Inds Inc T              206,526        224,187
World Acceptance Corpo T N           16,390              0
X O M A Cp* T                     4,140,380      4,641,687
Xilinx Inc T                         414,497       177,243
Xscribe Cp                                0         10,321
Yellow Freight Del* T               426,582        260,971
York Financial Cp T                  24,226         99,257
York Research Cp T                2,292,372      1,682,909
Zebra Tech Cp Cl-a T                102,132        170,504
Zenith Labs Inc T                   144,712         31,167
Zeos Intl Ltd T                     783,078        728,051
Zila Inc                             20,440          3,202
Zilog Inc T                          137,477       118,050
Zycad Cp T                          157,830         87,945
Zygo Cp T                            36,159          26,042


* May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations

In addition, short interest may also be affected by options positions

S Stock split

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1991


                             1531 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           December 23, 1991, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; SECTION C; PAGE 03

LENGTH: 571 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH; Blood test focuses on gene that causes heart disease

BYLINE: By Ellen Whitford STAFF WRITERdisease; medicine; research; human;
conditions; equipment; science; statistics; women; men; deaths; ranking;
international

BODY:

   Researchers have developed a blood test for a defective gene that causes an
insidious disease of the heart muscle that can kill seemingly healthy adults
with no warning.

   The test will give doctors a much more accurate way to determine which
children in an affected family have inherited the gene.

   The condition, called familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, made headlines in
1990 when it apparently killed basketball star Hank Gathers of Loyola Marymount
University.

   By identifying those affected before any symptoms appear, doctors hope they
may find ways to reduce the risk of death, said Dr. Anthony Rosenzweig, a
Massachusetts General Hospital cardiologist and lead author of a paper that
described the test in last week's New England Journal of Medicine. Doctors have
no way to prevent the disease from developing in people with the flawed gene,
but can monitor the heart's function closely.

   Cardiomyopathy can result from viral infections or unknown causes. The
hereditary form accounts for only a portion of cases.

   However, like other recently developed tests for gene mutations, the heart
test raises ethical and social dilemmas. Among them: Since the condition can be
life-threatening, individuals with the gene might have trouble obtaining health
or life insurance, even if their cases were mild.; Liver genes linked to
cholesterol

   By manipulating genes in the liver cells of laboratory rabbits, researchers
have corrected an inherited disorder that causes the buildup of deadly levels of
cholesterol.

   The study is a predecessor for human trials of the gene therapy, expected to
start early next year, said James Wilson of the University of Michigan Medical
School, who conducted the study. It was reported Friday in the journal Science.

   The experiment used a breed of rabbits that lacks a gene to limit
cholesterol, and demonstrated that genetic manipulation could reduce blood
cholesterol levels by 30 percent to 50 percent.

   A similar inherited flaw, called familial hypercholesterolemia, or FH, occurs
in people. The Food and Drug Administration is expected to approve an
application for human trials of the therapy technique in February.

   Patients with FH can have blood cholesterol readings higher than 700
milligrams per deciliter. Healthy cholesterol levels are below 200.

   Most FH patients develop serious heart disease by age 13. The most severe
form of FH strikes about one in every 500,000 to 1 million people in the United
States; it often results in fatal heart disease at a young age.

   The experimental trials on people will be virtually identical to those
conducted on the Watanabe rabbit, which inherits a defective gene that causes
extremely high blood cholesterol levels, Dr. Wilson said.; Device could warn of
heart attack

   A California scientist has developed a device that, used in an ordinary
electronic wristwatch, can give early warning of a heart attack.

   If approved by the Food and Drug Administration - which could take up to five
years - the watch would cost about $ 100, said Kenneth Matsumura, director of
science and technology for the Alin Foundation in Berkeley.

   Mr. Matsumura says the watch's tiny electrocardiograph, which monitors
electrical signals from the heart, would detect at least half of all impending
heart attacks. About 1.5 million Americans a year suffer heart attacks.

   - From staff, wire and published reports

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1992


                             1532 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 23, 1991, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1000 words

HEADLINE: 2 lives touched by act of healing 20 years ago;
Hope today spurred by Cancer Act

BYLINE: BOB TUTT; Staff

BODY:

   Ann Arnold has vowed that her leukemia isn't going to control her life, but
some days keeping that resolve is far from easy.

   ""There are times when it's really difficult to walk,'' she said.  ""I
compare it to having a triple case of the flu.  Your head can be in a kind of
fog. '' Still she holds a responsible job in Austin and remains grateful that
advances in cancer treatment have kept her alive.

   James Gill, whose leukemia is in remission after treatment, feels the same
gratitude.

   ""I am so happy every day that I have made another day, another year,'' said
Gill, a retired executive who lives at Baton Rouge, La.  ""Regardless of what
happens today or tomorrow, I feel blessed. '' Arnold and Gill are among
thousands of cancer patients who have benefited from progress achieved in
combating their disease since the National Cancer Act became law on Dec. 23,
1971, 20 years ago today.

   That measure, annually infusing millions of dollars into a national war
against cancer, has paid rich dividends in advancing research and treatment,
cancer experts agree.  It has fostered a network of almost 30 ""comprehensive
cancer centers,'' including the University of Texas' M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
here.

   That is where Arnold, 41, and Gill, 69, both have sought treatment.

   In 1986, Gill said, his immune system was so weak and his prognosis so poor
that he resigned as a senior vice president of the Ethyl Corp. to get his
affairs in order.

   When Gill's treatment started, there was no certainty the hospital's
experimental therapies could be tailored to fit his needs.  But he improved
enough to become an outpatient, and after two years he was in remission.

   In 1989, his immune system conked out again, and he began a new round of
treatment.  The combination of an experimental drug designed to stimulate bone
marrow to produce infection-fighting white blood cells and a low-grade
chemotherapy to treat diseased cells put him back in remission.

   Gill returns to the hospital for a checkup every six weeks in the knowledge,
he said, ""that as a general rule these treatments begin to lose their
effectiveness after a couple years. '' Hospital staffers salute Gill for an
unfailingly upbeat spirit.  ""I really believe a positive attitude will help you
combat any illness,'' he said.

   Arnold is a former wire service and newspaper reporter who worked as Gov.
Mark White's press secretary.  In 1986, as White launched his re-election
campaign, she began feeling her energy drain but tried to ignore it because she
had so much to do.

   She thought her feeling of weakness might stem from her diabetes or chronic
sinus infections, but medical tests in early 1987 produced a grim diagnosis: She
had chronic myelogenous leukemia, a virulent cancer of the blood.

   Arnold is convinced she probably would be dead now if she had received the
treatment then standard for her leukemia rather than therapy on ""the cutting
edge'' at a cancer center like M.D. Anderson.

   The hospital has accommodated her so that for the greatest part she has been
an outpatient who administered her own injections of interferon, a protein body
cells produce to combat infection.

   This freedom has allowed her to function as the executive director of the
Texas Association of Broadcasters.

   ""For me, the ability to avoid letting cancer control my life is why I want
to go on living,'' she said.

   At a low point two years ago, Arnold was prepared to stop her interferon
treatment because, she explained, ""I had decided that I wanted to live my life
more peacefully in the final days. '' But circumstances forced her to abandon
""the luxury'' of such a move after an automobile accident left her husband,
Reg, with ""no sign of brain life. '' ""I didn't have that choice because I
still had a very young child and a high school kid at home to worry about,'' she
said.

   Just at the point it seemed her husband was destined to end his days in a
nursing home, he began emerging from his coma.  After much rehabilitation, he
has returned to work and even resumed driving.

   Arnold now faces some new regimen of treatment after interferon apparently
has caused her to develop the disease lupus, but she is philosophical.

   ""So many times what life deals you is a real opportunity for growth and
self-discovery and ultimately the satisfaction of knowing that you can deal with
whatever comes.

   ""When the (blood) counts get bad enough, we'll have to look at some
alternatives, mostly involving more radical chemotherapy than I've had.  I look
forward to having to make some decisions, but I'm not troubled by it.  Hell,
I've had this many years.  Anything over six months is gravy,'' she said.

   Dr. Irwin H. Krakoff, director of M.D. Anderson's Division of Medicine, said
progress in understanding and treating cancer, abetted by the National Cancer
Act, has typically come, not through dramatic breakthroughs, but through the
cumulative benefits of many separate advances.

   For example, he said, research in molecular biology has contributed to
knowledge about how various cancers develop.

   Krakoff said that advances in chemotherapy have, among other things, made
some forms of cancer such as testicular cancer almost fully curable, have made
some cancerous tumors operable by reducing their size and have extended the
lives of cancer patients who, like Arnold and Gill, previously would not have
survived the ravages of their disease for so long.

   In many cases of throat cancer, he said, ""we've shown that by giving
chemotherapy and X-ray therapy we can avoid removing the voice box and seriously
impairing quality of life.  We can do this without sacrificing survival.  We
don't improve survival, but we don't decrease it. '' He said the past 20 years
also have seen notable achievements in developing anti-cancer drugs, plus a
start on gene therapy treatment that ultimately could prove highly beneficial.

   Striving to advance cancer prevention and treatment, Krakoff said, ""We learn
from the patients we treat. ''

GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. James Gill, whose leukemia is in remission after treatment,
gets a checkup from Dr. Razelle Kurzrock at the Clark Clinic (color); Mug: 2.
Ann Arnold (b/w, p. 10); Buster Dean/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1991


                             1533 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               December 18, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: Irving L. Weissman

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Systemix-Sandoz Accord Linked to Scientist's Role

BYLINE: By MILT FREUDENHEIM

BODY:

   The stake that Dr. Irving L. Weissman holds in the genetic sciences company
he helped to start four years ago, Systemix Inc., jumped to about $20.3 million
yesterday, an $8 million gain since Friday, as investors reacted to the news
that Systemix is selling 60 percent of its shares to Sandoz Ltd., the big Swiss
drug and chemical company.

   Analysts said Sandoz had paid a surprisingly high price in large part to
insure that Dr. Weissman and his team stick with Systemix's work on blood marrow
cells and gene therapy. They hope for important payoffs in cancer, AIDS and
organ transplant therapies.

    As a condition of the deal, Dr. Weissman said in a telephone interview
yesterday, he is giving up memberships on other company scientific advisory
boards, including the DNAX Research Institute unit of Schering-Plough and T-Cell
Sciences Inc.

   The initial tests in humans of Systemix's process of isolating and purifying
human stem cells taken from blood in the bone marrow to help halt the spread of
a disease will be conducted at the Stanford Medical Center, where Dr. Weissman
has been a faculty member since 1969.

   But Dr. Weissman himself will not participate in the tests. "I have an
obvious conflict of interest," he noted yesterday.

   Dr. Weissman said he had been working on the genetics of the immune system
and bone marrow transplants in mice since he got his first laboratory job as a
16-year-old high school junior in Great Falls, Mont., where he was born in 1939.
After graduating from Montana State College in 1960, he got his M.D. degree at
Stanford University Medical School.

   Dr. Weissman's team isolated stem cells in mice at Stanford, where they also
developed a special type of mouse that they use to test the human immune system
in AIDS and cancer studies. He helped to start Systemix in 1988, he said, when
the research began to need more money and laboratory space than Stanford could
spare.

   With help from two scientist friends, Leroy Hood, a biologist at California
Institute of Technology, and David Baltimore, who then headed the Whitehead
Institute at M.I.T., Dr. Weissman lined up three venture capitalists. They were
Eli S. Jacobs, a New Yorker who owns the Baltimore Orioles baseball team; Alan
M. Mendelson, who brought in Aetna Life and Casualty, and Dr. Simon Ramo, the
original "R" in TRW Inc.

   Dr. Weissman and his wife have four children.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1991


                             1534 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                  DECEMBER 18, 1991, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 904 words

HEADLINE: Baseball Owner in Big Play
 Stake in Systemix grows to $ 175 million

BYLINE: Alex Barnum, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Eli S. Jacobs' Baltimore Orioles may have finished second- to-last in their
division this year, but the New York financier hit a grand slam with Systemix
Inc., the Palo Alto-based biotechnology company that is selling a majority stake
to Sandoz Ltd. for $ 392 million.

   The little-known Jacobs, 53, who bought the Orioles in 1988, elbowed out a
top San Francisco venture-capital firm to finance the company three years ago
with an $ 8 million investment. After the Sandoz deal, the company will be worth
$ 650 million, and Jacobs' stake will be worth $ 175 million.

   The deal also is a windfall for the Stanford scientists whose discovery got
Systemix started. Dr. J. Michael McCune, 37, a former Stanford postdoctoral
student, and his mentor, renowned Stanford immunologist Dr. Irving L. Weissman,
51, each have options to buy stock at 28 cents per share. The stock closed
yesterday at 55 in over-the-counter trading.

   McCune and Weissman can each acquire $ 24 million worth of Systemix stock by
shelling out $ 105,000 apiece.

   Systemix surprised the biotechnology industry by announcing Monday that
Sandoz, the Swiss drug giant, would buy a 60 percent stake in the company. The
deal would give Sandoz access to what observers say are some of the most
exciting technologies in the biotech industry.

   Under terms of the deal, Sandoz will buy slightly more than 4 million
Systemix shares at $ 70 each -- an outlay of $ 281 million -- and pay $ 111
million more for 1.9 million newly issued shares at $ 56 each.

   Systemix, whose revenues for the first nine months of this year amounted to a
mere $ 1.6 million, was formed three years ago to commercialize the development
by McCune of the SCID- hu (pronounced skid-hue) mouse -- a mouse that is
implanted with a working human immune system. Although the development was made
at Stanford, Systemix was given an exclusive license.

   The development of SCID-hu, as well as the company's work in stem cells --
which spawn all the cells of the immune system -- have potential applications in
the treatment of a range of diseases, including AIDS and cancer, and can also
prove useful in organ transplants.

   Weissman and McCune re- cruited some of the nation's top biologists to help
start the company, including Dr. Leroy Hood, head of the biology department at
California Institute of Technology, and David Baltimore, a Nobel prizewinner in
biology who recently resigned amid a storm of controversy as head of Rockefeller
University in New York.

   Although Hood and Baltimore have served only as advisers to the company, they
have played key roles in making the contacts that were to get the company its
financing.

   Baltimore set the Sandoz deal in motion in October, introducing Systemix to
Eli Gilboa, a former post-doctoral student in Baltimore's lab and a pioneer in
gene therapy. Gilboa at the time was discussing a collaboration with Sandoz and
told the Swiss drug company that Systemix was looking for a partner.

   Three years earlier, Hood introduced Systemix to a special venture-capital
group led by Jacobs and including Simon Ramo, co- founder of TRW Inc., and Aetna
Life Insurance Co. The Jacobs group offered $ 10 million to fund Systemix,
killing a $ 5 million deal that the company had set up with the venture-capital
firm of Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers.

   Like the other founders, Hood and Baltimore have options to buy stock at 28
cents per share, although it is unclear how much.

   Jacobs, who shuns publicity and is closely tied to high-ranking Republicans,
was a relative newcomer to the biotech industry. He has made much of his money
in leveraged buyouts and junk bonds. He also has a reputation as a skilled
manager and successful long-term investor.

   Over the past two decades Jacobs has amassed an empire worth hundreds of
millions of dollars -- even excluding his Systemix investment. It has stretched
from retailing (Jos. A. Bank Clothiers) to computer equipment (Memorex Corp. and
Telex Corp.) to toys (Worlds of Wonder Inc.).

   CHART

      BIG WINNERS IN THE ACQUISITION OF SYSTEMIX INC.
    The Palo Alto-based biotech company had revenues of only $1.6 million in
the first nine months of this year, But its bright prospects prompted Sandoz
Ltd. to pay $392 million for a 60 percent stake, greatly enriching the
principal shareholders.
                       Current    Original       Value at   After Sandoz
                      stake in   Investment      IPO 8/91    acquisition
 Shareholder           company  (in millions)  (in millions)  (millions)
  Eli S. Jacobs          38.4%     $8.09         $48.0           $175.4
 New York financier
 Aetna Life &            9.8       2.07         12.4             44.8
 Casualty Co.
 Technology Funding      5.9       1.25          7.4             27.1
 Venture capital firm
 Dr. J. Michael McCune   5.3       0.11          6.7             24.4
 Co-Founder
 Dr. Irving L. Weissman  5.3       0.10          6.7             24.2
 Co-Founder
 Linda D. Sonntag        1.3       0.07          1.6              6.1
 Chief executive
 Source: Company reports
 EC:

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, CHART,Baltimore Orioles President Eli Jacobs (bottom) with
baseball commissioner Fay Vincent (top) and then Supreme Court nominee David
Souter at Baltimore's Memorial Stadium , BY ASSOCIATED PRESS


                             1535 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                December 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: Sandoz Buys 60% Stake In Systemix

BYLINE: By MILT FREUDENHEIM

BODY:

   Sandoz Ltd., the big Swiss drug and chemical company, announced yesterday
that it had agreed to pay $391.8 million for 60 percent of Systemix, a genetics
science company started by Stanford University researchers.

   The deal valued the four-year-old company at about $650 million. Systemix's
stock rose $19.75 a share yesterday to close at $53 in over-the-counter trading.

    The announcement came after the close of the Swiss stock market, but
Sandoz's American depository receipts closed at $34 a share, down 25 cents, in
over-the-counter trading.


Faster Development Expected

    Dr. Linda Sonntag, chief executive of Systemix, which is based in Palo Alto,
Calif., said the company planned to accelerate development of a patented process
for separating blood stem cells from bone marrow, a technique it hoped could be
used in treating certain types of cancer patients.

   Stem cells in the bone marrow are believed to give rise to all the
circulating blood cells in the immune and blood systems.

   Dr. Sonntag said the process, which received a patent five weeks ago, would
be tested in humans for the first time in a few months at Stanford, where it
would be tried on cancer patients weakened by heavy doses of chemotherapy or
radiation treatment. The purpose is to purify stem cells to eliminate traces of
the disease.

   "This takes us one step beyond traditional biotechnology," said Dr. Max Link,
chief executive of the Sandoz Pharma Ltd., the Zurich-based company's
pharmaceutical unit. Dr. Sonntag said the purified stem cells offered "an ideal
vehicle" for treating genetic disorders.

   Dr. Link said Sandoz hoped to be ready to market the cancer treatment program
by 1994. Both Dr. Link and Dr. Sonntag said that under current Federal
regulations the use of the stem cells in such a process did not require Food and
Drug Administration approval. F.D.A. approval for drugs can take years.

   They said the process would also be tested for applications in treating AIDS
patients and to try to prevent the rejection of animal organs in transplants to
humans.

   The process was developed by a group headed by Dr. Irving Weissman, a
professor of pathology and cancer biology at Stanford. He founded Systemix with
Dr. J. Michael McCune, a former Stanford colleague, and Eli S. Jacobs, a New
York venture capitalist.

Profitability Target: 1994

    Dr. Sonntag said Systemix planned to add 60 people to its 90 employees by
the end of the year. She said that if the blood marrow tests succeeded, the stem
cell technology could bring the company its first profits in 1994.

   She said the second product would use similar technology to purify
megakaryocyte precursers, a type of cell in the bone marrow that gives rise to
platelets essential in blood clotting. Systemix said it had been able to use the
purification process in producing platelets in the laboratory.

   The company said there were three million platelet transfusions a year in the
United States.

   Sandoz said it had agreed to make a tender offer for four million shares of
Systemix common stock on a fully diluted basis at $70 a share, for about $280
million in cash. Sandoz will also buy 1.98 million newly issued shares for $111
million, or $56 a share.

   The agreement gives Sandoz control of the Systemix board of directors and
permits Sandoz to buy the entire company after three years, if the independent
directors approve. If not, Sandoz agreed not to increase its holding above 60
percent for the first seven years, and not to go above 75 percent for the three
years after that.

Went Public in August

    Systemix, which became a publicly owned company in August, at $18 a share,
was advised in the deal by S. G. Warburg & Company.

   Dr. Link said Systemix scientists would work on Sandoz-supported projects
involving "transplantation tolerance" cancer and AIDS research at Genetic
Therapy Inc., a Gaithersburg, Md., company in which Sandoz has a minority
interest. Systemix scientists will also work with Dr. Eli Gilboa at Sloan
Kettering Cancer Institute and Prof. Fritz Bach at Columbia University, Dr. Link
said.

   Sandoz, which conducts one-third of its business in the United States,
reported $625 million in profits last year on sales of $8.9 billion.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1991


                             1536 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   DECEMBER 17, 1991, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: Swiss Firm Buying 60% of Systemix

BYLINE: Alex Barnum, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Systemix Inc., a Palo Alto biotechnology company best known for developing a
mouse with a human immune system, surprised the biotechnology industry yesterday
by announcing that it had agreed to sell a 60 percent stake to Swiss drug giant
Sandoz Ltd. for $ 392 million.

   The deal underscores the extraordinary rise to success of a company that was
founded only four years ago with $ 10 million in venture capital. The deal puts
a $ 650 million stock market value on Systemix, more than four times its $ 144
million value just five months ago when it sold stock to public investors for
the first time.

   The deal is the latest example of a large foreign pharmaceutical company
paying a premium price to gain access to the U.S. biotech industry's
leading-edge research.

   The agreement will give Systemix a large cash infusion to finance its costly
research and development as well as access to the marketing muscle of one of the
world's top 10 pharmaceutical companies. It gives Sandoz access to pioneering
research in immune system diseases, cancer and new techniques of gene therapy.

   ''I think it's a fabulous deal for both companies,'' said Linda Sonntag,
Systemix's president and chief executive officer. ''The common strategic
objectives of Sandoz and Systemix make this an ideal alliance. The financial
support and infrastructure of Sandoz will enable Systemix to build more rapidly
on our discoveries.''

   Max Link, chief executive officer of Sandoz Pharma Ltd. in Basel,
Switzerland, said in a state ment, ''The relationship with Systemix will allow
Sandoz to expand significantly our research capabilities in the areas of
immunology and oncology.''

   Under terms of the deal, Sandoz will buy about 49 percent of Systemix, or 4
million shares, at $ 70 a share.

   In addition, Sandoz will pay $ 111 million for 1.9 million newly issued
shares at $ 56 a share. The two transactions will give Sandoz 60 percent of
Systemix.

   Systemix stock yesterday jumped 19 3/4, or 59.4 percent, to $ 53 a share in
over-the-counter trading.

   Sandoz will be allowed to bid for the rest of the company in 1995, but only
if the offer is recommended by Systemix's independent directors. If not, Sandoz
will be able to increase its holding to 75 percent between 1999 and 2001.

   Unlike similar deals in the biotech industry, such as Hoffmann- La Roche
Inc.'s acquisition of 60 percent of Genentech Inc., the deal does not set a cap
on the future value of Systemix stock. Sonntag said that aspect of the deal
would preserve Systemix's ''entrepreneurial drive.''

   Once the deal is consummated February 15, Sandoz will get a majority on the
Systemix board.

   But Systemix said that its management and employees will remain and the
company headquarters and research operations will stay in Palo Alto. The company
will continue to operate and trade in the stock market as an independent
company.

   Much of the publicity surrounding Systemix has focused on the so-called
SCID-hu mouse, which is used to test and develop new AIDS drugs and accounted
for most of the company's $ 1.5 million in revenues in the first nine months of
this year. But Sandoz is most interested in the value of Systemix's pioneering
work with ''stem cells.''

   Stem cells are the grandfather cells of the immune system. Although they
constitute a tiny portion of bone marrow -- 0.1 percent -- they spawn all the
other cells of the blood and immune system and have potential applications in
organ transplantation, drug development and gene therapy.

   One of Systemix's key discoveries involves methods for isolating and
purifying stem cells. For example, Systemix hopes eventually to be able to
replenish bone marrow in cancer patients whose immune systems have been ravaged
by radiation therapy.

   Systemix also expects stem cells to play a major role in gene therapy, an
experimental technique for curing disease at the genetic level. Splicing
corrective genes into stem cells could be a more effective form of gene therapy
because the genetic trait would be passed on to the cells' offspring.

   Basel, Switzerland-based Sandoz had sales of $ 8.9 billion in 1990 and
profits of $ 695 million.

   Its top product, Sandimmune, which suppresses the immune system to facilitate
organ transplantation and treat immune disorders, has annual sales of more than
$ 500 million.



                             1537 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                    December 15, 1991, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 86

LENGTH: 153 words

HEADLINE: DIRECTORS;
WHO'S WHAT, WHERE

BODY:

    The Gitto Corp., Leominster - Tommy Lasorda, manager, Los Angeles Dodgers;
National Association of Securities Dealers Inc., Washington - Richard J.
DeAgazio, president, Boston Capital Services; Better Business Bureau, Boston -
chairman, Edwin R. Ciampa, president, Crest Buick Nissan Inc., vice chairmen,
Sandra J. Sucher, senior vice president, Fidelity Investments, Peter Van Kleeck,
hotel operations director, The Nelson Cos.

   New England Chamber of Commerce - president, Ronald E. Zooleck, executive
vice president, South Shore Chamber of Commerce, Quincy; EMC Corp., Hopkinton -
John F. Cunningham, chairman, Cunningham & Co.; National Fisheries Institute,
Region I - George Berkowitz, president, Legal Sea Foods, Allston;
Roxbury-Highland Bank - Erling A. Hanson Jr., president, Forest Hills Cemetery,
Boston; Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., Cambridge - William R. Miller, former vice
chairman, Bristol-Myers.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, LASORDA

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1991


                             1538 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    DECEMBER 9, 1991, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1257 words

HEADLINE: THEOLOGIANS QUESTION SCIENTIFIC ADVANCES
 Gene Research Starts Ethics Debate

BYLINE: Don Lattin, Chronicle Religion Writer

BODY:

    Concerned that genetic engineers may soon be ''playing God,'' the federal
government has hired a group of theologians to ponder the philosophic fallout
from the largest research project in the history of biology.

   Diving into the bio-ethical quagmire is the Center for Theology and the
Natural Sciences in Berkeley, which last month landed a $ 300,000 grant from the
National Institutes of Health to study the implications of genetic engineering.

   Rapid advances in the understanding of human genes have already begun
producing new treatments and potential cures to some of the 4,000 diseases in
which heredity plays a role. At the same time, however, theologians warn that
knowledge gained from this research could put genetic engineers in the position
of ''playing God.''

   ''How far should humans go in altering the structure of the human body?''
asked Ted Peters, a professor at Pacific Lutheran Theological Center in Berkeley
and director of the Center for Theology and Natural Science.

   ''If you think God is the sole author of human life, you might say, 'Not at
all.' But if you think of human creativity and divine creativity in partnership,
as I do, you could say it's our moral responsibility to make a better human
being.''

   At issue are the religious and ethical questions raised by the Human Genome
Project, a multibillion-dollar study that could unlock some of the deepest mys
teries of human existence.

   The project is an international effort to spend at least 15 years and $ 3
billion mapping the location of some 100,000 genes hidden within the molecules
of the chemical DNA. These molecules of genetic material in every cell of the
body contain the story of human heredity.

   One of the difficult questions the Center for Theology and the Natural
Sciences will consider is how far genetic engineers should go. If human gene
therapy is allowed to alter the genes of people with killer diseases like cancer
or cystic fibrosis, should it be allowed to rid future generations of other
conditions that run in families -- like depression, schizophrenia, dwarfism,
baldness or obesity?

   ''This project is bringing up questions about our role in nature, about
whether we are the shapers of our own destiny,'' said Robert John Russell, a
professor of theology and science with the Graduate Theological Union in
Berkeley. ''How do we honor people with Down's Syndrome as people, and then
proceed to eliminate them from the human gene pool?''

   Advances in genetic mapping could also pose soul-searching problems for
prospective parents who could be handed, in advance, more detailed lists of
which maladies will affect their children.

   ''Information about the genome of an unborn fetus could make the difference
in whether or not to have an abortion,'' said Peters.

   HEALTH INSURANCE QUESTIONS

   Other questions involve the ethics of insurance companies denying health care
coverage to people with ''bad'' genes.

   ''We could create a whole new class of poor people who can't get work or
health insurance on the basis of their genome,'' Peters said. ''Insurance
companies could find a baby has a genetic predisposition to Alzheimer's disease
and not offer insurance.''

   Scientists also worry that a breakthrough in the understanding of genetics
could lead to changing social values, such as increased belief in
''determinism.'' If, for example, alcoholics or compulsive gamblers are found to
carry a ''sensation-seeking'' gene, it could lead to the belief that they carry
no personal or moral responsibility for their actions.

   Most ethicists do not oppose gene therapy designed to correct existing
diseases in individual patients but have serious concerns about altering the
genes carried by human sperm and eggs, changes that can forever alter basic
human heredity.

   Religious denominations have greeted promises to ''make a better human
being'' with concern. In 1980, the National Council of Churches, the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops and the Synagogue Council of America sent
President Carter a letter expressing concerns about ''an era of fundamental
danger triggered by the rapid growth of genetic engineering.''

   Three years later, more than 60 religious leaders and scientists urged
Congress that ''efforts to engineer specific traits into the germ line of the
human species should not be attempted.''

   According to Peters, that statement was ''unnecessarily alarmist.''

   ''If you get the knowledge to rid an entire generation of cancer cells, you
could argue that it's immoral not to change the germ line,'' he said.

   CATHOLIC CONCERNS

   Other theologians and church leaders, however, are more cautious. ''Catholic
bishops have serious concerns about the rhetoric of 'making a better human
being,' '' said Richard Doerflinger, director of the Catholic Bishops' Office
for Pro-life Activities.

   Doerflinger was one of several theologians who questioned the composition of
the 12-member research panel Peters has formed to conduct the ethical study of
genome project. Most of its members come from mainline Protestant churches with
a relatively liberal stand on abortion and other controversies involving medical
ethics.

   The only Catholic on the panel, Thomas Shannon, a professor of religion and
social ethics at Worcester Polytechnic Institute in Massachusetts, has been
active in Catholics for Free Choice, an organization that dissents from Catholic
church teaching on abortion.

   ''They are packing the jury,'' said Rabbi Moshe Tendler, an Orthodox
professor of biology, medical ethics and Talmudic studies at Yeshiva University
in New York.

   Peters conceded that his research panel does not reflect the nation's
theological diversity but said experts from across the religious spectrum will
be invited to present their views before the three-year study is complete. A
series of public forums will also be held, with the first one scheduled for
February 16 in Berkeley.

   JEWISH PERSPECTIVE

   Tendler said Jewish theologians are ''not frightened with the idea of
modifying nature'' to cure disease but have deep concerns when scientists talk
about ''improving the race.''

   ''The Holocaust had its philosophical basis in eugenics,'' said Tendler.
''What we are afraid of is setting up a standard where someone decides that blue
eyes and blond hair is the definition of humanhood.''

   Lewis Smedes, a professor of ethics at Fuller Theological Seminary in
Pasadena, a leading college of the conservative evangelical movement, said a
consensus on the ethics of genetic engineering has not yet emerged in Protestant
fundamentalist circles.

   Fundamentalists have a long history of religious opposition to scientific
theories that contradict their literal interpretation of the Bible. The famous
1925 trial of Tennessee science teacher John Thomas Scopes -- convicted of
teaching evolution in the public schools -- was a watershed event for the modern
evangelical movement.

   ''Evangelicals have been hesitant about a science that claims to know how the
Earth was created and how it should be run,'' said Smedes. ''But we have not
been that hesitant about breakthroughs in medical science.''

   Smedes has a personal stake in the debate. His own child suffers from
Gaucher's disease, a genetic disease affecting the liver, spleen and bone
marrow.

   ''Our only real hope for a cure is from genetic engineering, so how could I
not possibly look at this as a gift,'' he said. ''There is a real possibility
for misuse of genetic engineering, but I believe the promise of helpfulness
outweighs the dangers of harmfulness.''



                             1539 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    December 3, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A3

LENGTH: 80 words

HEADLINE: CORRECTION

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Because of errors in an Associated Press report, an article in yesterday's
Washington Business incorrectly described the relationship between Sandoz Pharma
Ltd. and Genetic Therapy Inc. Sandoz, which has its world headquarters in
Switzerland, has purchased $ 10 million of Genetic Therapy stock. It has also
agreed to provide up to $ 13.5 million over three years to fund projects and
additional milestone payments of up to $ 11.5 million per product if certain
events occur.


                             1540 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    December 3, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z14

LENGTH: 2782 words

HEADLINE: THE NEW WEAPONS

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman

BODY:

   Cancer is nothing new.

   Archeologists have discovered tumors in cretaceous dinosaur skeletons and in
Egyptian mummies.

   Likewise, cancer treatment is nothing new.

   Surgery for cancer dates to at least 1600 B.C., when Egyptian physicians
removed tumors with knives or red-hot irons.

   A second approach to treating cancer came in 1896, just a year after German
physicist Wilhelm K. Roentgen discovered X-rays, when a breast cancer patient
was treated with radiation.

   Discoveries during World War II about the effects of poisonous mustard gas
led to the third approach: cancer chemotherapy. In 1943, C.P. "Dusty" Rhodes, an
army chemical warfare researcher on leave from Memorial Hospital Cancer Center
in New York used nitrogen mustard to treat people with cancer of the lymph
system.

   Surgery, radiation and chemotherapy remain the mainstays of cancer therapy
today, but they are effective for only about half of the people who develop
cancer.

   "The half of patients that cannot be successfully treated last year accounted
for 515,000 deaths in the United States, so it is obvious that we need new
methods to treat cancers," said Steven A. Rosenberg at the National Cancer
Institute.

   Taking off from major discoveries in the past decade about the workings of
cancer and the immune system at the molecular level, researchers have recently
moved into the fourth realm of cancer treatment: biologic therapy.

   In essence, biologic therapy goes back to square one, encouraging the body's
native ability to fight diseases that threaten its normal functioning.

   Unlike conventional treatments, which attack the cancer directly, biologic
therapy attempts to alter the body in such a way that its own defense mechanisms
will reject and destroy the cancer.

   This new therapy relies on substances naturally produced by the body that are
modified and amplified in the laboratory -- using the latest techniques of
biotechnology and genetic engineering -- then returned to the patient in ways
and in quantities that go beyond the body's usual capabilities.

   Biologic therapy "is trying to capitalize on a pretty smart system that works
most of the time," said John Laszlo, vice president for research at the American
Cancer Society. Cancer manages to elude this system, he explains, because it so
closely resembles normal cells.

   "Cancer," said Laszlo, "doesn't evoke the kind of strong immune reactions
that the body has to invasions of bacterium, worms or fungus. It tends to
overwhelm the immune system when it gets to a large size or it grows in
relatively inaccessible areas where the immune system can't get to it, such as
solid tumors in the brain."

   Biologic Agents

   Cancer is uniquely threatening among diseases because it does not remain
localized in an organ or system but can travel throughout the body and take up
residence elsewhere. It metastasizes. If caught early, it can be surgically
excised; if not, the full body must be treated, for it is these spreading, stray
cells that are ultimately what kills patients. And treating the full body with
radiation therapy or chemotherapy inadvertently destroys normal cells along with
the barely distinguishable cancer cells.

   Researchers are using the new biologic agents in attempts to alert the immune
system to a cancer, to help cancer-fighting cells grow in number, to arm these
cells with cancer toxins and to alter the cancer cells themselves so they look
more "foreign" to the immune system.

   Although the biologic agents are naturally produced substances, they are not
necessarily safe or painless. Thomas J. Fahey, acting physician-in-chief at
Sloan Kettering, said, "The hope that these substances would be relatively
innocuous when given in larger amounts than normally found in the body has not
panned out. Some of them are incredibly toxic."

   Yet biologic therapy is especially appealing because, like chemotherapy, it
can be applied systemically to rout out metastasizing cancer cells. And it
theoretically should spare healthy, normal cells because the immune system is
ordinarily very selective about the cells it attacks.

   Though hardly household names, some of the biologic agents being used against
cancer have already gained a certain notoriety:

   Interferon, a protein that helps regulate the immune system. It was the first
biologic agent to be licensed for cancer therapy (in 1986). Despite great hopes,
it has so far proved effective only in fighting a rare kind of leukemia and
Kaposi's sarcoma, a leading complication of AIDS.

   Monoclonal antibodies, the "guided missile" purified antibodies that are
designed to home in selectively on cancer cells, sparing normal cells.

   Interleukin-2, the hormone-like substance discovered by Robert C. Gallo and
Frank Ruscetti in 1976 that can stimulate immune system cells to grow
prolifically. But it has toxic and potentially lethal side effects when given in
the necessary high doses.

   Tumor necrosis factor, a substance produced in minute amounts by immune
system cells that causes tumors to shrink and die. Grown in quantity in the
laboratory, at high doses it is 100 percent effective in destroying cancer in
mice but is so toxic in humans that an effective dose would be lethal.

   TIL and LAK cells, special white blood cells called tumor invading
lymphocytes and lymphokine-activated killer cells, that can be gathered from the
body, grown in great quantity in the laboratory and returned to the body as they
are or with the addition of new genes to make them more potent.

   Cancer vaccines. These are after-the-fact attempts to prime the immune system
to attack a cancer. BCG vaccine, which has been used for years to protect
against tuberculosis, has recently been approved by the FDA to treat patients
with bladder cancer. The National Cancer Institute is testing a vaccine using a
person's own live tumor cells that have been genetically altered in the
laboratory and returned to the body. And at the University of Southern
California and elsewhere, researchers are using dead tumor cells from donors to
fashion a generic cancer vaccine.

   "In 1991, we are no longer limited to the kinds of cells that nature
naturally provides a patient," said Rosenberg. "We can, by genetically modifying
these cells, develop and generate a cell with properties that have not existed
before in the course of evolution."

   Combination Strategy

   Apart from the BCG vaccine, the only biologic agent that has been approved by
the government for general use is interferon, and then only for hairy cell
leukemia and Kaposi's sarcoma. Most agents are so new that they are still being
tested first for safety.

   In the patient studies, where efficacy is examined, doses and drug
interactions are more intently explored. Clinicians are looking at a range of
choices because they suspect that biologic agents may prove to be most effective
in combination with each other or in conjunction with the other three therapies.

   "It's overwhelming. It's a wonderful problem we didn't have five years ago,"
said Alan Houghton, chief of the clinical immunology service at Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center in New York. "The problem we face is which factors to
use, how do we give them, when do we give them, and the biggest problem, I
think, is in what sequence do we give them? Sequence turns out to be crucial. If
you're off by a couple of hours, you can get no effect. That's how the immune
system works."

   Rosenberg, for example, is testing IL-2 in combination with six different
agents including interferon, monoclonal antibodies and tumor necrosis factor.
Preliminary results, Rosenberg said, suggest that high doses of IL-2 and
interferon together work better than either agent does alone.

   Treatments can get even more complicated. In another clinical trial,
Rosenberg has pushed combination therapy into a futuristic mode with a "gene
therapy" approach. Instead of injecting IL-2, which stimulates immune system
cells to proliferate, he has found a way to encourage the body to make more of
the hormone itself. He transfers extra IL-2 genes into white blood cells and
then reinfuses the modified cells in large amounts into patients, who then
produce IL-2. Adding another layer of biotherapy, Rosenberg first gives the
patients a single dose of cyclophosphamide, a chemotherapeutic agent, to help
eliminate suppressor cells that might inhibit the growth of new white blood
cells.

   In a recent Gallup poll, oncologists were especially enthusiastic about the
prospects for using natural substances called "colony stimulating factors" to
increase the recuperative powers of bone marrow cells damaged by conventional
chemotherapy or radiation therapy. It is bone marrow that supplies the body's
immune system with its white blood cells. Patients undergoing traditional cancer
therapy are at risk for other diseases because their immune systems are
suppressed. If colony stimulating factors can compensate, then patients might be
able to tolerate stronger doses of chemotherapy or radiation, perhaps leading to
higher cure rates.

   Trans-retinoic acid, a variant of vitamin A, is a chemical with a biologic
effect being used to treat patients with a rare cancer called acute
promyelocytic leukemia. It apparently acts by switching cells from a permanent
state of immaturity and continual division (ie. cancer) to a more normal state
in which the cells mature and then die. Usual treatment for this cancer is
intensive chemotherapy or bone marrow transplantation.

   Meshing traditional surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy and the biologic
agents into a new cancer battle plan is a challenge for the future. "Right now,
we have to establish that biologic therapy itself has impact," said Rosenberg.

   Researchers in biologic therapies are currently limited to treating cancer
patients with advanced disease who are, by definition, unable to benefit from
the three traditional therapies. As the investigations progress, and safety and
efficacy are established, clinicians might be allowed to treat patients earlier
in the course of the disease, using surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy
first, to clear the body of obvious cancer before turning to biologic therapy to
ferret out microscopic or inaccessible cancer growths.

   Side effects, however, remain a constraint on the use of biologic agents.
"Tumor necrosis factor, for example, produces shock if not given appropriately,"
said Sloan Kettering's Fahey. "Interferon, which everyone thought would be the
magic bullet, has a lot of side effects. That's the reason why the 'smorgasbord'
will not be so easy to choose from."

   Vaccine Research

   Of all these new biologic approaches, perhaps the most intriguing is the
cancer vaccine, for if successful it could target unseen cancer and prevent
recurrence.

   Renaissance-era medical textbooks show that European doctors had already
drawn an association between the disappearance of cancerous tumors in some
patients and an episode of severe infection. The immune system apparently had
the capability to destroy cancer.

   The intuitive idea that cancer then ought to be vulnerable to a vaccine led
researchers in this country a century ago to begin crude attempts at immunizing
patients against cancer. In New York in the 1890s, surgeon William Coley at
Memorial Hospital developed a vaccine that was basically a cocktail of various
killed bacteria in an attempt to stimulate an immune response. "Coley's toxins,"
people called the mixes. A few of Coley's patients made remarkable recoveries.

   In 1958 at Memorial Hospital, Lloyd J. Old and B. Benacerraf noticed that
mice treated with BCG, the vaccine for tuberculosis, showed resistance to cancer
tumors. That discovery led researchers all over the country to try BCG
injections and infusions for all kinds of cancer, to no avail. The approach was
nearly abandoned.

   Just this year, however, the Food and Drug Administration was able to approve
use of the BCG vaccine for superficial (non-invasive) bladder cancer -- the
first cancer vaccine. The treatment involves inundating the bladder with an
infusion of BCG through the urethra. "It induces a very strong inflammatory
response, non-specifically, that destroys everything in its path," said
Houghton. There is fever, occasional nausea and, rarely, a potentially lethal
allergic response.

   The timing of the treatments, which are given over a two-year span, is
critical, said Donald L. Lamm, a urologist at West Virginia University Medical
Center who has been conducting studies with the vaccine method since 1973. In a
paper in the Oct. 24 New England Journal of Medicine, he reports the
disappearance of bladder cancer in 70 percent of patients -- twice as effective
as a standard chemotherapy agent called doxorubicin. A more recent study shows
the response jumping to 82 percent when three additional weekly BCG treatments
are added at the three-month mark.

   Science's most recent attempt at a cancer vaccine is considerably more
sophisticated than the BCG infusions. At the National Cancer Institute in
October, Rosenberg injected a melanoma patient for the first time with a live
vaccine made of the patient's own tumor cells, which had been genetically
altered in the laboratory to include a gene for tumor necrosis factor (TNF). The
theory is that the altered tumor cells would attract immune system cells while
killing off surrounding cancer by secreting the TNF toxin locally. TNF cannot be
administered systemically to humans because effective doses are too toxic.

   The vaccine technique is sophisticated, costly and tailored strictly to each
individual. It is based on the understanding that the body's immune system
recognizes cancer antigens only when they are presented in molecules specific to
each person.

   In his vaccine research at the University of Southern California
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Malcolm S. Mitchell is testing a generic vaccine
for melanoma constructed from cancer cells taken from two donors (since
deceased) a decade ago. The cells have been kept alive and replicating in the
laboratory.

   With vaccines made from a person's own cancer cells, said Mitchell, a patient
has to have enough tumor to excise and culture in the lab. "You can't treat
people with microscopic disease right after surgery. That's the group you could
help the most, who you could theoretically cure."

   To make a vaccine, Mitchell takes the donated melanoma cells and mechanically
reduces them to fragments in a homogenizer. The fragments are then frozen and
thawed several times to assure that they are dead. He then mixes into these
fragments a novel immunological stimulant called "Detox" derived from a bacteria
toxin. This thick mixture becomes the vaccine and is injected into the patients'
thighs. Periodic "booster" shots are given every few months.

   Immune Boosters

   More than five years into a clinical trial, he reports encouraging results:
15 percent into partial remission (shrinkage of existing tumors) and 5 percent
complete remission -- the disappearance of all disease for at least a month.

   More important, Mitchell has seen a prolongation of useful life even when
tumors do not completely disappear.

   "When you get a response, it's much better," said Mitchell. "[Patients] enjoy
their remission, they remain functional. You get a remission with chemotherapy,
but people feel terrible."

   Mitchell is set to begin a national, multi-institution trial in January
involving about 350 patients that will compare his melanoma vaccine therapy with
four different chemotherapy courses.

   When will the new biologic therapies move out of selective trials and into
the repertoire of all hospital oncologists? Several kinds of colony stimulating
factors are already in expanded patient trials, having been proved safe and
effective in supporting the bone marrow. The remaining question is whether the
stronger-dose chemotherapy they enable actually leads to a higher rate of cure.
One kind of colony stimulating factor called filgrastim received official
approval from the FDA in February but is still being studied.

   Biologic therapy for bladder cancer has already arrived with the BCG vaccine.
Other biologic agents "may play the major role in therapies for some types of
cancer" in 10 years, says Houghton.

   The reinvigoration and newfound hopefulness of cancer research "really ties
into an explosion of information in biology and biologic systems," said
Houghton. "A lot of people make the comparison to the years 1910 to 1930 in
physics, when there was this "quantum leap" in theory and information, and I
think this is happening now in biology. It's very hard to keep up. There are so
many experiments to do. It's a wonderful problem."



GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, SURGERY EGYPTIAN PHYSICIANS REMOVED TUMORS WITH KNIVES OR
RED-HOT IRONS. BOB DAHM FOR TWP


                             1541 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 2, 1991 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-5

LENGTH: 1330 words

HEADLINE: Scientists look past AZT for AIDS cure

BYLINE: CHERYL CLARK, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The recent announcement that basketball star Earvin "Magic" Johnson has
started taking AZT to slow the spread of the AIDS virus means he may have been
infected one to five years ago and may be at a middle point in the course of his
disease, according to AIDS experts. As Johnson begins his therapy, thousands of
researchers worldwide are searching for other ways to stop viral destruction to
the immune systems of Johnson and millions of others. AZT alone, say AIDS
experts, isn't a life-saver because of its toxicity and limited effectiveness.
Armed with $1.2 billion in federal research funds and more from private sources,
scientists -- as well as clinicians at universities, biotechnology firms and in
government laboratories -- are searching for pharmaceutical alternatives.
Scientists say much has been accomplished in the eight years since the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that causes AIDS was identified.

   "We have reached a much better understanding of how the virus works," said
Didier Trono, head of AIDS research at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies
in La Jolla. Simply put, after the virus binds itself to a receptor on a human
host cell, it gains entry into that cell, moves to the cell's nucleus and
integrates with the cell's chromosomes. From there, the virus gradually
replicates, infecting other host cells. Slowly, over the course of five to 10
years or longer, the virus destroys critical component of the immune system, CD4
T cells. When the number of those T cells -- normally 1,000 per cubic millimeter
of blood -- are reduced to around 200, many infected patients begin to develop
symptoms of AIDS. AZT normally is prescribed for patients with a T cell count
below 500. Physicians specializing in treating people with AIDS say T cell
decline varies dramatically from patient to patient.

   But during the past five or six years, the average patient's blood drops as
much as 100 T cells a year. AZT slows that decline. At 200 T cells, the patient
is considered in a danger zone, and physicians begin to prescribe drugs to
prevent certain infections such as pneumocystis carinii, the cause of AIDS
pneumonia.

   At 50 T cells, the immune system is considered severely depressed, and
otherwise rare, opportunistic infections begin to cause illness and, eventually,
death. Besides seeking a basic understanding of the virus, scientists have put
hundreds of compounds through clinical trials, many of them through large
research programs such as the one at UCSD Medical Center.

   Some of the compounds attack the virus itself while others attempt to quash
the opportunistic infections that eventually kills AIDS patients. More effective
drugs against those kinds of infections -- such as the leading killer of AIDS
patients, pneumocystis pneumonia and parasites, funguses, bacteria, viruses and
other pathogens -- are being discovered. These have greatly reduced pain and
discomfort and improved the quality of life of people whose immune systems have
been destroyed by the virus. But Dr. Stephen Spector, chief of infectious
diseases at UCSD and a leading AIDS researcher, said managing opportunistic
infections is not the answer to AIDS. "We should not deceive ourselves that if
we go down the list of opportunistic infections and develop an effective drug
against each we will have the problem solved," he said.

   "We could conceivably see another infection that now is rare becoming more
common. "Clearly, the bottom line is to develop anti-viral therapy and immune
modulating kinds of treatment to keep up the number of CD4 cells," he said.
Scientists want to prevent the patient from deteriorating to that point by
attacking the virus itself earlier in the course of disease. They are looking at
the life cycle of the virus for clues as to how it replicates in hopes of
stopping that process. Flossie Wong-Staal, a molecular biologist at UCSD and a
leading international expert on the disease, said there are dozens of cracks in
that armor to attack.

   "Every step in this replication cycle is a possible target for anti-viral
therapy," she wrote in last month's Western Journal of Medicine. The front line
attack has been AZT, a drug which in 1987 was shown to be effective in slowing
the ability of the virus to replicate.

   AZT interferes with reverse transcriptase, a viral enzyme which converts
viral RNA to DNA, an early stage of the replication process. But AZT, also
called zidovudine, remains far from a panacea.

   Although it has been shown to prolong life in people whose T cells have
dropped to below 500, there are two major problems. First, a study completed two
years ago by UCSD virologist Dr. Douglas Richman indicates HIV is capable of
mutating into a strain that resists AZT's attack.

   Richman estimates 30 percent of the people taking AZT will develop a high
level of resistant strains after taking AZT for one year. The rate a person
develops resistant strains is tied to the T cell count and individual variation,
Richman said.

   But generally, the higher one's T cells, the slower resistant strains emerge.

   In late stages of the disease when T cells have declined, 90 percent of
patients taking AZT will develop resistant strains, he said. Second, some
patients on the drug develop anemia, nausea and other side effects that can be
so severe, they can't take it. Because of those factors, several other drugs
that arrest the virus's ability to multiply have been developed.

   They include ddI, which has recently been licensed for use with AIDS
patients, and ddC, which is under study. Richman and other researchers are
experimenting with alternating doses of the three drugs to see if combination
"cocktails" can minimize both resistance and toxicity, prolonging the life of
people with AIDS. A study scheduled to start recently at UCSD and several other
research centers in the country will compare the progress of patients on AZT
alone, ddI alone, AZT and ddI in combination, and AZT and ddC in combination.
There are other avenues of attack in the works. Compounds also are being
developed to inhibit two key enzymes, integrease and protease, which enable the
virus to make mature copies of itself. Wong-Staal and Trono are studying ways to
interfere with viral genes responsible for activating the virus, much like
fooling with the ignition system of a car so that it can't start. "We work on
genes that make the structural components that make the virus infectious," Trono
said. Dr. Jonas Salk and researchers at USC have been testing a vaccine made
from killed AIDS viruses, in hope of boosting the immune systems of 100 infected
people. While his early tests showed encouraging results, Salk has not published
the results of his studies.

   But he said earlier this year that he hoped to pave the way for studies in
uninfected people by injecting his vaccine into himself. For Margaret Johnston,
AIDS specialist at the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases
(NIAID) in Bethesda, Md., research is about to enter a "dry spell" that will
last between three to five years, at least until an entirely different approach
is developed. She has high hopes, however, that that approach will use gene
therapy technologies now being developed for other diseases.

   By injecting certain genes into the body, the idea is that one could
effectively neutralize the virus by preventing it from replicating. "We have an
explosion of gene therapy protocols for other diseases," Johnston said during a
recent National Institute of Health conference on AIDS here.

   "We're very excited about pushing that forward in AIDS." The NIAID annually
grants about $17 million to cooperative groups of academic, biotechnology and
government scientists to develop strategies that each alone might not have the
resources to tackle.

   Several researchers suggest quietly that gene therapy is too "futuristic" to
speak of with any realism, but they have no other options. A big problem is the
changing structure of the AIDS virus -- between continents and even inside one
person.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1542 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    December 2, 1991, Monday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F7

LENGTH: 812 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Gains Capital Infusion

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   A major pharmaceutical company has increased its investment in Genetic
Therapy Inc., a Gaithersburg biotechnology firm.

   New Jersey-based Sandoz Pharma Ltd. purchased $ 35 million of stock in
Genetic Therapy to fund research and development, the two companies announced
last week.

   Genetic Therapy said it will use the funding for research into therapies for
immunologic disorders and inflammation, including asthma, cancer and
cardiovascular disease.

   Sandoz also will invest $ 13.5 million in three joint research projects of
Sandoz's choosing. Sandoz will give another $ 11.5 million to Genetic Therapy if
certain conditions are met, but those conditions were not disclosed.

   Sandoz already has bought $ 10 million worth of stock in Genetic Therapy,
which went public in July, said Marc R. Schneebaum, Genetic Therapy chief
financial officer.

   In exchange for the money, Sandoz will get exclusive worldwide licensing
rights to technology developed in the jointly funded research. Genetic Therapy
will get royalties on the products that Sandoz sells.

   MCI Communications Corp. of Washington signed a $ 12.6-million contract with
U.S. Long Distance Corp. of San Antonio to provide telecommunications services
to the company in 37 states.

   U.S. Long Distance is the nation's second-largest telecommunications billing
and collection clearinghouse. It has a subscriber base of more than 55,000 hotel
rooms, 6,000 pay phones and 9,000 hospital beds nationally. MCI, with revenue of
about $ 7.7 billion last year, is the nation's second-largest long-distance
provider.

   Booker T. Washington Foundation of the District won a contract from the
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority to provide technical assistance
and management services to enable minority businesses to compete for Metro
contracts and subcontracts.

   The foundation will operate a series of workshops and seminars to acquaint
minority businesses with the Metro marketplace. The program includes provisions
for assistance in obtaining bonding, insurance and working capital.

   General Physics International Engineering and Simulation Inc. of Columbia,
Md., which specializes in nuclear training and simulation, won a contract to
provide a safety training system at the Soviet-designed nuclear-power station
near St. Petersburg.

   ABC Burglar Alarm Systems Inc. is moving to a new location in Bowie.

   Radisson Plaza Hotel at Mark Center in Alexandria is updating and installing
a telephone device for guests with hearing and speech impairments.

   Kemp Mill Music, based in Beltsville, opened a store in Herndon, its 35th in
the area.

   Olsten Corp. of Montgomery County renamed its health care division Olsten
HealthCare.

   Edward Segal Communications of Washington won a contract to provide media
relations services to the Museum of American Political Life at the University of
Hartford in West Hartford, Conn.

   Translingua Inc. of Baltimore, a multilingual communications service
specializing in translation and interpretation, moved to Columbia, Md.

   HealthPlus Inc. of Greenbelt, a health maintenance organization, won
contracts from International Business Machines Corp., American Systems Corp.,
PRC Inc. and Southland Corp.

   Phillips Publishing Inc. of Potomac started World Airline News, a weekly
publication covering the airline industry.

   Netrix Corp. of Herndon and Pacific Communications Sciences Inc. of San Diego
signed an agreement to develop products and services for facsimile, voice and
data communications networks.

   Microdyne Corp. of Alexandria won a contract with Love Communications Corp.,
a Gulfport, Miss.-based broadcast communications company, to deliver a video
uplink.

   Federal Engineering Inc. of Fairfax won a contract to provide technical
services for a complex of satellite earth stations at the North Dakota State
Capitol in Bismarck.

   Schum & Stober of McLean, an advertising agency, changed its name to Schum &
Associates.

   Merrick Advertising Inc. of Kensington won a contract from Equitable Federal
Savings Bank, based in Wheaton.

   Gagnon Engineering formed in Ellicott City, Md., to provide fire protection
engineering and code consulting services.

   Rowan & Blewitt Inc. of Washington is collaborating with Law Companies
Environmental Group, based in Atlanta with an office in the District, to provide
industrial clients with technical and public affairs services in the
environmental field.

   Warner Bros. Studio Store opened at Fair Oaks.

   Chas. G. Stott & Co. of Landover, an office furniture dealer, expanded to
provide furniture refurbishing and restoration services.

   Super Coups of Northern Virgina, a direct mail business, has opened in
Fairfax.? Announcements of news and developments affecting Washington area
companies should be sent to Regional Report, Business News Department, The
Washington Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071-5300.

CORRECTION-DATE: December 3, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

CORRECTION:

   Because of errors in an Associated Press report, an article in yesterday's
Washington Business incorrectly described the relationship between Sandoz Pharma
Ltd. and Genetic Therapy Inc. Sandoz, which has its world headquarters in
Switzerland, has purchased $ 10 million of Genetic Therapy stock. It has also
agreed to provide up to $ 13.5 million over three years to fund projects and
additional milestone payments of up to $ 11.5 million per product if certain
events occur.


                             1543 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1991 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            December 1, 1991 Sunday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: People In Business Transkaryotic elects Miller to board

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge has elected William R. Miller,
formerly vice chairman of the board of directors of Bristol-Myers Squibb, to its
board of directors.

   The Labor Guild of the Archdiocese of Boston will present its annual awards
for labor relations work at a dinner Friday at the Sheraton-Boston Hotel. To be
honored are James R. Grande, administrator of the Operating Engineers Local 4
training program; John J. Shaughnessey, president and chief executive officer of
Shaughnessey Companies; Diane Zaar Cochran, chair of the Massachusetts Board of
Conciliation and Arbitration; and William Joy, senior partner in the law firm of
Morgan, Brown & Joy.

   Puma USA, headquartered in Brockton, has appointed John O'Rourke president.
O'Rourke joined the company in March 1990 as senior vice president. Prior to
that he held executive positions at Adidas and Converse.

   Alpha-Beta Technology, Inc. has appointed Michael E. Porter to the company's
board of directors. Porter is the C. Roland Christensen Professor of Business
Administration at Harvard Business School.

   Sally Bertolet has joined the Boston advertising agency of Rossin Greenberg
Seronick as traffic manager. Prior to joining the firm she was a senior account
manager at HubMail Advertising.

   Robert G. Greenly has been appointed vice president and manager of
organization development for The Putnam Companies. Greenly was formerly a
principal consultant at Digital Equipment Corp.

   Filene's Basement Chairman and CEO Samuel Gerson was recently elected
chairman of the board of the Urban League of Eastern Massachusetts. Mass.
Secretary of Transporation and Construction Richard Taylor was named vice
chairman.

   New England Electric System announced the following managerial changes
effective Jan. 1: NEES treasurer Richard P. Sergel will become a vice president.
Michael E. Jesanis, currently director of corporate finance, will become
treasurer. And Glenn Schleede, vice president, is retiring after 10 years with
the company.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1544 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     December 1, 1991, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE / GAUCHER'S DISEASE;
STUDY FINDS A 2ND GENETIC LINK TO ILLNESS

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   La Jolla scientists have identified the second major genetic defect that
causes Gaucher's disease, a debilitating, inherited disorder that is most common
among Jews of European descent.

   The discovery makes it possible for the first time to identify carriers of
Gaucher's disease -- an estimated one of every 12 Ashkenazic Jews -- with full
confidence that virtually all affected individuals will be identified. It also
makes possible effective prenatal screening.

   Researchers at the National Institutes of Health reported in 1988 that they
had identified the genetic defect responsible for nearly 75% of the cases of
Gaucher's (pronounced go-SHAYS), which affects as many as 15,000 Americans.
Researchers have identified at least 14 other mutations in the same gene, but
each of those accounts for only a fraction of a percent of victims.

   Hematologist Ernest Beutler and his colleagues at the Scripps Research
Institute report today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
that they have identified another defect, in the same gene, that accounts for
most of the remaining 25% of the cases.

   Although the discovery makes prenatal testing possible, the decision to abort
a fetus with the disorder will be ethically difficult -- and most likely
controversial -- because it is not yet possible to predict the severity of the
disorder in a child.

   Nonetheless, the discovery is "very significant" even if the parents do not
choose an abortion, said family practitioner Dr. Robin Berman, medical director
of the National Gaucher Foundation. "We can detect people who will be affected
at a much earlier stage and allow them to get treatment before they have any bad
symptoms of the disorder. That's extremely valuable."

   Gaucher's is characterized by a severely enlarged liver or spleen, anemia,
bleeding, significant bone and joint pain, fatigue, and orthopedic
complications, such as repeated fractures and bone erosion.

   Its severity varies widely. In some people, it is very mild and causes few
problems. In the most severe form, the affected individual typically dies in the
womb or in the first year of life. Typically, the later in life the disorder
strikes, the less severe it is.

   The disorder is caused by abnormalities in an enzyme, called
glucocerebrosidase, that normally degrades a fatty compound called
glucocerebroside. Because it is not destroyed, the fatty compound accumulates in
the liver, bone marrow and spleen, where it is toxic.

   Gaucher's afflicts both men and women and occurs in all racial and ethnic
groups, but about two-thirds of American victims are Jews of European descent.
In that ethnic group, about one child in 500 now develops the disorder.

   The first successful therapy for Gaucher's was approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration in April of this year. The treatment is based on a form of
the enzyme isolated from placental tissue, but it must be chemically modified
before use so that it reaches the affected tissues intact.

   Treatment with the modified enzyme, called Ceredase and manufactured by
Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., is highly effective, but it is also quite
expensive. Isolating enough of the chemical to bring one patient under control
requires more than a ton of placental tissue, and the resultant drug can cost as
much as $500,000. Some insurance companies have started paying for the therapy
since the FDA approved Ceredase, but many still do not, Berman said.

   Once the disorder is under control, however, the patient requires much
smaller quantities of the drug, and the yearly cost drops to between $30,000 and
$50,000. Early treatment reduces the initial amount of the drug necessary to
bring the disorder under control -- and thus the cost of treatment -- and may
reduce the complications associated with the disorder.

   Genzyme is now close to manufacturing the enzyme through genetic engineering
technology, and researchers hope that feat will bring a sharp drop in prices.
Further in the future, researchers hope to use gene therapy to provide a cure
for the disorder by inserting a healthy gene into the patient so his or her body
produces the needed enzyme. Most researchers agree that this will not happen for
another 10 years.

   Beutler said in a telephone interview that identification of the new gene
will enable physicians to offer premarital screening and genetic counseling for
young Jews in particular. This testing would indicate the likelihood that a
couple would conceive a Gaucher's child. Such counseling is already widely used
for Tay-Sachs disease, another genetic disorder that is most common among
Ashkenazic Jews.

   It is now also possible to perform prenatal screening for Gaucher's once a
woman is pregnant, he said, but the ethics of doing so are much more
complicated. Tay-Sachs disease is uniformly fatal, and most couples who learn
they have a fetus with the disorder choose to have an abortion.

   In sharp contrast, Gaucher's has a very broad range of severity and the
genetic testing is not yet able to tell how severely a child will be affected.
"No physician, armed with this information (from genetic testing), would
recommend an abortion," said Berman, who has three children with Gaucher's.


                             1545 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  November 28, 1991, Thursday, 2 Star Edition

SECTION: L; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2104 words

HEADLINE: Despite fast pace, AIDS solution is still years away

BYLINE: LAURIE GARRETT; Newsday

BODY:

   It's pitch black outside, but the halls of the National Institutes of
Health's Building 31, Wing A, in Bethesda, Md., are crowded with scientists
discussing their latest laboratory results.

   It's been a long day, says Dr. Anthony Fauci, but then every day in the life
of America's chief of AIDS research is long, filled with administrative details
and meetings to plot the next step in the war against the elusive human
immunodeficiency virus.  He won't get home until 10 p.m., after he addresses a
banquet at a major science conference in Washington.  And he has to be back the
next morning in time for a 6:30 strategy meeting with colleagues linked by
telephone around the world.

   ""It's the only time this particular group can get together.  We're all so
busy.  Six-thirty, can you imagine?'' says Fauci, as he plops down into a
leather armchair, his energy belying the lack of sleep and the daily stree he
carries.

   Ever since Magic Johnson announced he was infected with HIV, the phones have
been steadily ringing as members of Congress, constituents and journalists want
to know what will happen to the basketball superstar.  Even Vice President Dan
Quayle -- who at first said that sexual abstinence was the ""sure cure'' for
AIDS -- that morning said that it ""would be wonderful to have a cure for AIDS
in the marketplace before Magic Johnson gets AIDS.''

   ""People ask, ""Why has it taken so long to take care of HIV when we've taken
care of all other infectious diseases so quickly?' '' Fauci says.  ""They forget
it took decades and decades to get rid of polio and smallpox.  HIV is moving
along very quickly, but we still are in the middle of an out-of-control
epidemic.''

   As Fauci heads off to his speech, Dr. William Haseltine gets his second wind
and pushes another late night at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston
where his team may have identified exactly how the virus is sexually
transmitted.

   Meanwhile, Drs. Gerald Myers and Flossie Wong-Staal are winding up their work
days.  Myers commands a vast computerized network of genetic information at New
Mexico's Los Alamos National Laboratory, building a map of how the virus changes
and evolves.  And Wong-Staal's work on the basic biology of HIV, first at the
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, and now at the University of California,
San Diego, is aimed at finding a way to pierce the virus' formidable genetic
armor.

   As Haseltine parks at home, Dr. Francoise Barre-Sinoussi is just starting her
day at the Pasteur Institute in Paris where she is analyzing a mysterious strain
of the virus found in Zaire that seems to be an especially fast killer.  It was
her adept touch that finally in 1983 teased the mysterious virus out from the
cells of sick Parisian men.

   Meanwhile, in Geneva, researchers from all over the world are in a telephone
conference call with Dr. David Heymann, who leads up the World Health
Organization's effort to coordinate global AIDS drug-and-vaccine research.

   All of these, and thousands more throughout the world are part of the largest
medical hunt since the discovery of a vaccine for polio.  Though it left
millions crippled, polio rarely claimed the lives of its victims.  HIV disease
is almost always fatal.  Up to 11 million people are already infected, the World
Health Organization says, and despite expenditures of billions of dollars on
treatment, prevention and research, the epidemic is expected to hit 40 million
in just nine more years.

   None of these scientists, nor dozens of other leading AIDS experts
interviewed last week, are optimistic about finding a cure for the deadly
disease because the virus acts on the most basic human level and can change its
form faster than science can aim.  An effective vaccine, some way to prevent the
virus' spread, is probably decades away.

   ""It's incurable,'' Wong-Staal says, without hesitation, of HIV, ""because it
is a retrovirus and it integrates into the chromosomes of the host.  And once
it's there it cannot be removed.''

   Because there is no way to destroy the virus once it worms its way into the
human cell, the search is on for what Fauci and others call a functional -- as
opposed to an actual -- cure for AIDS.  The virus would survive but would be
kept at bay by a combination of drugs that is relatively non-toxic and can be
taken for years.  Some drug would boost the beleaguered immune systems and
others would control infections by microbes that take advantage of the patient's
weakened state.

   ""That, for me, is a reasonable goal to shoot for in the next decade,'' Fauci
says.

   In the first decade of the AIDS epidemic, scientists discovered that HIV
caused the disease by destroying cells in the body's immune system.  As the
numbers of the cells -- called CD4 T-cells -- declines, the body's ability to
stave off opportunistic infections shrinks.  People succumb to a wide range of
secondary disease such as tuberculosis, yeast infections and pneumonia.

   There are few weapons in medicine's arsenal that are effective against any
viruses, as seasonal flu sufferers well know.  HIV is orders of magnitude more
difficult to tackle than a garden-variety virus because it is one of only three
known human retroviruses.

   The usual viruses are essentially tiny packages of genes, usually in the form
of DNA or deoxyribonuclueic acid.  Human cells also contain DNA genes which are
the blueprint for growth.  To make proteins -- the building blocks of cells --
DNA must be translated into smaller RNA blueprints.

   Viruses containing DNA are usually large because their genes have to include
all sorts of directions regulating their own reproduction.  Their bulky size
makes DNA viruses relatively easy targets for the body's immune system.

   But in the mid-1960s Howard Temin and David Baltimore discovered some viruses
pulled a sneaky genetic trick to evade the defenses of animals and plants they
infect.  These viruses, dubbed retroviruses, contain tiny pieces of RNA, rather
than bulky DNA.  When retroviruses infect cells, they literally insert their
genes into the host DNA.  Once inside, the viral genes can hide for years, or
commandeer the cell's genetic and protein-production systems to make tens of
thousands of more viruses.  The immune system barely has a chance to see the
enemy before the body is overrun.

   The human immunodeficiency virus, like all retroviruses, cannot be removed
from a person's DNA once it has infected the individual's cells.  So, scientists
say, it is incurable.

   ""We've learned enough about the virus to know there will be no easy cure, no
magic bullet,'' Haseltine says.  ""Ultimately, the effective treatment will come
from an entirely new class of drugs.''

   So far, three drugs have been discovered -- two of them licensed by the Food
and Drug Administration -- that offer hope of giving some patients additional
months of life.  All three -- AZT, ddI and ddC -- block the ability of the virus
to reproduce.  Unfortunately, their blocking effects are both fairly toxic to
the body and fail after a while because the virus overcomes the drugs by
mutating.  HIV becomes resistant to these drugs within a matter of days in some
patients, months in others.

   ""By now, scientists have tested almost all the drugs available and many
chemicals which have the potential to be drugs,'' Haseltine says.

   In the past 10 years, various drugs have sparked waves of enthusiasm among
scientists and from patients, desperate to grasp any straw.  But the history of
the epidemic is littered with dashed hopes and false starts.

   Until recently there was excitement about a class of European HIV-blockers
called TIBOs, but clinical trials show the drugs are quite toxic, says Fauci.
More importantly, Haseltine notes, TIBO-resistant HIV strains appear within
three weeks, rendering the drugs useless.

   ""Things couldn't be worse right now,'' says AIDS patient and leading New
York activist Larry Kramer.  ""Nothing is panning out; the current drugs aren't
working.  We also know that everything in the pipeline is turning out to be a
dud.  So we're in major, major trouble.''

   The picture is not only gloomy for people, such as Kramer, who already have
AIDS, but also for those, such as Magic Johnson, who are in the early stages of
HIV infection.  Haseltine doubts any of the therapeutic approaches considered
promising just a year ago will pan out.

   Science has eliminated the easy options and can now focus on those which
require greater intellectual leaps, Haseltine says.  We've ""also examined
extracts of hundreds of thousands of plants, including the ingredients of the
traditional medicines of China, India and South America.  Despite this massive
effort of traditional drug discovery, we still don't have drugs that do anything
but slow the progression of the virus.''

   Gazing from his office window at a crisp autumn Boston sunset, Haseltine
heads the world's only academic division of retroviral research, staffed by nine
senior scientists and 51 other researchers.

   Nearly all are working on what they call ""the AIDS problem.''

   Their weekdays begin at 7 a.m. and rarely end before 11 p.m.; most of the
staff also works Saturdays and Sundays.  Even as his group works, Haseltine is
training the next generation of potential AIDS researchers.  Harvard graduate
students munch tortilla chips and gulp Diet Cokes as they listen to Haseltine
describe his latest findings.

   ""These are dendritic cells,'' he tells them, pointing at the large billowy
white blobs on the projection screen.  He goes on to explain that the cells are
found in mucosal areas, such as the linings of the rectum, male and female
genitals, stomach and mouth.  It is these cells -- even more than the cells of
the immune system -- that are the real HIV targets.  When HIV gets into
dendritic cells, it can multiply many times over but remain hidden from the
immune system.  When the virus is ready to pounce, it can flood the body
suddenly with whole armies of viruses, secretly manufactured inside the
dendritic cells.

   Recent studies in California and Britain have caused a sensation in the AIDS
world because they show that monkeys vaccinated against HIV may be immune if the
virus tries to infect through the blood stream.  But the monkeys can still get
SIV -- the simian equivalent of HIV -- if the virus attacks through their
rectums or genitals.  Haseltine thinks that means the virus easily enters
dendritic cells, evading even a supposedly vaccinated immune system.  If the
monkey studies hold up, implications for vaccine development, prevention of
transmission and treatment are enormous because they more accurately explain how
the virus may be passed.

   Scientists, such as those in Wong-Staal's modern facilities in La Jolla,
Calif., are trying to outsmart the virus by figuring out which genes are most
crucial to all HIVs and to find a way to shut them off.  There are several
possible targets, she says, and theoretically a long list of ways to get at
them.  But the key word is theoretically.

   Such approaches that target HIV genes are called gene therapy.  Fauci says,
""Gene therapy is obviously exciting to everyone because of the potential,'' of
completely reversing viral infection, ""but there is a large leap between
theoretical possibility and the reality of making genes inside cells in the
human body.''

   Haseltine puts it more bluntly: ""Although we have gene dreams, or Star Wars,
there are fundamental problems we don't understand and can't circumvent.''
Uppermost, he says, is the confounding ability of HIV to mutate around virtually
anything thrown its way.  And nobody knows how to effectively get such genetic
weapons inside the cells of living human beings.

   If there is any bright spot in the epidemic, it is the increasing
international cooperation.  ""I'd say there's really an international effort
right now, well orchestrated,'' says WHO's Heymann.  It can be felt at all tiers
of the epidemic; in the clinics, in the development of drugs to treat the
secondary infections of people with AIDS, in the hunt for anti-HIVs and in
vaccine research.

   Most dramatically, within two years scientists from private, government and
corporate centers throughout the world are hoping to conduct field trials of HIV
vaccines in four developing countries.  While none of the candidate vaccines are
considered effective at this point, the hope is that such trials will provide
researchers with the crucial information needed to lead to a second generation
of useful vaccines, though that could take decades.

   ""Nobody can say with certainty when, or ever, there will be an effective
vaccine,'' he said.

GRAPHIC: Mug: Anthony Fauci


                             1546 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  November 28, 1991, Thursday, 2 Star Edition

SECTION: L; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2105 words

HEADLINE: Despite fast pace, AIDS solution is still years away

BYLINE: LAURIE GARRETT; Newsday

BODY:

   It's pitch black outside, but the halls of the National Institutes of
Health's Building 31, Wing A, in Bethesda, Md., are crowded with scientists
discussing their latest laboratory results.

   It's been a long day, says Dr. Anthony Fauci, but then every day in the life
of America's chief of AIDS research is long, filled with administrative details
and meetings to plot the next step in the war against the elusive human
immunodeficiency virus.  He won't get home until 10 p.m., after he addresses a
banquet at a major science conference in Washington.  And he has to be back the
next morning in time for a 6:30 strategy meeting with colleagues linked by
telephone around the world.

   ""It's the only time this particular group can get together.  We're all so
busy.  Six-thirty, can you imagine?'' says Fauci, as he plops down into a
leather armchair, his energy belying the lack of sleep and the daily stree he
carries.

   Ever since Magic Johnson announced he was infected with HIV, the phones have
been steadily ringing as members of Congress, constituents and journalists want
to know what will happen to the basketball superstar.  Even Vice President Dan
Quayle -- who at first said that sexual abstinence was the ""sure cure'' for
AIDS -- that morning said that it ""would be wonderful to have a cure for AIDS
in the marketplace before Magic Johnson gets AIDS.''

   ""People ask, ""Why has it taken so long to take care of HIV when we've taken
care of all other infectious diseases so quickly?' '' Fauci says.  ""They forget
it took decades and decades to get rid of polio and smallpox.  HIV is moving
along very quickly, but we still are in the middle of an out-of-control
epidemic.''

   As Fauci heads off to his speech, Dr. William Haseltine gets his second wind
and pushes another late night at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston
where his team may have identified exactly how the virus is sexually
transmitted.

   Meanwhile, Drs. Gerald Myers and Flossie Wong-Staal are winding up their work
days.  Myers commands a vast computerized network of genetic information at New
Mexico's Los Alamos National Laboratory, building a map of how the virus changes
and evolves.  And Wong-Staal's work on the basic biology of HIV, first at the
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, and now at the University of California,
San Diego, is aimed at finding a way to pierce the virus' formidable genetic
armor.

   As Haseltine parks at home, Dr. Francoise Barre-Sinoussi is just starting her
day at the Pasteur Institute in Paris where she is analyzing a mysterious strain
of the virus found in Zaire that seems to be an especially fast killer.  It was
her adept touch that finally in 1983 teased the mysterious virus out from the
cells of sick Parisian men.

   Meanwhile, in Geneva, researchers from all over the world are in a telephone
conference call with Dr. David Heymann, who leads up the World Health
Organization's effort to coordinate global AIDS drug-and-vaccine research.

   All of these, and thousands more throughout the world are part of the largest
medical hunt since the discovery of a vaccine for polio.  Though it left
millions crippled, polio rarely claimed the lives of its victims.  HIV disease
is almost always fatal.  Up to 11 million people are already infected, the World
Health Organization says, and despite expenditures of billions of dollars on
treatment, prevention and research, the epidemic is expected to hit 40 million
in just nine more years.

   None of these scientists, nor dozens of other leading AIDS experts
interviewed last week, are optimistic about finding a cure for the deadly
disease because the virus acts on the most basic human level and can change its
form faster than science can aim.  An effective vaccine, some way to prevent the
virus' spread, is probably decades away.

   ""It's incurable,'' Wong-Staal says, without hesitation, of HIV, ""because it
is a retrovirus and it integrates into the chromosomes of the host.  And once
it's there it cannot be removed.''

   Because there is no way to destroy the virus once it worms its way into the
human cell, the search is on for what Fauci and others call a functional -- as
opposed to an actual -- cure for AIDS.  The virus would survive but would be
kept at bay by a combination of drugs that is relatively non-toxic and can be
taken for years.  Some drug would boost the beleaguered immune systems and
others would control infections by microbes that take advantage of the patient's
weakened state.

   ""That, for me, is a reasonable goal to shoot for in the next decade,'' Fauci
says.

   In the first decade of the AIDS epidemic, scientists discovered that HIV
caused the disease by destroying cells in the body's immune system.  As the
numbers of the cells -- called CD4 T-cells -- declines, the body's ability to
stave off opportunistic infections shrinks.  People succumb to a wide range of
secondary disease such as tuberculosis, yeast infections and pneumonia.

   There are few weapons in medicine's arsenal that are effective against any
viruses, as seasonal flu sufferers well know.  HIV is orders of magnitude more
difficult to tackle than a garden-variety virus because it is one of only three
known human retroviruses.

   The usual viruses are essentially tiny packages of genes, usually in the form
of DNA or deoxyribonuclueic acid.  Human cells also contain DNA genes which are
the blueprint for growth.  To make proteins -- the building blocks of cells --
DNA must be translated into smaller RNA blueprints.

   Viruses containing DNA are usually large because their genes have to include
all sorts of directions regulating their own reproduction.  Their bulky size
makes DNA viruses relatively easy targets for the body's immune system.

   But in the mid-1960s Howard Temin and David Baltimore discovered some viruses
pulled a sneaky genetic trick to evade the defenses of animals and plants they
infect.  These viruses, dubbed retroviruses, contain tiny pieces of RNA, rather
than bulky DNA.  When retroviruses infect cells, they literally insert their
genes into the host DNA.  Once inside, the viral genes can hide for years, or
commandeer the cell's genetic and protein-production systems to make tens of
thousands of more viruses.  The immune system barely has a chance to see the
enemy before the body is overrun.

   The human immunodeficiency virus, like all retroviruses, cannot be removed
from a person's DNA once it has infected the individual's cells.  So, scientists
say, it is incurable.

   ""We've learned enough about the virus to know there will be no easy cure, no
magic bullet,'' Haseltine says.  ""Ultimately, the effective treatment will come
from an entirely new class of drugs.''

   So far, three drugs have been discovered -- two of them licensed by the Food
and Drug Administration -- that offer hope of giving some patients additional
months of life.  All three -- AZT, ddI and ddC -- block the ability of the virus
to reproduce.  Unfortunately, their blocking effects are both fairly toxic to
the body and fail after a while because the virus overcomes the drugs by
mutating.  HIV becomes resistant to these drugs within a matter of days in some
patients, months in others.

   ""By now, scientists have tested almost all the drugs available and many
chemicals which have the potential to be drugs,'' Haseltine says.

   In the past 10 years, various drugs have sparked waves of enthusiasm among
scientists and from patients, desperate to grasp any straw.  But the history of
the epidemic is littered with dashed hopes and false starts.

   Until recently there was excitement about a class of European HIV-blockers
called TIBOs, but clinical trials show the drugs are quite toxic, says Fauci.
More importantly, Haseltine notes, TIBO-resistant HIV strains appear within
three weeks, rendering the drugs useless.

   ""Things couldn't be worse right now,'' says AIDS patient and leading New
York activist Larry Kramer.  ""Nothing is panning out; the current drugs aren't
working.  We also know that everything in the pipeline is turning out to be a
dud.  So we're in major, major trouble.''

   The picture is not only gloomy for people, such as Kramer, who already have
AIDS, but also for those, such as Magic Johnson, who are in the early stages of
HIV infection.  Haseltine doubts any of the therapeutic approaches considered
promising just a year ago will pan out.

   Science has eliminated the easy options and can now focus on those which
require greater intellectual leaps, Haseltine says.  We've ""also examined
extracts of hundreds of thousands of plants, including the ingredients of the
traditional medicines of China, India and South America.  Despite this massive
effort of traditional drug discovery, we still don't have drugs that do anything
but slow the progression of the virus.''

   Gazing from his office window at a crisp autumn Boston sunset, Haseltine
heads the world's only academic division of retroviral research, staffed by nine
senior scientists and 51 other researchers.

   Nearly all are working on what they call ""the AIDS problem.''

   Their weekdays begin at 7 a.m. and rarely end before 11 p.m.; most of the
staff also works Saturdays and Sundays.  Even as his group works, Haseltine is
training the next generation of potential AIDS researchers.  Harvard graduate
students munch tortilla chips and gulp Diet Cokes as they listen to Haseltine
describe his latest findings.

   ""These are dendritic cells,'' he tells them, pointing at the large billowy
white blobs on the projection screen.  He goes on to explain that the cells are
found in mucosal areas, such as the linings of the rectum, male and female
genitals, stomach and mouth.  It is these cells -- even more than the cells of
the immune system -- that are the real HIV targets.  When HIV gets into
dendritic cells, it can multiply many times over but remain hidden from the
immune system.  When the virus is ready to pounce, it can flood the body
suddenly with whole armies of viruses, secretly manufactured inside the
dendritic cells.

   Recent studies in California and Britain have caused a sensation in the AIDS
world because they show that monkeys vaccinated against HIV may be immune if the
virus tries to infect through the blood stream.  But the monkeys can still get
SIV -- the simian equivalent of HIV -- if the virus attacks through their
rectums or genitals.  Haseltine thinks that means the virus easily enters
dendritic cells, evading even a supposedly vaccinated immune system.  If the
monkey studies hold up, implications for vaccine development, prevention of
transmission and treatment are enormous because they more accurately explain how
the virus may be passed.

   Scientists, such as those in Wong-Staal's modern facilities in La Jolla,
Calif., are trying to outsmart the virus by figuring out which genes are most
crucial to all HIVs and to find a way to shut them off.  There are several
possible targets, she says, and theoretically a long list of ways to get at
them.  But the key word is theoretically.

   Such approaches that target HIV genes are called gene therapy.  Fauci says,
""Gene therapy is obviously exciting to everyone because of the potential,'' of
completely reversing viral infection, ""but there is a large leap between
theoretical possibility and the reality of making genes inside cells in the
human body.''

   Haseltine puts it more bluntly: ""Although we have gene dreams, or Star Wars,
there are fundamental problems we don't understand and can't circumvent.''
Uppermost, he says, is the confounding ability of HIV to mutate around virtually
anything thrown its way.  And nobody knows how to effectively get such genetic
weapons inside the cells of living human beings.

   If there is any bright spot in the epidemic, it is the increasing
international cooperation.  ""I'd say there's really an international effort
right now, well orchestrated,'' says WHO's Heymann.  It can be felt at all tiers
of the epidemic; in the clinics, in the development of drugs to treat the
secondary infections of people with AIDS, in the hunt for anti-HIVs and in
vaccine research.

   Most dramatically, within two years scientists from private, government and
corporate centers throughout the world are hoping to conduct field trials of HIV
vaccines in four developing countries.  While none of the candidate vaccines are
considered effective at this point, the hope is that such trials will provide
researchers with the crucial information needed to lead to a second generation
of useful vaccines, though that could take decades.

   ""Nobody can say with certainty when, or ever, there will be an effective
vaccine,'' he said.

GRAPHIC: Mug: Anthony Fauci


                             1547 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               November 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 8568 words

HEADLINE: Open Positions on Short Sales Increase by 3% on Nasdaq

BODY:

   The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the
number of actively traded shares sold short, and not yet covered, in the month
ended on Nov. 15 rose by nearly 9.9 million, or 3 percent, to a record 334.7
million.

   The previous record was set in the monthlong period ended Oct. 15, when open
positions on short sales of active issues totaled 324.8 million shares.

    Open positions on short sales in 1,254 less active over-the- counter
securities were at 34.6 million shares, down 5.2 percent from 36.5 million in
the earlier period.

How the Short-Sale Strategy Works

    In a short sale, investors, betting that a stock's price will fall, sell
borrowed stock in anticipation of buying back an equal number of shares later at
a lower price, thereby making a profit. The number of shares in which a short
position is still held by investors is totaled by each exchange at the end of a
reporting period and represents the "short interest" for that period.

   The short-interest figures from the N.A.S.D. are made public seven business
days after the 15th day of each month.

   In the latest period, the following N.A.S.D. stocks showed changes in open
short positions of 10,000 shares or more:

                                Short Interest
<Q
Security Name                           11/15/91        10/15/91
0 Telefonos de Mexico*                    402,610       661,503
3Com Cp* T                               289,877        211,398
50 Off Stores Inc T                    1,638,409        868,470
A A O N Inc                                2,045         14,045
A D A C Laboratories T                    10,239         44,142
A D M Tronics Unlim                        1,015         17,595
A D V A N T A Cp T                       810,756        887,867
A E S Cp (the) T                          81,679        186,993
A F P Imaging Cp                          12,158          1,063
A P Green Inds T                          49,201          1,140
A R I X Cp T                              13,815          2,376
A S K Computer Sys T                     175,928         96,716
A S T Research Inc T                   2,054,020      2,330,008
A T C Environmntl*                        56,199         79,332
A T R I X Labs Inc                       133,191          6,683
Acclaim Entertainmnt T                   107,979        595,369
Acorn Venture Cap Cp                      87,510              0
Acqua Group Inc                           17,400            799
Action Auto Rental T                      26,291          9,011
Action Staffing Inc*                     153,935         78,689
Action Staffing Wt A*                     53,560         78,530
Action Staffing Wt B                           0         24,393
Acxiom Cp T                               10,579         23,475
Adaptec Inc T                             79,969         67,036
Addington Resources T                     13,846         49,347
Adelphia Commun Cp A                     265,979        314,324
Adobe Systems Inc* T                   2,898,758      2,587,415
Adtec Inc T                                2,949         20,000
Advan Interventional T N                  12,140              0
Advanced Enviro A                        115,595        158,964
Advanced Enviro Wt A*                     90,196        102,100
Advanced Nmr Sys Inc*                    316,065        289,569
Advanced Polymer Sys T                    45,246         79,487
Advanced Telecommun T                     110,500        91,017
Affil Bkshs of Col T                      16,391          4,770
Agency Rent A Car* T                      68,187        103,982
Agouron Pharm Inc T                       87,887        102,306
Air Wis Services Inc T                   139,748         97,256
Airship Intl Ltd*                          5,088        124,471
Ajay Sports Inc*                           3,956         29,830
Akzo NV Adr* T                            88,425         19,140
Alco Intl Group Inc                        4,850         18,945
Aldus Cp* T                              492,969        602,725
Alex Brown Inc T                         436,680        468,732
Alexander Baldwin T                       78,029         62,312
Alias Research Inc T                     498,606        606,276
Alliance Pharm Cp T                      323,823        523,100
Allied Capital Cp T                       16,311        238,580
Allied Waste Inds                          1,312         20,687
Allwaste Inc* T                          192,989        221,310
Alpha 1 Biomedicals*                     142,183        122,603
Alpha Solarco Inc                        102,157         83,578
Alpharel Inc T                            27,773          9,278
Alteon Inc T N                            10,058              0
Alter Sales Co Inc                       167,725          8,000
Altera Cp T                               82,591        106,141
Amer Aircraft Cp                          41,935         17,675
Amer Bankers Ins Gp T                    240,627         98,905
Amer Biogenetic Cl A*                     54,572        166,707
Amer Biomed Inc N                         32,062              0
Amer Biomed Inc Wts N                     14,350              0
Amer Bus Comp Cp                         837,419      1,187,390
Amer Cons Growth Cp                       12,904          1,985
Amer Drug Screens*                       171,137         17,492
Amer Educational Pdt                      29,176            882
Amer Franchise Gp                         13,904          1,889
Amer Greetings Cp A* T                    35,195          97,495
Amer Intl Pet Cp                         366,068        389,135
Amer Med Elec Inc T                       43,567         55,599
Amer Nursery Product T                     3,002         16,102
Amer Plastics Chem                        22,746         39,273
Amer Power Convers T                   1,522,245      1,777,791
Amer Republic Bncp T                      87,408        130,557
Amer Software Inc A* T                    29,254         80,375
Amer TV Commun Cp A* T                    47,347         66,679
Amer West Airline* T                   1,289,221      1,415,438
Ameralia Inc                                   0        100,600
Ameritrust Cp T                           69,432        248,704
Amgen* T                               2,807,201      3,219,089
Amtech Cp T                              225,940        269,528
Amvestors Fin Cp T                       339,112        502,984
An Con Genetics Inc                       47,600          6,000
Analogic Cp T                             13,849            100
Analysts Intl Cp T                         9,685         20,303
Anergen Inc T N                           68,232              0
Anglo Swiss Mining                        76,949        400,979
Apogee Entrpr Inc T                       63,105         31,787
Apple Computer Inc* T                  1,898,989      1,957,155
Applied Bioscience T                       5,178         37,803
Applied Biosystems* T                     73,867        161,021
Applied Materials* T                   1,060,354        948,974
Applied Power Inc A T                     29,472         64,424
Archer Commun Inc                        395,397        517,185
Argonaut Group Inc T                      95,115        132,962
Armanino Foods Uts                         1,650         22,388
Armeno Resources Inc                       3,466         59,232
Armstrong Pharmaceut                      24,765          8,175
Artagraph Reprod                          71,004         55,000
Artisoft Inc T                           188,546         65,887
Artistic Greetings T                      86,586        187,524
Aspect Telecomm Cp T                      58,798         90,617
Aspen Wind Inc                             1,916         14,997
Athena Neurosciences T N                  24,420              0
Atlantic SE Airlines T                    19,638         35,691
Atmel Cp T                               228,357        256,786
Atratech Inc                               1,000         19,398
Au Bon Pain Cl A T                       636,572        686,576
Audre Recognition                         57,081          4,160
Aura Systems Inc T                     1,152,776      1,204,265
Autocam Cp T N                           122,906              0
Autoclave Engineers T                     13,616          1,070
Autodesk Inc* T                          638,275        948,415
Automated Sec Adr T                      523,451        488,840
B A R R A Inc                              30,108       229,549
B B T Finl Cp* T                         510,290        531,265
B L O C Dev Cp T                         957,964        934,600
B M C Software Inc T                     170,952        107,889
B M C West Cp T                            3,394         30,150
B P I Enviro Pfd A                         7,740         22,775
B P I Enviro Wts A                        52,527              0
B W I P Hldg Cl A T                        1,576         12,401
Babbage's Inc T                          162,873         26,155
Baker Hughes Inc Wts* T                   38,588         22,116
Bali Jewelry Ltd Wts*                     48,406            220
Banc One Cp Pfd C T                          779         11,259
Bank South Cp T                          502,269        677,286
Banta Cp T                                 5,712         45,376
Barringer Technology*                     65,988          4,473
Baybanks Inc* T                        1,468,677      1,545,372
BE Avionics Inc T                         32,291         11,228
Betz Labs Inc* T                         189,894        110,665
Big O Tires Inc T                         36,279          6,397
Bindley Wstn Ind* T                      752,320        603,506
Bio Tech Gen Cp T                        479,538        562,219
Biocontrol Tech Inc                       135,066        26,046
Biogen Inc* T                            383,357        351,809
Biomechanics Cp Wt A*                     20,120          7,500
Biomedical Waste Sys                     203,310          5,355
Biomerica Inc                             19,335          2,889
Biomet Inc* T                          1,304,187      1,380,782
Biopool Intl Inc*                          5,700         18,593
Biospherics Inc T                        119,761        137,228
Black Warrior Wireli                       9,841         57,161
Boatmen's Bancshares T                   340,162        237,344
Bob Evans Farms Inc T                    125,752         48,230
Body Drama Inc T N                         8,498         81,850
Bon Ton Stores The T                      27,223          9,000
Bonso Electronics Wt*                          0         12,050
Borland Intl Inc T                     1,108,559      2,692,871
Boston Five Bancorp T                    301,624        343,714
Branford Savings Bk T                        438         18,053
Breakwater Res Ltd T                           0         17,001
Bristol Res Cp Ut 95*                          0         12,585
Broadcast Intl Inc T                       1,115         56,828
Brooktree Cp T                            46,177         18,027
Brunos Inc T                           3,031,171      2,835,421
Brush Creek Mining                        79,831          3,814
Buffets Inc T                          1,963,968      1,951,215
Bull Run Gold Mines T                        569         13,119
Burmah Cast Plc Adr*                      13,069         23,170
Burnup & Sims Inc T                      733,260        715,939
Bytex Cp T                                65,982         84,817
C A P Rx Ltd*                            228,352        216,330
C B L Medical Inc* T                      15,289          2,437
C C A I R Inc                             10,948            878
C C C Franchising Cp                      90,986      2,572,841
C E C Industries Cp                       27,241         16,876
C I S Tech Inc T                       1,207,789      1,188,988
C M Communications                             5         15,373
C O N M E D Cp T                           9,722         33,934
C O R Therapeutics T                     162,475         61,755
Cable Car Bev Cp*                         21,378            804
Cabot Medical Cp T                       796,773        735,237
Cache Inc T                               18,575          4,415
Cadbury Schweppe Adr* T                  355,501        310,384
Cadema Cp*                               183,199        212,829
Caere Cp T                                80,768        113,847
Cal Biotech Inc* T                        83,210        119,006
Cal Biotech Wts 91*                       22,500          5,350
Cal Microwave Inc T                       11,610         39,212
Calgene Inc* T                           276,674        366,056
Cambridge Neurosci T                     176,119         131,350
Cannon Pictures Inc                       26,919              0
Canterbury Education*                      3,000         26,020
Capital Associates T                      11,770              0
Cardinal Distr* T                      1,537,800      1,526,412
Care Gp Inc The* T                        11,324         39,534
Cascade Intl Inc T                       981,308        449,667
Casey's Gen Stores* T                    126,732         67,497
Cato Cp The Cl A T                       182,232        163,475
Cel Sci Cp                               284,911         95,297
Celebrity Resorts*                           400         77,915
Celgene Cp T                              68,271         41,459
Cell Commun Pfd New T                    134,850        146,820
Cell Tech Inc* T                          42,363         16,398
Celtrix Labs Inc T                       318,370          11,436
Centerbank T                             135,525        195,725
Centex Telemanagemnt T                 1,790,667      1,826,561
Centigram Commun Cp T N                    9,290         48,000
Centocor Inc* T                        5,735,885      4,898,105
Centocor Inc Wts 94 T                     14,800            300
Central Fidelity Bks T                   617,484        670,828
Century Medicorp* T                       41,572         56,457
Cephalon Inc T                           278,044        190,680
Cerner Cp T                               47,046         35,020
Chantal Pharma Cp                        192,161        131,146
Charming Shoppes Inc* T                  278,136        257,851
Checkpoint Sys Inc* T                    117,200         97,166
Chemdesign Cp T                            1,975         12,984
Chemex Pharm Inc*                         40,239          6,543
Chempower Inc T                           14,457          4,200
Chipcom Cp T                             160,655        126,069
Chips & Tech Inc* T                      765,674        904,634
Chiron Cp* T                           1,205,448      1,092,696
Choice Drug Sys* T                        74,670         19,365
Cimflex Teknowledge T                     23,513          8,839
Cincinnati Financial T                    21,955         32,647
Cintas Cp* T                             196,658        164,579
Circadian Inc                             11,027              0
Circon Cp T                              611,405        500,007
Cirrus Logic Inc T                       327,383        474,985
Cisco Sys Inc T                        2,486,391       2,096,194
Clean Harbors Inc T                      348,814        515,677
Clearly Canadian Bev T                 1,018,335      1,106,253
Clinical Tech Assoc*                     106,657        230,654
Clothestime Inc The T                    210,336        224,014
Club-Theatre Network                       4,891         18,032
Codenoll Tech Cp T                        95,815         83,750
Cognex Cp T                               47,582         25,762
Cognos Inc T                              14,662          3,641
Coherent Inc T                             5,811         24,426
Collagen Cp* T                         1,961,117      1,811,804
Collective Bancorp T                     142,063         67,662
College Bound Inc T                      566,309        419,296
Colorocs Cp T                            458,145        474,339
Columbia Hospital Cp T                   202,015         28,892
Comcast Cp A* T                          675,534      1,158,894
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl* T                4,377,238      3,569,913
Comm World Intl A                         14,214            500
Commerce Clearing B T                     11,721         22,222
Commun Entert Cl A                         1,560         16,858
Commun Entertainment                      98,807         81,091
Commun Systems Inc T                      28,813          1,407
Compression Lab Inc T                  3,117,988      2,839,133
Compucom Sys Inc T                         1,246         13,762
Compumed Inc                              52,500          2,480
Computer Ntwk Tech T                     106,115         93,595
Computer Prod Inc* T                      42,579         16,399
Comtrex Systems Cp                        21,610         32,733
Comverse Tech Inc                        503,973          6,676
Concord Camera Cp T                      259,032        317,852
Confertech Intl Inc T                     18,334          7,937
Conquest Airlines Cp                      18,903          2,000
Cons Ruskin Dev Ltd                       11,745             82
Consilium Inc T                          328,266        299,505
Constellation Bncp T                     407,600        374,524
Consul Restaurant Cp* T                  284,147        113,604
Convoy Capital Cp                         10,722             85
Cooker Restaurant Cp T                    14,880         28,238
Coors Adolph Co B* T                     103,762         85,759
Copytele Inc T                         2,271,825      2,281,979
Cordis Cp T                              102,762         45,925
Corestates Fin Cp* T                      439,253       361,192
Corrections Cp Amer T                    679,196        590,652
Cortex Pharm Inc*                         57,451          2,059
Costco Wholesale Cp* T                   869,257         687,867
Coventry Cp T                             43,682         62,627
Cracker Barrel Old* T                     326,414       167,347
Cray Comp Cp T                           662,120        571,004
Crestar Finl Cp* T                       490,939        595,679
Crestmont Finl Corp T                     63,762        106,957
Criticare Sys Inc T                       44,642         82,134
Crop Genetic Intl Cp* T                  141,333        106,330
Crowley Finl Pfd E N                      18,377              0
Crowley Finl Svcs                      2,528,901         49,906
Cryomedical Sci*                         339,518        252,334
Curative Tech Inc T                      116,623         40,687
Custom Chrome Inc T N                     27,500              0
Cybernetics Prods                         19,135          4,850
Cygnus Therapeutic T                     289,084        359,425
Cytogen Cp* T                          1,505,428      1,568,148
Cytrx Cp*                                453,729         86,643
Cytrx Cp Wts B 92 N                      417,180              0
D B A Systems Inc T                      154,595        175,464
D E K A L B Genet B T                     21,040          3,657
D E P Cp T                               177,970        188,000
D N A Plant Tech Cp* T                     16,121       111,497
D N A Plant Wts 92*                       10,850              0
D R X Inc                                  10,425            25
D S Bancor Inc T                         603,157        579,139
D S C Commun Cp* T                       873,495        744,698
D V I Financial Cp T                     470,831        639,450
D V I Finl Cp Wts T                       97,710         20,025
Danek Gp Inc T                           111,118        132,000
Data I O Cp T                             19,308          8,644
Dataflex Cp T                             26,347         12,943
Datascope Cp T                           550,916        457,282
De Beers Cons Adr*                        55,140          7,413
Delchamps Inc T                           45,380         12,572
Dell Computer Cp* T                    1,905,781      1,372,448
Delphi Finl Gp Cl A T                     21,565         34,065
Deprenyl Research T                       31,047         55,266
Devry Inc T                                1,728         13,810
Diamond Entertain Cp*                     15,510            300
Dibrell Brothers Inc T                   745,391        507,502
Digital Microwave Cp T                   446,850        374,696
Digital Products Cp                      143,926         46,619
Digital Sound Cp T                        25,757         14,197
Digital Sys Intl Inc T                   100,016         64,246
Dimensional Vis Gp*                      140,890        162,288
Dionex Cp T                               27,977          5,256
Direct Connect Intl*                           0         27,797
Diversicare Inc T N                       66,000              0
Docucon Inc                              101,635         68,243
Dollar General Cp T                      271,356        142,545
Dominion Bkshs T                         171,247        291,559
Doskocil Cos New Wi T                     35,848         85,750
Dress Barn The T                          26,352          7,182
Dreyers Grand Ice* T                     131,344         47,789
Driefontein Cons Adr*                      2,200         57,882
Drug Emporium* T                         476,235        277,561
Drug Screening Sys                       202,143        136,714
Duriron Co Inc T                           9,095         21,714
Durr Fillauer Med* T                      82,727        177,169
Duty Free Intl Inc T                   3,490,599      3,051,408
Dyna Gp Intl Inc                          12,033          1,875
Dynamic Oil Ltd                            7,756         19,116
Dynatronics Laser Cp                      11,786         26,689
E C C Plc Adr Spon* T                     61,911         11,240
E C I Telecom Ltd T                       46,206         32,741
E M C O N T                               64,526         78,845
E X E C U T O N E* T                     159,617        221,234
E Z C O R P Cl-a T                        33,451         14,460
Ecogen Inc T                              89,899         37,727
Egghead Inc T                            817,761        784,543
El Paso Electric Co T                     43,732         27,035
Elcotel Inc                               60,086         45,385
Elec Clear House Wts                       7,000         26,181
Electromagnetic Sci T                     43,903         10,072
Electromedics Inc T                       19,981          2,655
Electronic Arts Inc T                  1,535,564      1,675,534
Electronic Tech Gp*                        1,100         51,750
Elron Electronics T                       53,777         17,886
Embrex Inc T N                           102,100              0
Embrex Inc Wts 96 T N                     34,500              0
Employee Benefit T                     1,107,496        439,050
Encore Computer Cp                        26,803         16,373
Endotronics Inc                            4,390         22,434
Energy Ventures Inc T                     28,034          1,152
Environ Diagnostics*                      66,370         17,022
Enzon Inc T                              232,379        258,804
Equitable Res Wt 92*                      59,954         47,954
Equitex Inc T                            444,612         62,479
Euroamerican Gp Inc*                           0         12,180
Everex Systems Inc* T                    213,848         281,752
Evergreen Res Inc                          4,876         17,275
Exabyte Cp T                             288,752        449,905
Exar Cp T                                 32,803         13,137
Excel Tech Inc                            17,171         64,761
Exploration Co The                        41,996        196,871
F H P Intl Cp T                          638,482        504,937
F I N D S V P Inc*                        24,650        171,230
F N B Rochester Cp T                       4,423         17,424
Facelifters Home Uts                       4,250         21,365
Failure Gp Inc (the) T                    18,279         36,593
Farmstead Telephn Gp*                      2,098         54,098
Fiberchem Inc*                            16,997          5,256
Fibronics Intl Inc T                      31,244         10,906
Fidelity Bnshs Inc T                      17,565          1,080
Fidelity Med Inc Wts*                          0         12,000
Fifth Third Bncp T                       359,498        372,911
Filene's Basement Cp T                   277,132         24,946
Filenet Cp T                              32,110         65,211
First Alabama Bcshs T                     69,272         54,651
First Bncp Ohio T                          1,595         12,223
First Commer Bncp T                      211,406        351,446
First Commercial L R T                    21,126         61,664
First Cons Fin Cp T                      116,836        145,341
First Eastern Cp T                        73,673        104,081
First Florida Banks T                     69,161         96,315
First Interst of Ia T                    373,053        266,949
First Liberty Fin* T                      35,724         58,710
First Peoples Fin Cp* T                   42,127        126,926
First Security Cp Ky T                    21,588          2,232
First Team Sports T                      120,324        109,832
First Tenn Natl Cp T                       9,692         36,705
First Western Fin Cp T                   169,959        300,357
Fischer Imaging Cp T                      29,778          1,537
Fleer Cp T                               467,514        478,593
Foliage Plus Inc                           2,650         15,829
Fonar Corporation                         17,894          4,259
Fonic Inc                                 36,900              0
Food Lion Inc Cl A* T                  1,662,167      1,499,383
Food Lion Inc Cl B* T                    197,592        148,218
Foreland Cp                                28,670        14,066
Foremost Cp of Amer T                     15,000         64,462
Forest Oil Cp* T                         430,360        415,747
Fountain Pharm*                          249,259        226,956
Framingham Savs Bk T                     114,623         87,740
Fremont Gen Cp* T                         65,752         49,585
Fuller H B Co T                            4,717         35,310
Furon Co* T                              112,539        101,121
Future Med Prods                         238,927        282,417
G B Foods Cp                              40,353         10,439
G K Svcs Inc Cl A T                       51,317         32,484
Galagraph Ltd Ord*                        13,554         32,193
Gantos Inc T                             504,557        558,661
Gates/FA Distributin*                     10,855            544
Gehl Company T                            12,230         24,759
Gen Nutriition Pfd A                      10,943            158
Genelabs Tech Inc T                       88,333         11,935
Genetic Therapy Inc T                     66,570         56,445
Genetics Instit Inc* T                   800,896        812,041
Genetics Instit Pfd* T                    20,724          43,044
Genlyte Gp Inc T                          81,404         49,759
Gensia Pharm Inc T                        203,054       240,948
Gentner Commun Cp Ut                     104,870        254,915
Genzyme Cp T                             507,478        288,475
Geonex Cp T                              169,651        141,814
Geraghty Miller Inc T                     20,033          5,961
Giddings Lewis Inc T                     760,786      1,044,612
Glycomed Inc T                            27,985          1,680
Goal Systems Intl T                      179,481        112,235
Gold Reserve Cp                           46,171         20,171
Gold Standard Inc                         20,273          5,082
Golden Triangle Oil                       24,836         11,567
Good Guys Inc The T                      479,826        259,609
Goody's Family Cloth T N                  32,763              0
Gradco Systems Inc T                      31,928         51,413
Grancare Inc T N                          14,540              0
Grant Tensor Geophys T                   352,645        337,334
Great Amer Commun T                    1,549,086      1,564,108
Great Lakes Bncp* T                       183,637       149,996
Great Oaks Finl Cp*                       95,987        138,632
Greater N Y Sav Bk T                     116,219        136,660
Greenstone Roberts                        27,670          2,883
Greentree Software                        36,152          1,513
Greenwich Pharm Inc T                  2,429,012      2,657,368
Grossman's Inc T                          19,307         31,688
Grudge Music Gp                           37,858          1,530
Gynex Inc                                  3,393         13,956
H B O Co* T                              310,906        264,880
H M O America Inc T                    1,700,686      1,486,913
Hancock Hldg Co TS                        21,762          3,318
Hanover Insurance Co T                    31,718         18,476
Harmon Inds Inc T                          2,800         14,960
Hauser Chem Research T                     20,507       424,470
Health Care Prods A                       11,740             50
Health Club TV Ntwk                          307         32,813
Health Images Inc* T                      66,949         50,893
Health Mgmt Assoc A T                     81,704         28,102
Healthcare Svcs Gp T                   1,866,212      1,835,092
Healthinfusion Inc T                       1,284         14,819
Healthwatch Inc Uts N                     46,250              0
Hechinger Co Cl A* T                   1,970,547      2,059,653
Helian Health Gp Inc* T                   14,242              5
Helix Biocore Inc T                       95,234         81,823
Hemacare Cp Wt 92*                        65,025         87,935
Henley Gp Inc The T                       76,759        104,872
Herley Inds Inc T                         39,774          7,325
Highland Superstores T                   197,977        186,113
Highline Inds Uts 94                      32,985              0
Highveld Steel Adr*                          350         10,823
Hingham Insti Saving T                     9,988         20,983
Hoenig Gp Inc T N                         51,767              0
Hoenig Gp Uts N                           25,700              0
Hoenig Gp Wts A T N                       24,972              0
Hogan Systems Inc T                      167,840        154,931
Hologic Inc T                             26,180         13,263
Home Intensive Care* T                   134,635        176,092
Homecall Inc*                             10,100         88,350
Homecare Mgmt Inc                         18,541          2,035
Hometrust Bank T                           2,535         13,217
Hon Inds Inc T                           156,760        195,084
Horsehead Res Dev T                       47,969         58,460
Hospital Staffing T                       36,659          7,656
Hotelecopy Inc T                           7,540         19,433
Huntington Bcshs T                         8,363         40,564
Hutchinson Tech Inc T                     66,702         84,391
I C C Tech Inc                            19,034           2,865
I C F Intl Inc Cl A T                     51,994         28,275
I C O S Cp T                             729,985        806,487
I H O P Cp T                           1,072,561      1,016,326
I I S Intell Info T                        3,120         17,581
I M N E T Inc T                            8,140         42,213
I N B Fin Cp T                            71,705         15,590
I N T E R S O L V T                      107,732         36,262
I P L Systems Inc A T                    269,425         52,505
I P S Health Care                         104,859       210,659
Idan Software Inds                             0         14,400
Image Entertainment T                     79,766         16,449
Imatron Inc* T                           103,669        124,939
Immucell Cp                              250,634        217,257
Immucor Inc T                             28,235         46,008
Immulogic Pharm Cp T                      92,015         62,558
Immune Response Cp T                   1,141,381        742,806
Immunex Cp T                           1,743,091      1,467,106
Immunex Cp Wts* T                         28,880         10,459
Immunomedics Inc T                       388,167        414,608
Imperial Bancorp T                       620,102        606,132
IMRE Cp                                   90,531        327,742
IMRE Cp Uts 96                                 0         22,900
IMRE Cp Wts 96 N                          37,400              0
In Focus Systems Inc T                    18,181         65,602
In Home Health Inc*                      165,185        133,047
Inacom Corp T                             28,235          9,940
Indep Bk Cp Ma T                          17,181         38,239
Info Resources Inc* T                     74,432         88,846
Informix Cp T                             81,802         55,244
Ingles Markets Inc A T                    52,263         68,477
Insituform East Inc T                      2,571         25,636
Insituform Midamer A T                    18,572          4,080
Insituform No Amer A T                    24,589          9,266
Insta Cool Inc                            16,482         82,015
Integrated Circuit T                      37,477         47,555
Integrated Devic Tec T                   673,297        691,337
Integrated Waste Svc T                   558,463        461,605
Intel Cp* T                              892,366        355,672
Interactive Media                         25,774         12,940
Interactive Network T N                   38,100              0
Interface Inc A T                        713,903        731,186
Interferon Sciences T                     81,656          5,984
Intergraph Cp* T                         290,322        204,544
Intergroup Healthcar T                       200         84,562
Interleaf Inc T                          318,650        255,986
Interspec Inc T                           20,220          5,872
Intervoice Inc T                         170,063        395,844
Intl Bus Schools Inc                       5,300         40,935
Intl Bus Schools Wts*                          0         46,000
Intl Cablecasting                         50,124         65,015
Intl Dairy Queen A T                     411,141        440,830
Intl Microelectronic T                    14,686         43,821
Intl Mobile Mach Cp* T                 1,963,840      2,187,570
Intl Remote Imaging                       53,535          3,647
Intl Superconduct*                         4,373         44,610
Intl Testing Svcs                          16,750         5,000
Invacare Cp T                            160,494        251,629
Investors Fin Cp T                       100,738        141,332
Iomega Cp* T                              50,654         76,737
Ion Laser Technology                         825         14,100
Isis Pharm Inc T                         253,750        194,068
J A M Inc                                      0         16,749
J Baker Inc T                            712,990        799,862
J J Snack Foods T                         19,238          7,914
J L G Industries Inc T                     3,310          32,044
J S B Financial Inc T                     46,511        110,284
Jack Carl 312 Future                      12,000              0
Jean Philippe Frg Wt* T                    1,140         12,537
Jennifer Convertible*                     29,842         64,153
Jones Intrcable A T                      640,882        664,984
Jones Medical Inds T                      48,677         10,488
Journey's End Resort                       1,100         12,466
Journey's End Wt 92                       13,000              0
Juniper Feature Wt A                      10,700              0
Juno Lighting Inc T                        2,662         14,758
K L A Instruments T                      180,830        124,658
K Swiss Inc Cl A T                        85,029        152,771
Kelley Oil Cp T                           82,517        107,124
Kelly Services Cl A T                    147,763         92,799
Kentucky Central A T                     458,289        761,543
Key Production Co T                       67,450         77,838
Key Tronic Cp T                           54,304         37,570
Kinder Care Lrn Ctrs                      27,250         37,963
Kinetic Concepts Inc T                     3,838         34,335
Kirschner Medical Cp T                   306,100        331,729
Kloof Gold Mine Adr*                      25,062         49,346
Knowledgeware Inc T                    1,050,080      1,301,165
Komag Inc T                              105,283         62,631
Kulicke & Soffa T                          55,919        26,737
Kushner Locke Co T                         7,179         82,694
L A Entertainment                         20,083         71,833
L D D S Comm Cl A T                      382,645        347,606
L M Ericsson Tel Adr* T                1,868,797      1,977,185
L V M H Moet Adr* T                      109,913         88,050
L X E Inc T                                1,044         11,432
Ladd Furniture Inc T                     277,317        242,979
Lancaster Colony Cp T                     36,009          6,904
Lance Inc T                              115,568         72,909
Lancit Media Prod Wt                       6,440         16,790
Landmark Graphic Cp* T                   694,091        619,966
Larson Davis Inc                          16,059          2,410
Las Vegas Discount                        13,102            219
Laser Precision Cp T                      43,394         67,176
Lasermaster Tech Inc T                   380,445        366,724
Laserscope T                             317,266        505,313
Latin Foods Intl Inc                      34,365         10,750
Lattice Semiconduct T                     17,040         34,897
Leadville Min Mill                        58,739          4,000
Lechters Inc T                           269,834        177,736
Legent Cp* T                             234,753        266,286
Leslie's Poolmart T                       19,418         35,175
Liberty Natl Bncp* T                      23,444         13,315
Licon Intl Inc                            50,269          1,000
Licon Intl Inc Wts                        46,170            900
Lidak Pharm Cl A*                          41,025         8,349
Lidak Pharm Wts A*                             0         30,010
Lifecore Biomedical T                    507,306        469,387
Lifeline Systems Inc T                   191,174         90,199
Lin Broadcasting Cp* T                   264,043        225,864
Linear Technology Cp T                    73,152         59,369
Liposome Co Inc T                        476,672        522,682
Liposome Tech Inc T                      219,057        101,318
Lomak Petroleum Inc                       16,254         33,450
Lotus Development Cp* T                1,911,953      1,943,641
Luther Medical Prod                        3,784         22,487
Luxtec Cp                                      0         36,728
M C I Comm Cp* T                        1,104,522     1,386,946
M E T Capital Cp                          12,100             32
M N X Inc T                               15,597          5,514
M S Carriers Inc T                        10,548         29,861
M T C Elect Tech New S                    21,334          4,250
MacMillan Bloedel T                    1,866,555      1,577,006
Magma Power Co T                          82,274        103,781
Magna Group Inc T                        176,623        141,271
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg T                  1,052,074        565,267
Magnetech Cp Wts*                          4,000         21,500
Mail Boxes Coast                          10,233              0
Main St Main Inc                           6,625         36,925
Major Realty Cp T                         39,410         12,808
Manufactures Natl Cp T                   109,133         27,327
Marcam Cp T                              253,652        269,503
Mark Twain Bcshs T                        26,608         50,308
Markitstar Inc                             8,904         36,454
Marquest Med Prod T                       43,157         13,772
Marrow Tech Inc Cl A* T                  418,607        766,233
Marsam Pharm Inc T                        22,355         10,797
Masco Inds* T                            165,289        134,013
Mascott Cp                                87,956          4,825
Matrix Service Co T                       52,485         63,932
Maxicare Hlth New                        328,653        104,858
Maxtor Cp* T                             354,649        947,891
Mccaw Cellular A* T                    1,397,035      1,509,016
Mccormick Co Nv* T                       183,923         23,470
Medco Containmnt* T                      699,248      1,030,795
Medex Inc T                               17,958         31,000
Medical Care Intl* T                     637,743        405,041
Medical Innov*                            88,245        208,278
Medical Marketing Gp T                   298,843         233,575
Medicine Shoppe Intl T                 1,240,371      1,303,397
Medicis Pharm Cl A*                      605,452        671,867
Medicis Pharm Wts A*                     842,825        818,621
Medicis Pharm Wts C*                         134         28,600
Medimmune Inc T                          132,968         59,538
Medphone Cp*                             305,371        394,711
Memry Cp                                  31,910         18,887
Mentor Cp The* T                       1,296,644        975,387
Mentor Graphics Cp* T                  1,127,239      1,003,818
Mercantile Bncpn Inc T                    28,444          7,522
Meridian Bncp Inc* T                      43,711         29,323
Meris Labs Inc T                          28,282         15,397
Merisel Inc T                            116,890         22,645
Meritor Savings Bank T                   879,493        961,379
Merry Land Inv Co T                       11,093            274
Metalclad Cp                              96,414        125,899
Methode Electronic A T                    28,046         13,768
Michael Foods Inc T                    2,243,603      2,337,958
Michaels Stores Inc T                    110,540        665,520
Michigan Natl Cp T                        58,208         72,455
Micro Healthsys Inc T                    577,818        548,969
Microcom Inc T                           187,261         153,901
Microdyne Cp T                            74,641         33,046
Micrografx Inc T                         374,076        392,757
Micronetics Inc                           14,441              0
Micronics Computers T                     55,806         97,823
Micropolis Cp* T                         502,175        426,432
Microsoft Cp* T                        2,357,418      2,264,653
Mid Atlantic Medical T                   637,502        661,287
Midlantic Cp* T                        5,517,907      5,011,002
Miller Diversified                        22,500              0
Miller Herman Inc T                      299,976        181,826
Millicom Inc* T                          613,320        627,599
Minntech Cp T                             11,949         26,430
Minorco Adr*                              15,520         39,784
Mobile Telecomm Tech T                    90,235         66,883
Mobley Enviro Svcs A T                     6,985         18,985
Modine Mfg Co T                            1,088         12,322
Molex Inc* T                              21,142         48,841
Molex Inc Cl A* T                         44,739         55,585
Monro Muffler Brake T                     48,184         11,699
Mountaintop Cp*                           14,700              0
Movie Superstore*                         45,123          1,213
Multi Solutions Inc                       16,766          3,873
Multimedia Inc T                          57,618         32,703
Mutual Assurance Inc T                    25,478          8,820
Mycogen Cp T                              63,502        102,291
Mylex Cp T                               233,023        181,580
Myo Tech Cp*                              20,562            206
N A C Re Cp* T                           652,578        600,260
N A M I C Usa Cp T N                      18,600              0
N D E Enviro Cp                              100         10,458
N E C Cp Adr* T                            65,507        90,411
N E S B Cp T                             175,588        210,479
Natec Resources Inc T                    260,307        302,326
Natl Beverage Cp T                         8,270         20,354
Natl Community Bks T                     148,517        198,768
Natl Data Cp T                           462,034        400,499
Natl Medical Waste                        72,933         98,240
Natl Micronetics Inc T                         0         10,238
Natl Pizza Co Cl B T                     139,415        157,163
Natl Rehabilat Ctrs T N                   15,093              0
Natl Techteam Inc                          5,958         26,628
Natl Western Life A T                     15,026          2,876
Nellcor Inc T                            140,933        125,360
Neolens Inc                              220,508        176,495
Neorx Cp* T                              318,990        286,090
Network General Cp T                     326,047        393,940
Network Systems Cp* T                    716,346      1,162,491
Neurogen Cp T                            182,630         54,441
Neutrogena Cp T                          604,676        389,103
Newbridge Netwks Cp T                    552,439        628,355
Newpark Res Inc T                         38,678         67,225
Newport Cp T                                4,247        18,619
Nobel Insurance Ltd T                     11,140            127
Noise Cancellation                       162,173        118,330
Noise Com Inc N                          150,000              0
Non Invasive Mon Sys*                    442,604              0
Nona Morelli's II                        320,652        338,873
Nordson Cp T                              42,947         58,669
Nordstrom Inc* T                         852,853      1,022,205
North Lily Mining Co                       3,011         15,014
Northeast Bncp T                         149,016        173,850
Northern Tr Cp T                          41,182         98,112
Nostalgia Network*                            62         17,228
Nova Pharm Cp* T                         195,904        133,709
Novell Inc* T                          2,486,956      2,016,982
Novellus Systems Inc T                   297,759        245,442
Nu-West Inds Inc* T                      762,121        804,562
Nucorp Inc Delaware* T                       788         14,887
Nytest Environmental                     452,623        582,771
O R E X A N A Cp*                          7,300         26,510
O'Charley's Inc T                         92,979         43,834
Occupational Urgent T                    610,684        727,364
Oceaneering Intl Inc T                   152,195         78,094
Octel Commun Cp* T                       205,507        218,793
Office Depot Inc* T                    1,056,174      1,042,479
Officeland Inc                           110,404          3,800
Offshore Log* T                           55,135         33,670
Old Dominion Freight T N                  14,349              0
Old Kent Fin Cp* T                       425,425        261,902
Old Stone Cp* T                          539,249        463,722
Optical Radiation Cp T                   154,587         94,915
Oracle Systems Cp* T                   1,718,618      2,493,967
Oregon Metallurgical T                    44,200         82,870
Orthopedic Svcs Inc T                     14,304         31,015
Osborn Commun Cp T                        74,900         38,000
Oshkosh B Gosh Cl A* T                   200,907        282,905
Oxford Health Plans T                    180,709         14,994
P A M Transport Svcs                       3,209         21,344
P L A T I N U M Tech T                   486,963        450,622
Pac Rim Hldg Cp T                        195,765         34,075
Paccar Inc T                              68,407         81,432
Pacific Dunlop Adr* T                    563,441        548,002
Pacific Intl Svc Cp* T                    18,361          1,107
Pacific Telecom Inc T                     21,972          2,335
Pacificare Health T                      910,163        745,806
Paging Network Inc T                      28,714         47,025
Pak Mail Centers                          16,397             25
Pamet Systems Inc                         30,162         40,306
Pantheon Inds Inc                         10,177         77,077
Park Commun Inc* T                       185,726        202,962
Partech Hldgs Cp                               0         20,804
Paychex Inc T                            118,329        153,043
Payco American Cp T                       52,178         35,762
Pentair Inc* T                           202,854        143,492
Penwest Ltd T                            277,781        316,685
Peoples Heri Fin Gp T                    483,343        494,805
Personal Comp Prod                        16,030        112,900
Pharmacy Mgmt Svc T                      511,141        498,097
Pharmakinetic Labs T                     486,876        509,191
Phoenix Advance Tech                      61,201          7,467
Phoenix Laser Sys*                        92,182        261,238
Phoenix Tech Ltd T                       232,216        115,333
Pic N Save Cp* T                         133,757        119,004
Picturetel Cp T                          103,414        129,186
Pinkerton's Inc T                        145,160        159,983
Pioneer Hi Bred Intl T                    90,923         79,307
Pioneer Std Elct* T                       92,501        115,266
Plenum Publishing Cp* T                  245,538        221,395
Polydex Pharm Ltd                         14,242          2,292
Pool Energy Svcs Co T                     28,324          6,699
Possis Cp T                              553,796        565,791
Powell Inds Inc T                        494,463        650,784
Premier Bncp Inc T                        61,630         76,486
Presidential Life Cp T                   490,817        521,022
Presstek Inc T                           695,757        829,359
Price Co The* T                        3,388,954      3,004,884
Prime Cellular Inc                           300         15,500
Princeton Elec Prods                      17,132            119
Production Oper* T                       322,689        293,820
Progress Software Cp T                    62,345         50,956
Proteon Inc T                            206,497        192,066
Pub Svc Co N H                                18         22,411
Puget Sound Bncp T                       170,993        267,398
Puritan Bennett Cp T                      551,588       379,635
Pyramid Technology T                     226,161        208,225
Q V C Network Inc* T                     346,755        294,328
Quadrax Cp Wts C                          23,850         39,750
Qual Med Inc T                            89,626         32,645
Quality Food Centers T                   189,227        199,805
Quantum Cp* T                          1,354,137      1,275,607
Quarterdeck Office T                     415,781        457,732
Quiksilver Inc T                         478,120        544,821
Quixote Cp T                              61,744         17,154
R 2000 Cp                                  1,345         75,074
R E N Cp Usa T                             1,672         27,398
R P M Inc* T                             611,414        651,530
Rada Electronic Ltd T                      2,412         17,506
Radiation Sys Inc T                       15,204          2,686
Radius Inc T                              38,003         16,905
Rally's Inc T                            549,457        573,758
Random Access Inc*                        32,301         13,837
Rasterops T                              186,966        106,098
Ratners Gp Adr* T                         42,941         22,493
Raycomm Trans Pfd C                          140         10,252
Raycomm Transworld                         2,532         28,073
Read-Rite Cp T N                          41,350              0
Refac Tech Dev Cp T                            0         13,461
Regency Equities Cp T                     33,775         10,100
Regeneron Pharmaceut T                    182,249        44,695
Regenex Inc                               25,495            960
Regis Cp T                                48,300         68,909
Relife Inc Cl A T                         17,229          7,077
Rentrak Cp T                             173,098        183,256
Repap Enterprises Cp T                   187,930        177,002
Repligen Cp T                            209,344         73,115
Republic Health Cp T                      32,345            577
Republic Waste Inds T                     75,893        196,388
Research Frontiers                        78,900         61,326
Research Industries T                    657,451        864,593
Restor Inds Inc                            1,700         23,320
Restor Inds Inc Wts                       27,610          3,490
Reuters Hldg Plc Adr* T                2,552,850      2,342,331
Ribi Immunochem T                         30,010         15,453
Richardson Elect Ltd T                    97,553        116,494
Riggs Natl Cp The T                      620,102        511,797
Robern Apparel Inc                        49,191              0
Roberts Pharm Cp T                        71,481         16,690
Rogers Cantel Mob B T                     21,582          4,400
Ropak Labs                                77,194          2,059
Ropak Labs Wts                            19,850        101,750
Ross Stores Inc T                        156,256         28,842
Ross Systems Inc T                       108,929        216,163
Rotech Medical Cp T                      173,741        307,100
Rouse Co* T                            3,617,402      3,734,698
Royal Gold Inc                            47,371         25,721
Royce Laboratories*                      133,275        180,636
Ryan's Family Steak* T                     71,622        99,189
Ryka Inc*                                151,585        162,848
S A F E C O Cp* T                        213,701        107,778
S A N B O R N Inc                         42,165            200
S G I International                      162,456        146,169
Sage Alerting System N                    89,840              0
Sage Alerting Wts 94 N                    30,000              0
Salick Health Care T                      73,390         55,150
Sandwich Co Op Bank T                     19,000         33,410
Sanford Cp T                              86,149         59,792
Saratoga Brands Inc                       29,527         14,977
Savannah Foods Inds T                    826,872        866,923
Schield Mgmt Co                                0         16,290
Scimed Life Sys Inc* T                   401,752        653,286
Scitex Cp* T                             431,890        874,487
Score Board Inc The T                    492,249        879,465
Scorpion Tech Inc A                      393,764        206,749
Seagate Tech* T                        1,404,852        980,971
Seahawk Deep Ocean                       221,296         10,412
Second Natl Bncp T                        89,340        113,343
Senetek Plc Adr*                         311,725        384,017
Sentex Sensing Tech                      589,050        701,058
Sepracor Inc T                           204,420         52,914
Sequent Computer Sys* T                1,227,730        941,085
Sequoia Sys Inc T                         25,185         11,655
Shared Medical Sys* T                     89,352         42,998
Sharper Image Cp T                         4,550         26,855
Shopsmith Inc T                           19,248              9
Shorewood Pkging Cp T                     55,015        109,483
Sierra On Line Inc T                     419,669        794,723
Sierra Semiconductor T                   186,685         78,168
Sierra Tucson Cos T                      186,828         23,601
Sigma Aldrich Cp T                       103,060        169,734
Silicon Valley Bncsh T                   596,456        831,218
Silicon Valley Gp T                       36,550         13,223
Simpson Inds Inc T                        13,086          1,378
Simtek Cp Wts 96 T                        11,091            475
Site Based Media Inc                     108,304          1,480
Smith Intl Inc Wts B*                        302        147,191
Smithfield Foods Inc T                    21,399         50,263
Society Cp T                           1,108,974        777,657
Software Publishing* T                   679,492        588,321
Software Svcs Amer                        53,757          8,900
Software Toolwks Inc* T                  579,066        781,087
Somanetics Cp Wts A                       23,720         13,375
Somatogen Inc T                          287,914        159,298
Somerset Bkshs Inc T                      49,287         61,209
Sonic Cp T                               302,998        232,613
Sonoco Products Co T                      52,920         42,621
South Caro Fed Cp T                            0         17,114
South Carolina Natl T                    729,849        742,166
Southern Pac Pet Adr*                     50,136         13,553
Southland Cp                              58,295         32,738
Sovereign Bancorp T                      241,920          4,740
Sparta Surgical Cp                        22,070          9,465
Spartan Motors Inc T                     263,879        177,658
Special Devices Inc T                     17,521          4,680
Spectran Cp T                             69,493         36,175
Spectrum Info Tech                       173,618        253,642
Spectrum Info Wts A                            0         12,900
Spiegel Inc A Nv T                       189,438        125,295
Sport of Kings Inc                        50,260            600
St Jude Medical Inc* T                   399,015        354,073
Stake Technology Ltd                      13,865         25,799
Standard Microsystem T                    12,590          2,477
Staples Inc* T                         2,165,312      1,919,001
State O Maine Inc T                       34,354         17,294
State Street Boston T                    747,537        477,189
Stateswest Airlines                      159,173        512,511
Stewart Enterpr Cl A T N                   2,418         30,700
Stewart Stevenson T                       77,282         66,366
Stokely U S A Inc T                       67,346         80,910
Stor Furnishings                           1,000         16,948
Stratford Amer Cp                         22,263            345
Structural Dynamics T                    126,282        141,881
Stryker Cp* T                            413,512        361,414
Stuart Hall Co Inc T                       7,304         93,053
Sulcus Comp Cp Wts A                     290,294         20,301
Sulcus Computer Cp                       695,507        537,596
Sulcus Computer Pf A                       1,837        149,261
Sulcus Computer Wt B                     122,470        334,100
Sullivan Dental Prod T                    44,114         67,195
Summit Bncp T                              45,232        55,287
Summit Tech Inc T                      1,914,814      2,124,168
Sun Microsystems Inc* T                2,686,179      3,782,259
Sundowner Offshore T                      11,988          1,981
Sungard Data Systems* T                  199,398        175,362
Sunrise Medical Inc T                     64,393         22,491
Sunrise Tech Inc T                       351,197        459,768
Sunward Tech Inc T                            73         12,168
Supercuts Inc T N                         17,445              0
Surgical Care Affil T                    371,680        612,351
Surgical Laser Tech T                    537,460        494,055
Survival Tech Inc T                      108,178        137,954
Swank Inc New                                  0         16,251
Symantec Cp TS                           330,588        352,482
Symbolics Inc T                           12,283         40,678
Symix Systems Inc T                       28,450          15,576
Syncor Intl Cp Del T                      65,313         49,843
Synergen Inc TS                        2,359,848      1,666,818
Synetic Inc T                             43,721         15,832
Synoptics Commun Inc T                   778,232      1,185,953
Syntellect Inc T                          63,485         89,104
System Software T                        124,659        495,052
Systemed Inc* T                          561,962        445,851
Systemix Inc T                            41,432         24,028
T B C Cp T                                48,973         10,689
T Cell Sciences Inc* T                   137,813        114,230
T E T R A Tech Inc T                     308,643        337,811
T G X Cp                                 386,885        328,470
T J Intl Inc T                           340,301        373,992
T J Systems Cp                             7,164         21,525
T P I Enterprises T                      159,379        173,536
T S I Cp* T                               87,626        106,349
T S S Ltd*                                71,594         37,097
T W Holdings Inc T                     2,450,095      2,043,856
T2 Medical Inc T                       2,492,908      2,572,929
Takecare Inc T                           509,259        408,020
Tandon Cp T                               83,785         20,665
Tech Data Cp T                            33,248         67,736
Technical Commun Cp T                     14,334          1,190
Telco Systems Inc T                       48,391         16,360
Tele Commun Inc A* T                   9,718,996      8,757,908
Tele Commun Inc B* T                           0         20,000
Telebit Cp T                              13,034         27,253
Tellabs Inc T                              9,404         32,065
Tellus Inds Inc                           16,999              0
Teltronics Inc                            12,879          2,000
Telxon Cp* T                             560,433        492,569
Teradata Cp* T                           126,784        192,204
Teva Pharm Ind Adr* T                     38,499          8,347
Thermodynetics Inc                       461,024         635,624
Thousand Trails Inc T                    234,184        250,971
Tide West Oil Co                          22,052         60,504
Tigera Group Inc T                        15,269            181
Tokio Marine Adr* T                       45,714         55,867
Tokos Med Cp Del T                       226,599        100,325
Top Source Inc                           106,019         39,746
Topps Co Inc The* T                    1,075,692        819,418
Total Research Cp*                         1,100        104,470
Transmedia Ntwk Inc                       34,349         87,637
Travel Ports of Amer T                       645         15,576
Treadco Inc T                                500        179,400
Trenwick Group Inc T                      41,061         25,660
Trimble Navigation T                     739,789        699,307
Trinity Capital Ent                        1,350         13,275
Trinity Capital Uts                        2,300         29,200
Trinity Capital Wt B                       4,000         23,305
Tround Intl Inc                           47,118         19,249
Trustco Bank Cp NY TS                     20,123        138,537
Tseng Labs Inc T                         355,283        246,056
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A* T                2,052,236      2,019,547
U N I C O Inc                              3,368         14,013
U S A Waste Service T                     72,342         51,549
U S Alcohol Testing                       93,934         63,695
U S Bancorp Oregon* T                    291,087        265,713
U S Facilities Cp T                      131,540         85,751
U S Healthcare Inc* T                  2,014,676      1,640,219
U S Homecare Cp T                         28,360          6,255
U S Pawn Inc*                             79,321         22,185
U S T Cp T                               571,624        554,866
Ultrak Inc                                   757         11,107
Unigene Labs Inc* T                      153,010         88,593
Unigene Labs Wts B                       237,854        255,279
Unimed Inc                                24,538          9,710
Union Bk T                               287,184        247,294
Uniquest Inc                               1,870         14,937
United Artists Cl A* T                   168,023         96,354
United Artists Cl B* T                    34,485         51,856
United Cities Gas Co T                     3,528         18,819
United Ins Cos Inc* T                    140,637        151,431
United Stationers T                       99,428        146,232
US Trans Sys Inc*                        222,226        435,741
Utah Medical Inc T                       118,445        140,174
Utah Shale Land                            1,009         12,020
V L S I Tech Inc T                       199,809        100,089
V T N Cp                                   5,764         19,674
Vaal Reefs Explr Adr*                    130,849        225,938
Valley Capital Cp T                       33,373         69,805
Valley Forge Sci Cp*                     123,474         92,276
Valley National Cp T                   1,439,129      1,964,835
Valmont Inds Inc T                        84,561         40,065
Value Health Inc T                       774,664        730,833
Value Merchants Inc T                    140,860         65,774
Vanguard Cellular A T                    211,496        192,523
Vans Inc T                                 4,135         15,289
Vegas Chips Inc New                       25,235            365
Vencor Inc T                              16,231         53,061
Verifone Inc T                           855,321        441,976
Vestar Inc T                              65,020         46,918
Vicor Cp T                               123,040         96,720
Vicorp Resta* T                           86,148        124,452
Vidcom Post Inc                           19,300          2,400
Video Jukebox Netwrk                      31,015         44,208
Video Lottery Tech T                     631,402        363,666
Videocart Inc T                        2,434,689      2,298,430
Vimrx Pharm Inc*                          34,622         63,030
Vimrx Pharm Wts A*                         1,000         45,495
Vinland Prop Tr Sbi                          940         13,577
Viratek Inc T                            543,563        486,633
Vision Tech Intl                               0         15,954
Vision Ten Inc N                          23,000              0
Visual Equities Inc                        2,500         98,166
Vitafort Intl Cp*                          3,000         15,152
Volvo AB Cl B Adr* T                      28,567         13,269
Vystar Group Inc                              53         13,006
W P P Gp Plc Adr* T                      334,562        242,659
Walbro Cp T                               25,612          3,919
Warehouse Club Inc T                      27,923            165
Wasatch Education                          3,650         14,454
Washington Energy Co T                 1,028,584          1,560
Washington Mut Sv Bk* T                  640,588        615,641
Waste Technology Cp                        2,700         38,931
Waterford Plc Adr Ut T                   117,841        106,215
Watts Industries A T                     349,743        335,770
Weitek Cp T                              368,716        298,064
Welkom Gold Hldg Adr*                          0         37,119
Wellfleet Commun Inc T                   161,729        114,746
Werner Enterprises T                      28,252         17,144
West One Bancorp T                       270,716        126,094
Western Accept Uts N                      94,000               0
Western Acceptance                        14,336          2,341
Western Pac Res Cp                         2,660         15,700
Western Publishing T                      21,919         50,316
Westmark Intl Inc T                      132,665        464,036
Wet Seal Inc Cl A T                      232,526        136,080
Wheatley T X T Cp T                          154         13,850
Willamette Inds Inc T                     54,790         42,908
Wolf Financial Gp T                      146,730        213,977
Wordstar Intl Inc T                        9,481         20,456
Worthington Inds Inc TS                  224,187        188,581
Wyman Gordon Co T                        100,404         13,794
X O M A Cp* T                          4,641,687      3,779,227
X Rite Inc T                              25,027          8,355
Xicor Inc T                               10,183         22,194
Xilinx Inc T                             177,243        260,691
Xscribe Cp                                10,321             85
Xylogics Inc T                             3,341         15,129
Yellow Freight Del* T                    260,971        171,558
York Financial Cp TS                      99,257        154,053
York Research Cp T                     1,682,909      1,802,723
Zebra Tech Cp Cl-a T                     170,504        147,937
Zenith Labs Inc T                         31,167         56,711
Zeos Intl Ltd T                          728,051        327,537
Zycad Cp T                                 87,945         51,030

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1991


                             1548 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 27, 1991 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: Neil Morgan

BYLINE: Neil Morgan

BODY:

   ON THE ROAD: Unlike your everyday angel of mercy, Glenda Flores wears a
bullet-proof vest and packs a gun when she stops to change your tire along San
Diego freeways.

   A Highway Patrol officer, she drives a van as part of the Freeway Service
Patrol, offering free emergency aid to motorists in trouble.

   She's a veteran of the tough East Los Angeles beat.

   She moved to San Diego as the only woman driver in the FSP, a partnership
between the CHP and the New Car Dealers Association, which supplies vans and
equipment. FSP drivers carry spare fuel; jumper cables and tire irons are tools
of their trade.

   When Officer Flores plies those tools for helpless male drivers, sexist
banter is off-limits. CROSSTOWN: Art dealers in Tijuana are upbeat.

   The boom they predicted in Latin American art is confirmed by $12 million in
sales at three recent Sotheby's auctions in New York, including a Diego Rivera
at $2.9 million....When Evelyn Page (wife of SDG&E Chairman Tom Page) seeks
funds for the San Diego Regional Cancer Center, friends tend to listen.

   The center plans a clinical test of gene therapy with multiple sclerosis
patients, and she's committed to be one of the study patients....UCSD is quick
to schedule a Faculty Club address (on Dec. 13) by Councilwoman-elect Valerie
Stallings.

   She's the first UCSD undergrad alumna (1978) to become a council member.
FEEDBACK: Ch. 10 news director Paul Sands reports a surge of callers responding
to last week's joint series on racism by his station and The Tribune: "You've
struck a nerve when you get calls on an issue that's so hard-hitting," says
Sands.

   "Callers said things like, `Why are you raising this issue?' or, `Why are you
opening wounds you shouldn't be opening?' " Many of Channel 10's callers said
they'd read about the issue first in The Tribune, then tuned in TV. NOTEPAD:
Even in a profitless recession, Grant Hotel manager John Roberts takes a rosy
view of the holidays.

   His Christmas card insists that this will be the Grant's "most colorful year
ever."...Newsweek's worldwide survey of bright spots in education gives the U.S.
an odd couple: postgraduate institutions and art training....At the Borrego
Springs deli called Chefs For You, the top house pizza is called the Borrego
Sink....Visiting the fashion salon of Adrienne Vitadini in New York for a
showing, Gayle Wilson, the governor's wife, found an impish, tall blonde
assigned to her as guide: Alexandra Black, a former Bishop's girl from La
Jolla....Yvonne Hancher and Robert Muzzy, who've made careers in wine judging,
do some blending of their own on Dec. 6: They'll wed in a family ceremony on
Crystal Pier....NBC News is pursuing a story on San Diego investor Charles W.
Hostler, who won a Bush appointment as ambassador to Bahrain. ROOM SERVICE: Gary
Petill was catering director for the Sheraton Grand Hotel in 1988 when the
Maryland Hotel caught fire.

   With its senior residents displaced, Petill organized a Thanksgiving dinner.

   Now, as head of catering for the U.S. Grant, Petill and his Grant staff will
cook dinner for 2,500 down-and-outers to be served tomorrow at Golden
Hall....More Sheraton good works: It teamed with Catholic Worker to do dinner
for 1,500 homeless today at Joan Kroc Center. Dee Anne Traitel assists with the
Neil Morgan column

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1549 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                  November 27, 1991, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE C2; ROUNDUP

LENGTH: 774 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

    ECONOMY

   Yields on five-year Treasury notes fell to their lowest levels since Aug. 27,
1986. The average yield at the Treasury's auction was 6.54 percent, down from
6.92 percent at the last auction Oct. 24. The notes will carry a coupon interest
rate of 6.5 percent with each $ 10,000 in face value selling for $ 9,983.20.

   Gasoline prices for the week that ended Tuesday dipped slightly from the week
earlier, according to AAA. The nationwide average price for a gallon of
self-serve unleaded regular fell 0.1 cent, to $ 1.142. Prices were higher in New
England, the Midwest and the Southwest, but they fell elsewhere.

   COMPANIES

   Colgate-Palmolive announced several actions to boost its presence in Eastern
Europe. The company said it will create operations to produce and market
consumer goods in Poland, Romania and Hungary.

   Ford of Britain transferred the ownership of Jaguar Cars to its parent
company in Detroit. The luxury-car maker will keep its headquarters in Coventry,
England. The move follows the first loss ever for Ford of Britain in 1990.

   Genetic Therapy told the SEC it plans to sell 1.5 million shares of common
stock to be underwritten through a syndicate led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &
Co. and Montgomery Securities.

   Aerospatiale of France pulled out of the bidding for Boeing's De Havilland
commuter aircraft division, ending 16 months of negotiations. The withdrawal
leaves only Montreal-based Bombardier in the running.

   Continental Airlines resolved a nine-year legal dispute by agreeing to pay $
17.9 million to about 900 current and former pilots. The settlement involved
bankruptcy claims dating back to Continental's first Chapter 11 filing and
unfair labor claims involving seniority, furloughs and rehiring. Separately,
Continental said it won't sell any of its remaining service hubs while it
continues to seek additional capital, a spokesman said.

   Northwest Airlines accused Midway Airlines of filing false traffic and yield
figures with the Department of Transportation. Northwest, which is involved in a
court fight with Midway over Northwest's canceled buyout agreement, said that
Midway gave it access to its figures under a confidentiality agreement and that
"Midway has kept two sets of books on traffic and yield numbers."

   Upjohn said it will defend doctors who properly prescribe the sleeping drug
Halcion if they are sued by a patient. The announcement was the company's latest
attempt to counter negative publicity over Halcion, which is banned for sale in
Britain, Norway and Finland because of concerns about potentially dangerous side
effects.

   Mercedes-Benz and an Iranian agency plan to build an auto plant in Iran that
will be the largest in the Middle East, producing 25,000 cars a year.

   U.S. automakers and 31 suppliers have formed a council to lobby legislators
on issues important to the domestic auto industry. Ford Chairman Harold Poling
will chair the Automotive Supplier Governmental Action Council for the next two
years with Dana Corp. Chairman Southwood Morcott.

   Coors and Jinro Ltd. of Korea agreed to construct a brewery in South Korea.
The joint venture is part of Coors's effort to place its products in at least 20
foreign markets by 1995.

   INTERNATIONAL

   The European Community's average annual inflation rate slowed to 4.4 percent
in October, the lowest point in nearly three years.

   REGULATION

   The SEC and the CFTC approved new rules to allow some market professionals to
hold one margin account for combined positions in futures and options. The
changes, called cross-margining, are designed to release capital that market
professionals have on deposit for margin accounts and to help improve traders'
liquidity in times of market stress.

   FTC staffers oppose a proposed requirement that cable television systems must
carry signals from all local TV broadcast stations. The "must-carry" rule was
dropped by the FCC in the 1980s after a series of court decisions against it.

   COURTS

   Michael Milken's cooperation with government prosecutors will remain
confidential, U.S. District Judge Kimba Wood ruled. The press petitioned Wood to
release records of Milken's cooperation, saying he did not significantly help
the investigation and that his information was dated. Wood said only a broad
outline of Milken's cooperation can be released.

   Revlon employees sued the company and its top officials, including Chairman
Ronald O. Perelman, seeking damages for money that Revlon's pension fund lost by
investing in Executive Life Insurance annuities.

   EARNINGS

   Toshiba's pretax profits tumbled 59 percent in the six months ended Sept. 30.


                             1550 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   November 26, 1991, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: Battered biotechs show signs of life

BYLINE: Rhonda Richards; Beth Belton

BODY:

    Biotech stocks battered in the 120-point Dow Jones industrial average plunge
11 days ago are down but not out.

   Some stocks staged a mild comeback last week as investors picked out
bargains. Good news kicked some stocks higher Monday.

   News about a Schering-Plough drug ignited the group Monday. Analysts said
they expect a Food and Drug Administration panel to approve the pharmaceutical
giant's Intron-A as a treatment for hepatitis B. The drug, derived from alpha
interferon, already is used as a treatment for hepatitis C and AIDS-related
Kaposi's sarcoma. Although Schering-Plough stock fell 7/8 to $ 60, Biogen rose 1
1/4 to $ 38 1/4. Biogen was the first to clone the alpha interferon molecules
and will receive royalties on all Intron-A sales.

   Genetic Therapy added 7/8 to $ 13 7/8 after announcing Sandoz Pharmaceuticals
bought 6% of the company for $ 10 million. Liposome Technology added 1 3/8 to $
11 after Kidder, Peabody analyst Robert Kupor repeated his buy rating.  Word
that the FDA cleared a new AIDS-testing technology lifted Immune Response, which
is developing an AIDS treatment. Immune's stock rose 2 to $ 31.

   Despite Monday's gains, those companies' shares are still well below 52- week
highs. The downward trend continued at some larger biotech companies: Genzyme
slid 1 1/2 to $ 47 1/2, Chiron fell 1/2 to $ 60 3/4, and Amgen dropped 1/2 to $
54 3/4. ''Many stocks in the biotech group are overvalued, so investors can
expect a further correction in the first quarter,'' says Jim McCamant, editor of
Medical Technology Stock Letter.

 Fading recovery: Brokerage stocks stumbled amid signs that the industry's
recovery is fading. The anemic economy and recent weakness in the stock market
could take a toll on brokerage earnings, says Wertheim Schroder analyst James
Hanbury. He downgraded several big brokerages from buy to hold: Merrill Lynch,
which fell 2 3/8 to $ 48 3/4; Morgan Stanley, which lost 2 to $ 53; and Bear
Stearns, which
dropped   3/4 to $ 14. He downgraded PaineWebber, off 1 3/8 to $ 26 5/8,

from attractive to neutral. St. Louis-based A.G. Edwards lost 2 3/8 to $ 27 3/4.
''The price (on these stocks) is just too high,'' says Hanbury. ''Business is
good, but it may not be as good in 1992.''


                             1551 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 23, 1991 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:2,3,5,6; B-5:4; B-12:1

LENGTH: 1263 words

HEADLINE: Panel puts off approval of therapy for cancer

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM and DORI MEINERT, Staff Writer, Copley News Service

BODY:

   A federal review panel yesterday deferred approving a request by San Diego
scientists to use an experimental gene therapy to treat cancer patients until
they complete more studies in laboratory animals. The National Institutes of
Health panel wanted convincing evidence the therapy could be useful, and it
sought clarification about whom the scientists from the San Diego Regional
Cancer Center and UCSD would actually treat.

   The vote was unanimous, 13-0. The San Diego scientists hope to insert into
cancer patients human genes that would produce natural substances the doctors
believe could help fight a variety of cancers.

   A potentially revolutionary approach to medicine, gene therapy now is used
only by two doctors at the NIH in fewer than 20 patients. The subcommittee felt
"it was premature for their proposed clinical experiments," said Nelson Wivel,
executive secretary to the Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee, which voted in
Bethesda, Md., yesterday. Some panel members judged the San Diegans so
ill-prepared to undertake the treatments that they suggested deferring the
proposal without even allowing the scientists to speak, although the panel did
in fact hear their presentation. The committee wants evidence "there's a
reasonable chance of this working," Wivel said.

   Having the scientists repeat their experiment with a larger sample of
laboratory mice could help the committee decide, Wivel added. The San Diego team
plans to do the additional work and seek the subcommittee's approval at its
March meeting, said Ivor Royston, scientific director of the San Diego Regional
Cancer Center. "We see no reason why we can't get the answers they want by March
and get approval," Royston said in a telephone interview after the meeting. The
proposal was submitted by Royston and Habib Fakhrai, of the San Diego Regional
Cancer Center, UCSD scientist Theodore Friedmann and Robert E. Sobol, who has
appointments at both institutions.

   The treatments would be delivered at the UCSD Medical Center in Hillcrest or
the UCSD La Jolla campus. The scientists believe the approach they are
considering might be most effective in treating melanoma, which is a virulent
skin cancer, kidney tumors and cancers of the lymph system and colon. The lack
of information in the San Diego proposal drew some testy responses from some
members of the subcommittee, which is comprised of scientists, doctors,
ethicists and members of the public. The proposal "didn't seem well-developed,"
said Alexander Capron, of the University of Southern California law school.

   He described some of the team's answers to questions about the proposal as
"sketchy and somewhat seat-of-the-pants." "The preclinical efficacy data is far
from being sufficient," said Dusty Miller, of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center in Seattle. "I think this is a misuse of this committee,"
Charles Epstein, a physician from UC San Francisco, chided.

   "I don't think the function of this committee is to tell you how to write
your protocol." Nonetheless, members praised the scientists' concept and
encouraged them to resubmit their plan. Who would be eligible for the treatments
was a point of debate yesterday, with committee members wanting to narrow the
focus of the treatments. Royston said the meeting was "very educational" for the
San Diegans. The treatment he and his colleagues are considering might be as
direct as an injection of genetically altered cells in the arm or thigh.

   Under the skin, the cells would act like a biological factory, churning out a
missing protein, in accordance with the genetic instructions. The goal is to
stimulate the body's natural immune response to tumor cells, a response that is
not being triggered in the patients as robustly as it might be. Following
yesterday's delay, the earliest that the proposal might complete the elaborate
federal approval process is next June. The San Diegans said they expected
critical questions from the review panel, but they had hoped for a provisional
approval that would advance the proposal to next level of NIH review, while they
completed the additional tests. "I think the feeling of the subcommittee was
that there was just insufficient data to allow it to proceed forward," Wivel
said. Gene therapy, sometimes called the medicine of the future, could be a very
potent means of treatment because it uses the natural products of the gene to
attack disease at a more fundamental level than drugs, which often treat
symptoms.

   It is expected to have fewer side effects, too. But the therapy remains under
close federal scrutiny in part because of the uncertain consequences of
inserting genes into people, even though initial studies suggest it is safe.

   At the NIH it has been used only within the last year to treat a rare
malfunction of the immune system and for melanoma. The subcommittee yesterday
approved another gene therapy proposal, from University of Michigan scientist
Gary Nabel, to treat melanoma.

   That proposal also had been deferred at a previous meeting by the
subcommittee until Nabel provided additional information. Following subcommittee
approval, gene therapy applications must be approved by the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee and by the NIH director.

   The Food and Drug Adminstration also must approve the proposals before they
can begin. If approved by the subcommittee at its March 30-31 meeting, the San
Diego proposal could go to the full committee June 1. The San Diego team
proposes to inject patients with cells that have been engineered to contain the
gene that produces a substance that they believe is necessary to trigger the
immune response.

   The injection would have the volume of a typical vaccine and contain a few
million cells. Royston said the procedures the UCSD team proposes have been
shown effective in tests in mice.

   Their tumors were reduced by the treatment, and it appeared to have the
effect of a vaccine.

   When tumor cells were added later, no tumors grew in four of the mice, while
a small tumor grew in one mouse. It is these tests that the committee wants
repeated, in more mice. The transplanted gene in the San Diegans' approach is
one that produces interlukin 2, a protein that is necessary for attracting the
immune system's cytotoxic T cells to tumors to destroy them.

   T helper cells in the body produce the interlukin 2, which in the presence of
tumor cells attracts the cytotoxic T cells to destroy the tumor.

   But for some reason, the T helper cells do not always produce large amounts
of the interlukin 2 in response to a tumor. The genetically altered cells act as
a surrogate for the natural T helper cells.

   The genetically boosted cells then will be mixed with some of the patient's
own tumor cells that have been irradiated so that they are no longer harmful.
The scientists hope the interlukin 2 and now harmless cancer cells will act
together to stimulate an immune response of cytotoxic T cells throughout the
body to attack the patient's cancer. Royston said yesterday that he remains
hopeful that the committee might let him use the treatment in a variety of
cancers and even at earlier stages of cancer, when the treatment might more
easily stimulate an immune response. Gene therapy to date has been discussed at
the NIH as an experimental therapy for patients who have few treatment options
left. The genetic engineering needed to prepare the cells for transplant likely
will be done in at the San Diego Regional Cancer Center. Eventually, gene
therapy might be used against a variety of diseases, including cystic fibrosis,
Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and diabetes.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1552 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 23, 1991 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 548 words

HEADLINE: Panel delays gene therapy against cancer

BYLINE: Bruce V. Bigelow, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   A federal health panel wants more information before it will allow a team of
San Diego scientists to use an experimental genetic engineering technique to
treat cancer. If authorized, the proposal would be the first clinical trial in
California to use a revolutionary medical technique known as human gene therapy.
The clinical trial proposed by doctors at the San Diego Regional Cancer Center
and the University of California at San Diego was reviewed yesterday in
Washington D.C. by the Human Gene Therapy Committee of the National Institutes
of Health. But the NIH committee asked the scientists to conduct additional
animal studies, a request that will delay the application for clinical trials by
at least several months. "We feel confident that we can provide the requested
data in time to obtain an approval at the next committee meeting in March," said
Ivor Royston of the regional cancer center. The principal researchers include
Royston and Habib Fakhrai of the regional cancer center and Theodore Friedmann
and Robert E. Sobol of UCSD. The clinical trial still must be approved by
another NIH panel and by the Federal Food and Drug Administration.

   The scientists had hoped they could obtain all necessary authorizations by
February and that the experiments could begin as early as next summer. The San
Diego researchers plan to treat advanced melanoma, a fatal skin cancer, and
kidney tumors that are resistant to conventional treatments. The protocol calls
for infusing the patient with tissue cells that have been genetically altered to
produce interleukin-2, a key protein that triggers the body's tumor-fighting
arsenal. "We're all very hopeful that this will provide a new way of attacking
cancer that we haven't had available before now," said John Stevens, a vice
president for research at the American Cancer Society in Atlanta. The first
experiments with human gene therapy began at the National Institutes of Health
in May 1989. The first attempt to treat a patient with a hereditary disease by
using the recombinant DNA technique began at the NIH in September 1990. Melanoma
will strike an estimated 32,000 people in 1991, and is expected to kill about
6,500, according to the American Cancer Society. If detected very early,
melanoma can be cured by surgically removing the cancerous lesion.

   Advanced melanoma has spread too far, however, and does not respond to any
known treatment.

   Most patients in this stage usually die within four months. Experiments using
gene therapy techniques in a slightly different approach to treat melanoma
patients began last January under the supervision of Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg,
chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute. Scientists at the University
of Michigan also have a request to conduct human gene therapy experiments
pending with the NIH. Instead of altering cells to produce interleukin-2,
Rosenberg and his colleagues added a gene to certain cancer-fighting cells,
called tumor infiltrating leukocytes. In extremely preliminary results published
Sept. 15 in the Journal of Cancer Research, Rosenberg reported that 38 percent
of the patients he treated were responding to treatment. Much of the financial
support for the clinical trial was provided by a $358,000 grant from the
Lawrence Family Foundation of San Diego.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1553 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           November 19, 1991, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; SECTION D; PAGE 04

LENGTH: 1353 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy: the new frontier; Incredible potential' for treating
diseases now without a cure

BYLINE: By Diane Loupe STAFF WRITERscience; medicine; research; health

BODY:

   In sterile laboratories across the United States, Europe and Japan, and in a
growing number of human guinea pigs, genetic researchers are brewing a medical
revolution.

   The experiments - moving faster than many anticipated a year ago when they
were first attempted - aim to treat currently incurable medical disorders by
taking altered genes, the fundamental blueprint of all life, and inserting them
into human bodies.

   So far, the highly experimental therapy has been used in a handful of
patients in two separate experiments - one to combat a fatal form of skin cancer
and another to treat an extremely rare immune system disorder. None of the
patients undergoing the therapy has had any major complications, and researchers
described the initial success as encouraging.

   But soon, researchers are expected to use genetic therapy on more widespread
medical problems, including AIDS.

   Scientists at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor recently won permission
to begin experiments from two important government panels that monitor attempts
to manipulate human genes.

   By early next year, Dr. James Wilson, associate professor of internal
medicine at the University of Michigan, and his colleagues hope to insert new
genes into the liver cells of patients afflicted with familial
hypercholesterolemia, a disease perhaps best-known for killing Stormie Jones, a
Texas girl who died last year at the age of 13 after a heart-liver transplant
failed.

   Scientists hope the experimental treatment may become a permanent therapy for
the cholesterol disease, which now can be treated only with drugs and
blood-cleansing techniques, or, in rare cases, with organ transplants.

   Only a few hundred people in the United States suffer from a form of the
cholesterol disorder severe enough to qualify them for the initial gene therapy
trials. But researchers said the genetic approach could prove valuable for the
treatment of less extreme cholesterol diseases, as well as other ailments that
afflict the liver.

   Pioneers in gene therapy research are excited about the success so far and
where it is heading.

   "It's really sort of where our imagination leads us," says Dr. R. Michael
Blaese, one of the lead researchers at the National Cancer Institute, where gene
therapy has been attempted on two young girls suffering from a rare immune
disorder. "There's such incredible potential."

   Other attempts at using gene therapy against cancer, cardiovascular disease
and blood disorders such as sickle cell anemia are further in the future.

   But laboratory experiments in animals have also been encouraging.

   Over the last few weeks scientists have reported:

   Successfully treating kidney cancer in a mouse by inserting altered tumor
cells to boost the mouse's own immune system. The altered cells caused a kidney
tumor on the mouse to disappear and they wiped out other cancerous cells
circulating in its body.

   Experiments in dogs and rabbits have shown that genetically altered cells
inhibit the unchecked growth of smooth-muscle cells in the interior walls of
coronary arteries. The therapy could go a long way toward ensuring that heart
arteries reopened through angioplasty would remain open.

   The possible targets of gene therapy will broaden when the $ 3 billion Human
Genome Project provides a detailed map of disease-causing genes in the human
body. So far, approximately 4,000 disorders are directly caused by genetic
defects. With the exception of cystic fibrosis, which affects one in 2,500 white
newborns, most are very rare.

   The field has not been without controversy. Ethicists have debated the
morality of genetic manipulation of human embryos, conjuring up images of
genetically crafting a "master race." Federal regulators won't approve any
proposal to tamper with the genes of egg or sperm cells. But those concerns have
outpaced scientific reality. Dr. Blaese notes that it's extremely difficult to
insert a gene into egg or sperm cells.

   "Those are sort of science fiction discussions," Dr. Blaese says. "No
responsible scientist is recommending cloning people. We wouldn't know how to do
it."

   Before experiments are approved, researchers face several layers of
scientific and ethical review both inside and outside of government.

   Dr. Blaese says the idea for gene therapy was born soon after Linus Pauling
discovered the gene responsible for producing a sickle-shaped hemoglobin, the
cause of sickle cell anemia. Further research demonstrated that hemoglobin is a
particularly complex molecule.

   But blood and immune system disorders remain particularly attractive to
researchers because of their connection to bone marrow.

   The mother of all blood cells is stem cells, which make up less than 1
percent of the cells in bone marrow. White blood cells defend the body against
disease and toxic substances. Researchers hope to be able to insert genes into
stem cells to correct blood and immune system disorders, ranging from
beta-thalassemia to AIDS. So far, scientists have found stem cells
extraordinarily difficult to work with or grow outside the body.

   The most likely scenario for AIDS therapies will involve inserting genes into
special kinds of white blood cells, called T cells. The AIDS virus insinuates
itself into the genetic makeup of T cells, destroying them or preventing them
from orchestrating attacks on disease organisms. But the virus's dismantling of
the immune system may take years.

   Dr. Blaese's group hopes to capture some of these T cells from people who are
infected with HIV but whose immune systems are still healthy. He hopes to craft
a virus that will carry a genetic shield to those T cells, protecting them from
infection by the AIDS virus or to prevent HIV from reproducing.

   "In a few years, the scientific community might look back on the original"
experiments and find them "to have been so naively simple that they might wonder
how it could have caused so much fuss," said Dr. W. French Anderson, one of the
National Institutes of Health's gene therapy pioneers. "1991 was an eventful
year; 1992 promises to be even better."; Experiments target variety of ailments

   Here's a brief look at the disorders that scientists are now treating
experimentally with genetic therapy, and some that may soon be tested:;
Treatments under way

   Severe combined immune deficiency (SCID). Over the past year, National Cancer
Institute researchers have been transfusing genetically altered white blood
cells into two girls with a form of this rare immune system disorder. The
therapy is causing the girls, for the first time, to make the enzyme adenosine
deaminase, ADA, which had been missing from their immune system. They are both
healthy and progressing well.

   Melanoma. NCI researchers armed naturally cancer-fighting white blood cells
with a gene to produce a potent anti-tumor toxin. Two patients with advanced
melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer, have received the genetically altered
cells since the first of the year. They have developed no ill effects from the
experiment, and are said to be progressing well.; Coming soon

   Familial hypercholesterolemia. Michigan researchers plan to insert altered
genes into three patients with this disease, which causes often- lethal
cholesterol levels. The therapy is designed to lower the level of low-density
lipoproteins, the so-called "bad" cholesterol, in the bloodstream.

   AIDS. NCI researchers will begin preliminary work with AIDS patients that
could result, as early as next spring, in the first use of gene therapy in AIDS
patients. The experiment aims to arm a patient's white blood cells with genes
that will make them resist infection by HIV, the AIDS virus, or prevent HIV from
infecting other cells.

   Cancer. The next step in therapy for malignant melanoma would be to immunize
cancer patients using cancer cells taken from their own tumors and inserting a
gene for tumor necrosis factor, which kills tumor cells, or a gene for
interleukin-2, a hormone-like protein that can orchestrate attacks on cancer
cells.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992


                             1554 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           November 19, 1991, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; SECTION D; PAGE 04

LENGTH: 408 words

HEADLINE: Turning viruses into the good guys'

BYLINE: By Diane Loupe STAFF WRITERhealth; science; research; medicine

BODY:

   Viruses can make you sneeze and give you herpes, warts, measles, polio and
AIDS. Soon, viruses may also help lower cholesterol, cure cancer and treat AIDS.

   In experiments that promise to revolutionize medicine, researchers are using
viruses as genetic dump trucks to deliver potentially lifesaving genes to cells.
In ongoing gene therapy experiments, doctors at the National Cancer Institute
use viruses to put enzyme-producing genes into the blood cells of two girls
suffering from a rare immune disorder called adenosine deaminase (ADA)
deficiency and to deliver cancer-fighting genes to adults with a deadly skin
cancer.

   On the horizon are gene therapies for inherited forms of high cholesterol and
AIDS.

   "Nature has been figuring out infectious genes for the last 500 million years
and they call those infectious genes viruses," says Dr. R. Michael Blaese, a
National Cancer Institute researcher who directs the ADA deficiency project.
"And what we're going to try to do is modify these viruses so we can use them to
deliver our own genetic information."

   To insert genes to cure diseased cells, scientists must be able to remove the
cells, work with them, grow them in the lab and then put them back into the
body, Dr. Blaese said. So far, gene therapists have proposed inserting genes
into human blood, skin and liver cells.

   Viruses entwine their own genetic code into the chromosomes of host cells.
Researchers genetically gut such viruses, removing the virus's own genetic
information and replacing it with a therapeutic gene. The altered virus can then
deliver and deposit the desired gene into the host cell.

   Researchers tend to use retroviruses, a viral class that includes the AIDS
virus, as genetic vectors because they can carry larger genetic loads than other
varieties of viruses and can infect many kinds of cells in both humans and
animals. Dr. Blaese and others use a mouse leukemia virus, replacing the virus's
own gene with a human gene.

   However, these viral dump trucks are inefficient, dropping genes at random in
the host chromosome. That could prove troublesome if, for example, they land
near genes that switch on cancer growth or stop production of vital proteins.

   It may be possible, Dr. Blaese speculates, to disarm now-dangerous viruses,
such as those that cause rabies and hepatitis, and load them with therapeutic
genes for delivery to the central nervous system or liver.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992


                             1555 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           November 19, 1991, Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; SECTION D; PAGE 01

LENGTH: 209 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy successes offering hope for AIDS

BODY:

   Just over a year ago, researchers at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md., began injecting altered human genes into the bloodstream of a
young girl suffering from a rare immune disorder that made her a virtual
prisoner in her home.

   The girl, whose identity has not been disclosed, could not leave her home or
family for fear of contracting a common infection that could turn lethal because
of a genetic disorder. Within weeks of receiving the gene therapy, her body
began to make an essential enzyme, adenosine deaminase, that had been missing
from her immune system. She was able to leave the house - even go ice skating -
and has remained healthy.

   The experiments are still in their infancy - they have only been tried in a
handful of patients suffering from the immune disorder or a lethal form of skin
cancer - but scientists at the NIH and elsewhere are moving ahead with plans to
try gene therapy on other incurable disorders, including a rare liver condition
that causes cholesterol to build up to lethal levels. If research continues at
the current pace, scientists may even attempt the controversial therapy on AIDS
patients within a few years.

   SCIENCE/MEDICINE takes a closer look at these developments.D4

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992


                             1556 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                November 18, 1991, Monday, Orange County Edition

NAME: EDMUND M OLIVIER

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 4; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

HEADLINE: Q & A:  EDMUND M. OLIVIER, VENTURE CAPITALIST, FAIRFIELD VENTURE
PARTNERS, COSTA MESA

BYLINE: By Sonni Efron, Times staff writer

BODY:

   Within the next five years there will probably be effective new drugs to
treat hepatitis and the flu -- but not the common cold. So predicts Edmund M.
Olivier, a principal in Fairfield Venture Capital of Costa Mesa. Olivier has
raised and invested $60 million since 1985, much of it in fledgling
biotechnology firms. His newest fund, Oxford Bioscience Partners, plans to
invest another $50 million next year. Olivier spoke with Times staff writer
Sonni Efron about the hot areas in biotechnology -- and how investors can avoid
being burned.

   Which biotech companies that you've financed have done well?

   One diagnostic company, Gen-Probe of San Diego, which makes DNA probes. A DNA
probe is a diagnostic (test) that recognizes the specific DNA of a diseased
virus. You can make it as specific as you want, so in theory you could go in and
say, "You have flu A instead of flu B." They did well, and they were sold to a
Japanese company, Chugai.

   Then we went into therapeutics, where our greatest success was Gensia
Pharmaceuticals Inc. It's a cardiovascular drug company in San Diego, formed in
1986, now with a market valuation of well over $500 million. We put in just
under $3 million.

   Another company that would have been formed about the same time was Athena
Neurosciences Inc., a neurology company located in South San Francisco that's
going public now. It's going after diagnostics and therapeutics for Alzheimer's
disease. Athena is now worth about $100 million.

   Which company has the most exciting science?

   GenPharm International Inc. of Mountain View, which was founded in 1987. They
may go public next year. This is a company that's into transgenic animals. You
take an animal, and you get the embryo from it. Then you get a piece of human
DNA that has the characteristics you want, and you insert that DNA into the
(embryo) cell. In this case we're using cows and mice. Then the calf or the
mouse is born with certain human characteristics you want.

   Now, this sounds kind a little scary or space-aged. But as an example, in the
diagnostic area, we can create mice that will get human diseases such as AIDS or
hepatitis or cancer or Alzheimer's. Right now we don't have any good animal
models for these diseases.

   What this will mean is that for some of the new therapeutic drugs, we can
test them rapidly on animals and get a lot more information than having to test
them -- gingerly -- on humans. And it should accelerate the time it takes to
develop a new drug and significantly reduce the cost.

   The second thing we're doing with GenPharm, and this is being done in Europe,
is infant formula. Very often, in infant formula, you'll see the words iron
added, because that's good for the child. Cow's milk doesn't contain iron the
way mother's milk does, so they add iron. Unfortunately, that doesn't really do
the job (because the body can't absorb it well).

   The ingredient that's in mother's milk is called human lactoferin. This fixes
iron. So we take the gene that codes for lactoferin production in human breast
milk, and we introduce that gene into the embryo of the cow. And the cow then
gives milk that is much more nutritious for children (than present formula). We
have agreements with major infant formula companies, both in Europe and in the
United States, for using this item as an additive.

   Which of the companies that you backed performed poorly?

   I've invested in a dozen companies. We had two that really bombed. Both of
them made diagnostic tests. Cytotech of San Diego, which made diagnostics for
rheumatoid arthritis, and the second one was Symex, in Tulsa, Okla., which had a
diagnostic test for flu. Both of them went into clinical trials, and it just
didn't work.

   You're about to invest another $50 million; where do you want to put it?

   The whole field of neurology. Also gene therapy . . . transgenic animals and
non-invasive diagnostics, especially advances in imaging. . . .

   Also "rational drug design," which means understanding drug structure, and
disease structure, on a molecular level.

   Very often now when you get a disease, you throw a lot of drugs against it to
see what makes people feel better. But if we really know what the structure of
the AIDS virus looks like, in three dimensions, then we have a head start in
designing a drug or an antibody that will effectively attack it.

   Many investors in biotech have been burned. How can they protect themselves
against companies that "hype" their science or their products?

   If a company has been taken public by one of the top six underwriters, that's
good. I'd look at the board of directors of the company, and who the venture
supporters were. . . . We and other major venture funds simply won't let our
companies overhype themselves or go public too early. Most biotech companies, in
order to have the capital necessary to develop drugs, do a strategic partnership
with major drug companies. So if the company has an alliance with corporations
like Sandoz or Merck or Pfizer or Marion Merrell Dow or Eli Lilly, that's a good
sign. This doesn't guarantee it's going to work, but it goes a long way to
saying it's not all smoke and mirrors.

   Should the public worry about this genetic meddling? And are there
technologies in bio-agriculture that you wouldn't invest in, because you think
public opposition would be too strong?

   I think if we were trying to produce new strains of animals, then this would
be publicly opposed, with some justification. But what we're trying to do with
this is to produce healthier strains. These cows that produce lactoferin also
happen to be much more disease-resistant than regular cows. It turns out that
the lactoferin is good for the cows, as well as the people.

   We're also using large animals -- cows, pigs and sheep -- to produce proteins
that are useful to people. There's a transgenic animal firm on the East Coast
producing human hemoglobin from pig's blood. This would be a source of blood
products less susceptible to being infected by AIDS or hepatitis.

   On which drugs will be moneymakers. . .

   "A cure for rheumatoid arthritis would be more profitable than a cure for
AIDS."

   On what's hot in the '90s. . .

   "Anything to do with geriatrics. Alzheimer's, the aging of organs, including
the skin, incontinence, prostatitis, osteoporosis."

   On antiviral drugs. . .

   "Within five years we will have effective drug treatment for flu, but we will
not have it for the common cold. Flu is two or three highly specific viruses.
The common cold is a grab bag of 30 different ones."

   On regulatory delays. . .

   "I don't think the FDA needs to be completely overhauled. But the patent
office is absolutely overwhelmed."

   On investing in biotech. . .

   "The main thing is for the public not to get suckered on overhyped stock."

GRAPHIC: Photo, Edmund M. Olivier; Photo, Edmund M. Olivier; Photo, Edmund M.
Olivier AURELIO JOSE BARRERA / Los Angeles Times


                             1557 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 15, 1991 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1075 words

HEADLINE: Approval sought for human gene therapy study at UCSD

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   A team of San Diego scientists is seeking permission from federal health
officials to begin human gene therapy, a potentially revolutionary medical
technique, at UCSD to treat cancers. Only two medical teams in the country are
experimenting with human gene therapy now.

   If approved, UCSD could become the first institution in California to try the
treatment, which involves transplanting into people genes that produce crucial,
natural substances they need to fight disease. The proposal which is now before
the National Institutes of Health calls for using a gene therapy that might be
effective in treating melanoma, a virulent skin cancer that often is fatal, and
kidney tumors, which are resistant to conventional treatments, scientists said.

   The proposal has been submitted by UCSD scientists Theodore Friedmann and
Robert E. Sobol, and two scientists from the non-profit San Diego Regional
Cancer Center, Ivor Royston and Habib Fakhrai. "Most people are now convinced
this kind of approach will have a very important place in medical therapy, and a
growing place," said Friedmann, an early proponent of gene therapy almost 20
years ago. Sometimes called the medicine of the future, gene therapy is
considered powerful because it is a means of correcting diseases at a more
fundamental level than drugs, which often treat symptoms of disease.

   It might have fewer harmful side effects that accompany many conventional
cancer treatments. The treatment the San Diego scientists are considering might
be as direct as an injection of genetically altered cells in the arm or thigh,
in this case to stimulate the body's natural immune response to the tumor. The
UCSD proposal will be reviewed for safety and efficacy by two committees of the
NIH, and it must meet the requirements of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
too.

   If approved, the treatments might begin within the next several months,
officials said, at either the UCSD Medical Center in Hillcrest or the La Jolla
campus. The proposal has its first review at the NIH next Friday, said Nelson
Wivel, director of the NIH's office of recombinant DNA activities, which
oversees the NIH review process.

   It must be approved by the recombinant DNA advisory committee, its human gene
therapy subcommittee, and the NIH director. The goal of the UCSD experiment is
to stimulate the body's natural immune response to tumor cells that is not being
triggered in patients as it should be, Friedmann said. Researchers propose to
inject patients with cells that would have been engineered to contain the gene
that produces the substance that they believe is missing, yet necessary, in
triggering the immune response.

   The injection would be given in the volume of a typical vaccine and contain a
few million cells. Under the skin, the cells would act like a biological
factory, churning out the missing protein, in accordance with the genetic
instructions.

   In the UCSD plan, some of the patient's tumor cells that had been rendered
harmless would be included in the injection to help trigger the immune response.
Other scientists have demonstrated previously the ability to transfer genes
safely into people, and Royston said he has shown that the procedures the UCSD
team plans to use have been effective against tumors in mice. To date, gene
therapy has been used only at the National Insitutes of Health, the federally
operated research labs and hospitals.

   W. French Anderson has used gene therapy to treat a malfunction of the immune
system that puts people at acute risk for infection.

   Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute is using a gene therapy to
treat melanoma, Wivel said. The NIH has approved gene therapy for use by a
University of Michigan scientist to treat a condition involving an excess of
cholesterol in children that leads to childhood heart attacks, but that
procedure is pending before the FDA. At the Nov. 22 meeting where the UCSD
experiment is considered, the NIH will consider another gene therapy treatment
for melanoma, this one by another University of Michigan scientist, Wivel said.
Eventually, gene therapy likely could be used against a variety of diseases,
including cystic fibrosis, Parkinson's disease, diabetes and others, Wivel said,
adding, "You're only limited by your imagination." UCSD scientists are
considering the possibility of gene therapy to treat Alzheimer's disease, based
on research at the university about how to nourish brain cells that are
susceptible to loss in the disease, Friedmann said.

   That protocol has not yet been submitted to NIH. Royston said the gene
therapy proposal the San Diegans are submitting might be useful against an
unspecified range of cancers, but Wivel said the NIH is likely to approve gene
therapy now only for specific applications. The genetic engineering needed to
prepare the cells for transplant likely will be done in at the San Diego
Regional Cancer Center, said Royston, who left a research position at UCSD's
cancer center last November to found the new center.

   The therapeutic gene would be placed inside a virus that has been rendered
harmless for causing disease.

   The virus would infect skin cells that will be taken from the patient. The
transplanted gene in this case is one that produces interlukin 2, a protein that
is necessary for attracting the immune system's cytotoxic T cells to tumors to
destroy them.

   Usually, helper T cells in the body produce the interlukin 2, which in the
presence of tumor cells attracts the cytotoxic T cells to destroy the tumor, but
it is that process that scientists believe has broken down in some cancers.

   The genetically altered cells act as "a surrogate" for the natural helper T
cells, Friedmann said. The genetically boosted cells then will be mixed with
some of the patient's own tumor cells that have been irradiated so that they are
no longer harmful. The scientists hope the interlukin 2 will in the presence of
the now harmless cancer cells act together to stimulate an immune response of
cytotoxic T cells throughout the body to attack the patient's cancer. "It's an
attempt to induce an immunity to the cancer," Friedmann said. Some people might
receive treatments as outpatients, he said.

   The first trials might include a dozen patients. Friedmann was co-author in
1972 of a scientific journal article that broached the idea of gene therapy.

   "Originally the concept came from UCSD," Friedmann said.

   "Now we're there.

   This is our first bash at a gene therapy protocol."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1558 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   November 14, 1991, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 268 words

HEADLINE: Smokers may not feel heart's disease signals

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: ANAHEIM, Calif.

BODY:

    Smoking appears to deliver a double whammy to the heart, putting people at
high risk for sudden heart attacks, a study suggests.

   By comparing heart performance of smokers and non-smokers on a treadmill,
researchers found smokers:

   - Had about three times more episodes of oxygen loss to the heart, called
ischemia.

   - Were twice as likely not to feel chest pain even though their hearts were
becoming starved of oxygen.

   ''That means smokers can be slowly losing heart muscle and not be aware of it
until they have a heart attack and irreversible damage,'' says Dr. Prakash
Deedwania, University of California San Francisco School of Medicine and the
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Fresno, Calif.

   The finding was reported Wednesday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association.

   Normally when ischemia occurs, a person feels chest pain and seeks treatment.
But Deedwania says smoking appears to raise the pain threshold, making smokers
less likely to feel early signs of heart disease.

   In the study, 66% of smokers had this ''silent'' ischemia, compared to 39% of
non-smokers. The study also showed:

   - The first cigarette of the morning does the most damage to smokers' hearts.
-Morning is also when people are at highest risk for a heart attack.

   - Smokers have more episodes of ischemia due to mental stress than do non-
smokers.

   Other reports at the meeting:

   - Scientists are taking the first steps to use gene therapy to prevent
arteries from reblocking after angioplasty.

   - A drug, 7E3, kept blocked arteries open after heart attacks in 59 of 60
patients, preventing more attacks.


                             1559 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 13, 1991, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2654 words

HEADLINE: LONG, HARD FIGHT STILL SEEN BEFORE CANCER IS CONQUERED;
HEALTH: SURVIVAL RATES ARE UP ONLY 4.1% SINCE THE MID-1970S. AND THE INCIDENCE
OF THE DISEASE IS ON THE RISE.

SERIES: CANCER. The New Battlefront. Part 4: Can we afford the search for a
cure?

BYLINE: By SHARI ROAN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   Colleen Casey fingers a patchwork quilt stitched by her daughter Susan before
the young mother of three died last spring.

   Casey, 65, a retired La Mirada nurse, is not naive to the cruelty of illness.
Her mother died of breast cancer. In 1966, at age 40, Casey underwent a
bilateral mastectomy for breast cancer. She had raised her daughter, Susan
Bassett Feldman, to be aware of her increased risk of breast cancer; her family
history put Susan's chances of developing the disease at 1 in 2, far above
average.

   Susan regularly examined her breasts for lumps and had frequent mammograms.
At one point, she asked her doctor if she could undergo a prophylactic
mastectomy -- a procedure where the breast tissue is removed and replaced with
implants to lessen cancer risk. She was discouraged from taking that radical
step.

   When she found a lump in her breast at age 40, Susan sought the best medicine
had to offer -- including undergoing harsh, experimental treatments when the
cancer spread to her brain and spinal fluid. But the disease won out.

   Susan spent her last months making each of her three children and her mother
patchwork quilts and pillows. Colleen Casey stayed by her side, administering
massive doses of morphine to ease Susan's pain. Susan died March 3 at age 42.

   Casey is dry-eyed as she says: "I thought I was helping my daughter do all
the things that were necessary. And she followed all the rules. What is
frustrating is that the results from treatment now are not a heck of a lot
better than they were when I had cancer. I am watching her two daughters, ages
22 and 14. I'm hoping the outlook will be better for them, but I'm not sure it
will. Twenty-five years after my cancer, why should I still be worried about my
granddaughters?"

   Casey folds the quilt and puts it in a closet.

   "It is still a long, hard road before we conquer this dreadful disease."

   Few cancer experts would argue with that.

   While optimism for the future is technically grounded in auspicious work in
genetics, biotechnology, prevention, early detection and new drugs, almost half
of all people who get cancer die from the disease within five years -- about
514,000 deaths a year in the United States.

   Survival rates have only increased 4.1% since the mid-1970s, making the
National Cancer Institute's 1985 goal of reducing cancer mortality by 50% by the
year 2000 painfully remote.

   Moreover, the incidence of cancer is increasing for reasons that are poorly
understood. Breast cancer has increased about 3% a year since 1980; melanoma, 4%
a year; prostate cancer, 2.8% a year. Among children under 14, brain tumors and
leukemia incidence have soared over the last two decades.

   At current rates, one of every three Americans can expect to develop cancer
at some time in their lives. As life expectancy increases, cancers that are more
common in old age -- colon, prostate and breast -- are also expected to continue
to increase.

   Despite its successes, the war on cancer has not resolved many troubling
aspects of the disease.

   Researchers promote cancer prevention and early detection as major tactics to
greatly lower cancer death rates. But the realities of achieving either on a
grand scale are far from certain.

   Experimental new treatments such as gene therapy and the use of biological
agents show great promise. But they are only now being tested and there is no
guarantee that these are the answer, either.

   In the meantime, physicians admit that they are left to strive for greater
success by eking out improvements in the traditional forms of cancer treatment:
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. Each of these treatment approaches, so far,
has serious limitations.

   For example, people die of cancer largely because none of the current
treatment approaches are very effective at stopping metastasis -- malignant
cells that have spread beyond the primary tumor to other parts of the body, said
Dr. Lance Liotta, chief of the NCI's laboratory of pathology.

   "Metastasis is the real reason cancer is lethal," Liotta said. "If we can
control metastasis, we would really be able to prevent death."

   Even when there is no sign of disease in the lymph nodes -- where the tissue
cancer is likely to spread first -- 25% to 30% of patients probably still have
"micro metastasis," which cannot be seen in the cells examined under a
microscope.

   "In time, those cells will grow and become life-threatening. We need better
markers to show when that might happen," Liotta said.

   When cancer is detected early, treatment is often overwhelmingly successful.
But the opportunities for early detection are only beginning to emerge. Because
of a lack of symptoms, ovarian, pancreatic and lung cancer typically are not
discovered until later stages.

   The failure to detect lung cancer is particularly troubling: The disease
represents an estimated 28% of all cancer deaths. Lung cancer cannot be detected
until the abnormal cells are large enough to be seen under a microscope. By
then, the cancer has usually been growing for some time and may have spread.
This fall, however, researchers at several investigative centers will begin
using monoclonal antibodies, genetically engineered molecules that can be
targeted to specific sites in the body to detect malignant cells in the sputum
samples of people at high risk. Researchers hope that the new technique will
allow them to detect the cancer much earlier, before the cellular changes and
damage to the lungs are too great.

   Scientists in the lung cancer study have an easy place to start targeting
people for early detection -- cigarette smokers. But, other than the use of
tobacco, experts know little about what places individuals at high risk for
cancer. Predicting what environmental or lifestyle factors cause cancer is
largely guesswork. And the ability to identify the genes that predispose some
people to certain cancers is little more than a goal.

   "That is pie-in-the-sky prevention at this very moment," said Helene G.
Brown, director of community applications of research at the Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA. "The prevention we've got now -- we really
haven't gotten much to go on. Prevention is just as complex as treating
disease."

   In the more immediate future, at least, any gains made in reducing cancer
deaths are likely to emerge from improvements in the four current approaches to
treating cancer: chemotherapy, radiation, surgery and, the newest, gene therapy.
Each is limited in what it can achieve, researchers say.

   Physicians are disappointed with the lack of major new classes of drugs that
might do more than just nudge survival rates forward. Chemotherapy aims to
interfere with cell growth and reproduction, either to cure the cancer or to
prolong survival or simply relieve discomfort. However, cancer drugs -- as
opposed to the newer biological therapies -- do not distinguish between normal
cells and cancer cells, so a balance must be found between destroying the tumor
and side effects caused by damaging healthy tissue.

   While oncologists continue to experiment successfully with different
combinations of chemotherapy on various cancers, taxol is the first distinctly
new drug to surface since platinum drugs were introduced to fight cancer in the
mid-1970s, said Dr. Ezra Greenspan, a pioneer in the use of combination
chemotherapy who is now with the Mt. Sinai Medical Center in New York.

   Taxol is made from the bark of the rare Pacific yew tree found in old-growth
forests in British Columbia and the northwest United States. It is painstaking
to gather -- it takes the bark from about 38,000 mature trees to procure 55
pounds of taxol, enough for 1,200 patients. But taxol has been found to be
successful in treating ovarian and breast cancer and may be useful in lung
cancer and other solid tumors. In one recent study of 48 women with ovarian
cancer so advanced all were expected to die within months, 30% showed a
regression of the tumors and one woman's cancer vanished.

   Greenspan said that several obstacles will have to be overcome before
everyone who can benefit from taxol will be able to get it, including years of
clinical studies, environmental concerns about the way the drug is obtained, and
funding difficulties. Research on the drug as a cancer agent began in earnest in
1979, and the drug is only now becoming available in clinical trials among women
with advanced ovarian cancer.

   "Taxol is the most recent, exciting new drug. But it will take another 10
years to get it on the market," Greenspan said. "A big disappointment to me is
that there aren't more new drugs coming down the pike. You only get one or two
major new drugs per 10 years. That's terrible. That's the result of (inadequate)
funding."

   But even where money has produced multifaceted new strategies, some of the
results have been less than hoped for.

   In the field of radiation oncology, physicians cite a wealth of dazzling new
high-tech equipment, such as three-dimensional scanners, computers and linear
accelerators, and applaud their increasing ability to deliver therapy with fewer
side effects.

   The bad news is that radiation therapy has not advanced cure rates, said Dr.
Eli Glatstein, chief of the NCI radiation oncology branch. While praising
improvements that have led to fewer side effects from radiation and prolonged
survival, Glatstein bemoans the bottom line.

   "Radiation does not help the overall cure rate," he said. "Survival is the
single, most important end point. A patient is alive or dead. There is no doubt
about that. Anything that doesn't show a survival gain has to be interpreted
with some caution."

   Particularly mystifying is the inability to know when radiation will be
successful.

   "Our inability to know in advance how tumors will respond to radiation is
ridiculously poor," he said. "You really don't know until you try."

   Experts are also struggling to better target radiation to the tumor while
avoiding damage to healthy cells. Many promising approaches to this problem are
on the horizon. But for now, Glatstein said: "Every form of cancer treatment has
some problem discriminating between normal tissue and tumor. There are no easy
answers for this other than better tools."

   Better tools are also the hoped-for salvation of one of the most promising
cancer treatments of the early 1980s -- biological therapy. But disappointment
lingers over the performance of biological therapies such as interferon and
interleukin-2, which once were heralded as potential "magic bullets" to cure
cancer.

   "I think when these were first introduced people thought you could just take
one and inject it and cure one or another disease," said Dr. Michael W. Fanger
of the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Hanover, N.H. "I think that outlook
was very hopeful, but it was made without understanding their mechanisms for
action. Certainly, the results have been very disappointing. We knew they would
find the tumor cell, but how do they kill the cell?"

   The latest approach in this field is to use agents called bi-specific
antibodies that will act as bridges to link a tumor-identifying drug with a
cancer-killing drug.

   But according to Dr. Robert C. Young, a former president of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology and now with the Fox Chase Cancer Center in
Philadelphia: "These will only improve survival for some patients. And none of
these approaches is likely to change the prognosis significantly for most
advanced cancer patients."

   Finally, with only three limited studies under way, the potential of this
fourth and newest approach -- gene therapy -- is unknown.

   Speaking to a stuffy, standing-room-only ballroom at a meeting of the
American Assn. for Cancer Research in May, NCI scientist Steven A. Rosenberg,
the only researcher approved to use gene therapy, cautioned his colleagues that
the present techniques are so complex and cumbersome that they could be
administered only at a few, highly sophisticated cancer institutions. And, the
therapy is still toxic to many patients.

   Rosenberg expresses modest hopes for his clinical trials.

   But the studies, he said, "have demonstrated that it is possible to use
immunological therapies. And this may lead to a more practical approach."

   "It is possible that none of the approaches (in use today) will prove in the
end to be the most effective ways of preventing and treating cancer," Young
said.

   But promising new strategies, he warned, will not materialize unless
government funding for cancer research is stepped up.

   In Young's view, the training, research and treatment infrastructure that has
developed under the National Cancer Act during the last 20 years is in "grave
danger" of collapsing.

   The budget of the National Cancer Institute has dropped 6% in real dollars
from 1980, Young said, resulting in research staff cutbacks.

   The weakening of federal funding for cancer research in the last 10 years
infuriates cancer researchers, many of whom take on the posture of politicians
in white lab coats when given the opportunity to speak about their work.

   "The tragedy now is that the scientific community is excited -- they have the
tools to solve the problems," said Dr. Curtis C. Harris, chief of the NCI's
laboratory of human carcinogenesis. "But there is a concern and reluctance to
put money in basic and applied research. This is the time to do it because we
now have the tools. It's not hype. The excitement is evident within the
scientific community."

   Researchers who go before Congress to seek bigger cancer research budgets
have, in recent years, encountered bruising interrogation on why cancer
mortality statistics have not markedly improved, said Dr. Karen Antman of the
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.

   Legislators have taken a view that the war on cancer has failed, she said.

   "Congress looks at the bottom line -- the number of Americans dying of cancer
this year -- when evaluating the return on their research appropriation dollars.
One congressman asked me: 'What have we got to show for it?' Cancer researchers
face this question all the time. The public perception is that there isn't much
to show for it."

   Public and government impatience is understandable, said Dr. Allan Herman, an
expert on preventive health at the National Institutes of Health.

   "I don't think there is a failure yet," he saids of the war on cancer. "But
we have to translate a lot of basic science into interventions. To do that there
has to be political will."

   It is unclear whether Americans and their political representatives can
demonstrate that will. Public outcry over the cancer death toll is almost
nonexistent. But the pain in individual voices cannot be underestimated. It
rings in the voice of Colleen Casey. It rings in the voice of Kathryn
Underwood-Zimmer, 35, a Diamond Springs, Calif., woman who lost her father,
William Underwood, 59, to cancer a few months ago.

   Since then, Underwood-Zimmer has written letters to newspapers and local,
state and federal authorities asking whether enough is being done to defeat
cancer.

   "I know losing a loved one is never easy under any circumstances. But I do
not feel enough is being done in the fight against cancer," she says in a letter
she has sent around the country.

   Underwood-Zimmer said it interests her "how people involved in the fight
against AIDS make darn sure they are heard."

   Cancer deaths, she said, are neither seen nor heard.

   "No one seems to be storming Washington. Hollywood has other causes. And the
rest of us just hope it never hits home.

   "Cancer and the lack of progress in the fight against it is not OK. The
degree of apathy that surrounds this disease is not OK. The lack of
understanding by both the medical society and society in general is not OK. . .
. I don't know what I can do about this situation. But I don't feel sending my
annual donation to the American Cancer Society and leaving it at that is
enough."

GRAPHIC: Photo, Colleen Casey, whose daughter died of cancer despite heightened
awareness of her susceptibility.  JOE KENNEDY / Los Angeles Times


                             1560 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 12, 1991, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 3494 words

HEADLINE: MANY CANCER PATIENTS FAIL TO GET THE BEST TREATMENT;
HEALTH: ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY IS LIMITED BY A DISJOINTED CARE SYSTEM UNABLE TO
KEEP PACE WITH RESEARCH ADVANCES.

SERIES: CANCER: THE NEW BATTLEFRONT. Part 3: The obstacle course to the best
care. Next: What does the future hold?

BYLINE: By SHARI ROAN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   Cancer is by nature unfair, capriciously stalking children and grandparents,
corporate presidents and clerks, super athletes and shut-ins. Still, there is a
sense that this most feared of afflictions is an act of fate, rather than
anyone's fault.

   The same cannot be said, however, for the access to cancer treatment. Too
often, patients are left to their own devices in the search for the best
possible medical care, cancer experts and patient advocates say.

   Forced to make their way through a morass of options, patients find
themselves physically and emotionally exhausted by the very search for cancer
treatment. And this, some say, has nothing to do with fate, but is the sad
consequence of a disjointed, unwieldy treatment system unable to keep pace with
almost continuous research advances.

   "Technology and the ability to access technology are miles apart,
particularly if you're not well-endowed with good health insurance," says Selma
Schimmel, founder and director of Vital Options, a Studio City-based support
organization for young adults with cancer.

   Dr. Bruce Chabner, director of the National Cancer Institute's division of
cancer treatment, acknowledges that many advances that spring from
government-funded research do not become available to everyone who could benefit
from them.

   "People hear about all the wonderful things scientists are finding out and
doing and they say: 'Where are the applications?' There is a large amount of our
population that doesn't have access to these things," he says.

   The problem is documented in a disturbing 1988 report by the U.S. General
Accounting Office showing that many cancer patients do not receive up-to-date
treatments.

   The study showed that 37% of women with premenopausal breast cancer, 25% of
patients with small-cell lung cancer and 60% of patients with rectal cancer did
not receive the best possible treatment. Fully half of the breast cancer
patients who should have received adjuvant therapy (combinations of surgery,
chemotherapy and radiation) did not get it.

   Age and economics have put the elderly and minority groups at a particular
disadvantage, says Dr. Martin Abeloff, president of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology.

   For example, the five-year cancer survival rate for blacks stands at 38.2%,
well below the 52% rate for whites.

   Moreover, the elderly are often undertreated by physicians who worry, often
needlessly, that the side effects of the treatment may do their patients more
harm than good, says Dr. Gregory Curt, clinical director at the National Cancer
Institute.

   The National Cancer Act, passed 20 years ago as part of the country's newly
declared "war on cancer," aimed in part to enable greater access to
state-of-the-art therapies. Among other things, the act created 54 federally
accredited cancer centers around the country to speed up the dissemination of
advances and coalesce vast teams of leading cancer researchers and clinicians.

   In addition, the NCI sponsors a toll-free number, 1-800-4-CANCER, to provide
consumers with information from a computerized cancer data service called the
Physicians Data Query. Called a "living textbook" by cancer officials, the
service provides a caller with the latest information on treatment options,
including clinical trials, along with a list of nearby physicians and hospitals
offering those treatments. The PDQ is updated monthly by 100 editors.

   But many patients are not aware of the information services that the NCI and
the American Cancer Society provide, experts say.

   "I would say 90% of patients don't have the first idea of the kinds of
information resources that the NCI can provide," says the NCI's Curt.

   But, says Curt, much of the burden in locating the best care falls on the
patient.

   "You make it your business to know about this disease, learning what
treatment options are available, what the risks and benefits are," he says.
"What that does is give a patient a vocabulary to ask relevant questions."

   Patients who do not become informed are rolling the dice on their lives, says
Schimmel.

   "People don't know where to seek information," she says. "At the time of
diagnosis, one is rendered totally helpless and paralyzed. Panic overrides
everything else. The medical consumer goes to the doctor with a lot of faith,
but that doesn't mean you're getting the best therapy."

   Panic was certainly the dominant emotion for Mary Jo Siegel in the days after
her diagnosis of cancer last February.

   Only 41 and the mother of three teen-agers, she was told she had
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a slow-growing cancer of the lymph system that patients
can live with for years but is often incurable.

   Siegel underwent surgery to remove the primary tumor that was blocking her
intestines and causing pain. Several doctors then advised her to "wait and
watch" to see if new symptoms of the cancer emerged before undergoing further
treatment. One doctor suggested she undergo radiation therapy.

   "They all said it was my decision," says Siegel, of Pacific Palisades. "I
thought if it was my decision, I should get another opinion."

   Siegel located two of the country's top oncologists for non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma. One, at Stanford University, told her to do nothing until her symptoms
returned. But an oncologist at the reknowned Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in
Boston suggested she undergo an experimental procedure involving high-dose
chemotherapy along with bone marrow transplantation. The sooner, the better, he
said.

   Today, Siegel is still struggling to choose between those two radically
different approaches. "You want to put yourself in the hands of these people,
but you go home at night and you realize you're all by yourself," she says.

   Conflicting opinions among experts are inevitable as research expands
options, experts say. But even the latest treatments do not come with assurances
that they will improve a cancer patient's chance for a cure.

   "Advances which are found today will require years of study before you know
precisely which patients will benefit from that advance," Curt says.

   For example, almost a third of melanoma patients respond successfully to the
immunological therapies interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells
(LAK), he says. "But we don't know why the other 70% don't respond."

   Likewise, the earlier detection of breast cancer has created widespread
confusion about whether women with early-stage breast cancer should undergo
mastectomy or a lumpectomy, in which the tumor is removed but the breast is left
intact, and to what extent radiation and chemotherapy should be used, he says.

   Abeloff says that conflicting opinions are "not necessarily bad. I tell
patients that the good news is they are getting more options. The bad is that it
puts the burden (to choose) back on their shoulders."

   Choosing where to obtain cancer treatment can be equally important, experts
note.

   Because cancer treatment can be complex and require the talents of many
specialists, some patients would fare best at NCI-designated centers or large
teaching hospitals -- rather than community hospitals, experts say.

   NCI centers and teaching hospitals are also more likely to offer clinical
trials, where the latest treatments are under evaluation by the federal
government for safety and effectiveness.

   For patients with cancers that have poor survival rates, high relapse rates
or for whom standard treatments have failed, clinical trials offer another
chance, say cancer experts.

   In clinical trials, a patient is usually randomly assigned to receive a new
treatment under investigation -- such as biological drugs or gene therapy -- or
the most effective established treatment. The purpose of such a study is to see
which treatment is more effective, and patients must take the chance that they
may not get what proves, in the final analysis, to be the most effective
treatment.

   Because the newest treatments are not available elsewhere, clinical trials
may be "the way to get the best therapy," says Dr. E. Carmack Holmes, director
of the Jonsson Cancer Center surgical oncology program at UCLA. For example, he
says, the use of biological therapies such as interleukin-2 and LAK are still
available only in clinical trials.  The number of cancer-related clinical trials
under way has grown compared to only a decade ago, even though only 1.5% to 2%
of cancer patients enroll in clinical trials (about 25,000 patients per year).

   Finding the most appropriate cancer treatment is only half the battle,
however. Patients often face a second battle in persuading their health insurers
to pay for their care.

   Patient advocates and cancer experts across the country say that health
insurance problems constitute the biggest obstacle to getting the best care.

   While the crisis in health insurance is pervasive in every area of medicine,
the pain of shrinking insurance coverage is especially acute in cancer therapy
where treatments are often complex, long term, costly and more likely to involve
therapeutic strategies that are still considered investigational, says Abeloff.

   A Gallup survey co-sponsored by the NCI reported earlier this year that more
than half of 200 doctors questioned had problems providing their
treatment-of-choice to patients because insurers refused to pay for the
therapies. The survey concluded that roughly one in eight cancer patients never
got his physician's preferred treatment because of reimbursement obstacles.

   For example, therapy described as experimental or investigational often
signals to insurers that the treatment is not a sure thing. But, Abeloff says:
"In the area of cancer there is little doubt that the finest state-of-the-art
treatment is provided in clinical trials," which are investigational by nature.

   Patient advocates also complain bitterly that while one arm of the federal
government, the NCI, advocates clinical trials as possibly the best chance for a
cancer cure, another arm of the government, the Health Care Financing
Administration, which runs Medicare and Medicaid, routinely refuses to pay for
those treatments at an investigation stage.

   Schimmel, who hears dozens of complaints each week about insurance coverage,
says another widespread problem is that many insurers do not reimburse for
cancer drugs when physicians administer them for purposes not yet approved by
the Food and Drug Administration, a dilemma called off-drug labeling.

   Patient advocates also decry the refusal by many health insurers to cover
cancer screening tests, such as mammograms, which can detect cancer in its
earliest stages when it is most curable, easily treated and less costly.

   "We know early detection results in the best possible treatment and cure,"
Schimmel says. "But if people can't get access to these tests, they're defeated
from the beginning."

   For the nation's uninsured, the outlook is especially grim. Too often, by the
time government-funded health care becomes available, cancers have metastasized
and the odds for cure are reduced, the NCI's Curt acknowledges. Or they may live
far from a major cancer center and have no idea where to go for optimal care.

   For these reasons, younger, wealthier people in major metropolitan areas are
likely to obtain the best care, say cancer experts, while the poor, minorities,
elderly and people in rural areas are least likely to receive the best of what
medicine has to offer.

   Other patients discover a nightmare of red tape trying to get reimbursement
while their lives hang in the balance.

   When Brent McCrae, 30, began having stomach pain in October, 1988, his
insurer did not pay his medical bills because, unbeknown to McCrae and other
policyholders, his employer had not paid the group premium and the policy had
been canceled. Coincidentally, McCrae changed jobs and signed up for a new
health insurance plan. By the time he was found to have colon cancer, in
January, 1989, his new insurer refused to pay his bills claiming he had a
pre-existing condition that the company was not responsible for.

   McCrae began fighting both insurers while mailing $25 payments each month to
his health-care creditors as a sign of good faith. But five weeks into his
chemotherapy regimen and with $100,000 in bills outstanding, McCrae's oncologist
called McCrae into his office.

   "He put his hand on my knee and said: 'Brent, I'm sorry, I can't be your
banker any longer,' " McCrae recalled.

   The oncologist halted McCrae's chemotherapy, forcing him to wait another five
weeks before he could join an HMO that agreed to pick up his treatment.

   He later won a settlement with his first two insurance companies to cover his
medical bills.

   "It got to the point where I, literally, considered suicide," says the
entertainment executive, who is still struggling with the effects of two
surgeries that removed most of his colon. "Hanging over my head was $100,000 of
outstanding medical bills."

   Too often, says Schimmel, individuals stunned with a diagnosis of cancer find
that the key question "Is there a cure?" goes hand-in-hand with "Can I afford a
cure?"

   "On the consumer end, there is this feeling of victimization that is greater
than your cancer," she says, after a morning haggling with an insurance company
on behalf of another Los Angeles man who has been denied reimbursement. "People
tell me, I can't begin to deal with eradicating my disease until I deal with the
'business' of cancer."

Cancer Centers

   * COMPREHENSIVE CENTERS: These 24 centers are the major components of the
National Cancer Institute's network of cancer resource facilities.  After having
met specific criteria, these institutions are designated by the NCI as regional
and national hubs for cancer research, training and treatment.

   * CLINICAL: Nationwide, there are 16 NCI clinical centers. These facilities
conduct research and treat patients.

   * Other NCI facilities include 15 BASIC centers that conduct primarily
laboratory research and rarely treat patients along with two CONSORTIUM centers
made up of two or more institutions in a region which operate cancer control and
research programs.

   COMPREHENSIVE CENTERS

   1) University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL

   2) University of Arizona, Tucson

   3) USC, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles

   4) UCLA, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles

   5) Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center School of Medicine, New Haven, CT

   6) Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Medical School,
Miami

   7) Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore

   8) Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston

   9) Comprehensive Cancer Center of Metropolitan Detroit, Wayne State
University, Detroit

   10) Mayo Comprehensive Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN

   11) Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Hanover,
NH

   12) Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York

   13) Roswell Park Memorial Institute, Buffalo, NY

   14) Columbia University Cancer Center, College of Physicians & Surgeons, New
York

   15) Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center, Durham, NC

   16) Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina
School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC

   17) Comprehensive Cancer Center of Wake Forest University Bowman Gray School
of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC

   18) Comprehensive Cancer Center, Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH

   19) Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelephia

   20) University of Pennsylvania Cancer Center, Philadelphia

   21) Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA

   22) M.D. Anderson Cancer Center University of Texas, Houston, TX

   23) Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle

   24) University of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, WI

   CLINICAL

   1) UC San Diego Cancer Center, San Diego

   2) City of Hope, Cancer Research Center Beckman Research Institute, Duarte

   3) University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver

   4) Lombardi Cancer Research Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, D.C.

   5) University of Chicago Cancer Research Center, Chicago

   6) University of Michigan Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI

   7) Cancer Research Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY

   8) Cancer Center, New York University Medical Center, New York

   9) University of Rochester Cancer Center, Rochester, NY

   10) Case Western Reserve University Ireland Cancer Center, Cleveland

   11) Cancer Center, Brown University , Roger Williams Medical Center,
Providence, RI

   12) St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN

   13) Institute for Cancer Research and Care, San Antonio

   14) Utah Regional Cancer Center, University of Utah Medical Center, Salt Lake
City

   15) Vermont Regional Cancer Center, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT

   16) Massey Cancer Center, Medical College of Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth
Unversity, Richmond, VA

   BASIC

   1) La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, La Jolla

   2) Armand Hammer Center fo Cancer Biology, Salk Institute, San Diego

   3) CalTech, Biology Division, Pasadena

   4) Purdue Cancer Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN

   5) The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME

   6) Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury, MA

   7) Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA

   8) Eppley Institute, University of Nebraska, Omaha, NE

   9) Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY

   10) New York University Medical Center, New York

   11) American Health Foundation, New York

   12) Wistar Institute Cancer Center, Philadelphia

   13) Fels Research Institute Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia

   14) Cancer Center, University of Virginia Medical Center, Charlottesville, VA

   15) McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI

   CONSORTIUM

   1) Illinois Cancer Council, Chicago

   2) Drew-Meharry-Morehouse Consortium Cancer Center, Nashville, TN

   In the Los Angeles area, three NCI-designated facilities are available to
cancer patients: at USC, UCLA and the City of Hope. The NCI supports basic
cancer research at CalTech.

   In the San Diego area, UCSD is an NCI-designated cancer offering treatment
while basic research is supported by the NCI at the Salk Institute and La Jolla
Coancer Research Foundation.

   SOURCE: National Cancer Institute

   Compiled by Times researcher Michael Meyers

Patient Information

   The National Cancer Institute and American Cancer Society operate distinct,
non-competing, free information services to the public. Both provide information
on the disease, risks, prevention and early detection. Each service offers some
distinct services.
 NCI

   The National Cancer Institute will provide people who call 1-800-4-CANCER
with highly technical information about the disease from a computerized cancer
data service called the Physicians Data Query. The service can provide a caller
with:

   * The latest information on treatment options.

   * Information on clinical trials, along with a list of nearby physicians and
hospitals offering those treatments.

   * A list of all NCI-designated cancer centers.

   * Referrals to hospitals in their area that may not be NCI centers but which
have received the American College of Surgeons approval rating for their cancer
programs, another measure of quality assurance.

   * The phone lines operate from 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. PST. The lines are frequently
busy, so be prepared to wait. Calls can be answered in English or Spanish.

   ACS

   By dialing 1-800-ACS-2345, callers can receive information on all
ACS-sponsored programs. In addition, the ACS provides information on services
for cancer patients, rehabilitation, and professional and public educational
activities.

   * Phone information: Call 1-800-ACS-2345. Phone hours are 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.
PST. Inquiries can be addressed in Spanish, English and Mandarin.

   HOSPITAL PERFORMANCE

   Cancer patients can also determine whether their physician or local hospital
is up-to-date on top cancer treatments by asking whether the facility
contributes to the National Cancer Data Base, a new service sponsored by the
American Cancer Society that collects and summarizes statistics on cancer
treatment from hospitals around the country.

   * While the NCDB information isn't directly available to patients,
individuals undergoing treatment at a particular facility can ask if the
hospital belongs to the service and has compared its treatment to that of the
data base.

   VERIFYING PHYSICIAN'S STATUS

   You can verify that a physician is a board-certified oncologist by calling
the American Board of Medical Specialists:

   * Phone information: Call 1-800-776-2378 between the hours of 5 a.m. to 3
p.m. PST.

   INSURANCE COVERAGE

   For information on health insurance and cancer treatment, the Assn. of
Community Cancer Centers offers a brochure entitled "Cancer Treatments Your
Insurance Should Cover."

   * Address information: The free brochure can be obtained by writing to: ACCC,
11600 Nebel St., Suite 201, Rockville, MD 20852.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Socorro Macias watches television as she receives chemotherapy
treatment as an outpatient at the Jonsson Cancer Center at UCLA. ; Photo, Mary
Jo Siegel, shown with one of her three children, Jaimie, is still struggling to
decide between two radical options to treat her cancer.  ANACLETO RAPPING / Los
Angeles Times; Map, United States and California, MICHAEL HALL / Los Angeles
Times


                             1561 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 11, 1991, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2664 words

HEADLINE: EXPERTS FIND ROLE OF GENES CRUCIAL IN FIGHTING CANCER;
MEDICINE: DISCOVERIES HAVE PROPELLED RESEARCH INTO GENE THERAPY, WHICH HAS MADE
ITS WAY INTO TREATMENTS.

SERIES: Cancer: The New Battlefront. Part 2: Unraveling the mysteries of the
cells. Next: Choices for patients

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   When the "war on cancer" was declared by President Richard M. Nixon 20 years
ago, researchers had a depressing mantra: "Cancer is not one disease, but 100."
No single cure for cancer will be found, they said. We will have to go through
the long and agonizing process of finding a separate cure for each one.

   But a series of startling and unexpected discoveries over the past
half-decade have brought a marked change in that view. Molecular biologists have
discovered two families of genes -- one family that promotes growth of cancer
cells and one that suppresses it -- and, for the first time, researchers are
beginning to understand the biology of how tumors grow from a single runaway
cell into a life-threatening mass of tissue.

   Although the geneticists already have discovered at least 60 genes that play
roles in the transformation of healthy tissues into malignancies, it is becoming
clear that only a handful of key genes, perhaps no more than five or six, play a
role in the vast majority of cancers.

   These and other discoveries have propelled cutting-edge research into gene
therapy, some of which has already made its way into human treatment. Just as
important, scientists are beginning to discern common patterns in the
development of certain widespread cancers, such as colon, breast and lung -- a
finding that they hope could revolutionize the entire approach toward the
dreaded disease. The crucial role played by these growth-suppressing and
growth-promoting genes in the development of cancer and their uniqueness to the
cancer process means that physicians have a potential new way to attack tumor
cells without damaging healthy cells. Furthermore, a small number of therapies
might have applications to a broad range of tumors, thereby limiting the number
of new treatments that must be developed.

   In addition, identifying these defective genes may provide a technique to
diagnose the presence of tumors at a very early stage, when therapy is most
effective.

   Within the past year, oncologists have initiated at least four clinical
trials of new therapies linked to the cancer genes, and the preliminary results
appear promising. Researchers are also devising gene-based techniques to
diagnose tumors, especially colon and breast cancers.

   The notion that cancer has a genetic cause is not new. "The idea that
mutations lie at the heart of cancer goes back close to 100 years," said
molecular biologist Bert Vogelstein of the Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine. "But only in the last decade has it been possible to get definitive
supporting evidence for that idea."

   Detecting that evidence has been made possible by the development of the same
genetic engineering techniques that, in recent years, have led to the discovery
of defective genes for cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and a variety of
other inherited disorders.

   "The cancer cell used to be a black box," said oncologist Vincent T. DeVita
Jr. of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City. "But the lid of
the black box has been opened and we can see the wheels turning inside." He
believes there is a good prospect of throwing some sand, and maybe even a monkey
wrench, into those wheels to slow or halt them.  But the wheels inside that box
are not a smoothly operating mechanism like that of a fine pocket watch.
Instead, scientists are now discovering that they bear more resemblance to a
Rube Goldberg machine, haphazardly patched together from two different groups of
genes that act at cross-purposes.

   The first group, the tumor-promoting genes, or oncogenes, want to push and
prod the cell toward runaway growth. These are genes that are normally activated
during fetal growth and childhood to allow the body to grow larger, or during
wound repair, and then shut down for the rest of the individual's life.

   At the same time, the second group, the tumor-suppressing genes or
anti-oncogenes, are straining to hold back that growth and keep the cell in
check. These genes are normally shut down during fetal growth and childhood,
then activated later in life to maintain the status quo.

   As long as the delicate balance between these two forces is maintained, cell
growth is checked and the individual remains healthy. But this precarious
tension between opposing forces in the cell is easily disrupted as the cells are
buffeted by radiation, carcinogenic chemicals, viruses and bacteria. In such an
event, growth of the cells spirals out of control, threatening the patient's
life by invading and disrupting healthy organs.

   Perhaps an oncogene in a cell is activated by a flash of radiation from a
medical X-ray. Or maybe an anti-oncogene is disabled by a benzene molecule from
a back-yard barbecue. Either way, the cell is freed from its normal constraints
and begins to proliferate.

   "A damaged oncogene is like having the accelerator pedal (in a car) stuck to
the floor," said Vogelstein. "A damaged tumor-suppressor gene is like losing the
brakes."

   But a car does not go plunging over a cliff the moment the accelerator
sticks, and a cell does not become cancerous the instant a gene is mutated.

   One mutation in an oncogene or anti-oncogene may start the cell on the road
to cancer, but that mutation alone is not sufficient to get it all the way
there. One of the principal lessons researchers have learned in recent years is
that a cascade of genetic mutations must occur, most likely over a long period
of time, before the cancer becomes life-threatening.

   That is heartening news, said molecular biologist Curtis C. Harris of the
National Cancer Institute, because "this gives us more opportunities to
intervene" and block cancer development. "And if you can identify those early
stages, you can intervene before the tumor becomes life-threatening."

   Perhaps the prototypical example of the cascade of mutations is found in
colorectal cancer, which will strike 157,000 Americans this year and claim
60,500 lives, second only to lung cancer. In the last year, it has become the
most thoroughly understood form of cancer, thanks largely to the work of
Vogelstein. But researchers agree that similar processes occur in most other
types of cancer and the lessons learned with colorectal cancer will have broad
applicability.

   Colon cancer is a valuable type to study because it takes many years to
develop, allowing researchers to examine tumors in many separate stages. And the
researchers have ready access to the tumors for the removal of biopsy specimens
in which they can search for altered genes.

   Moreover, at least 20% of all colorectal cancers can be traced to an
inherited condition called familial adenomatous polyposis, giving scientists a
window on the genetic processes involved in cancer. In August, teams headed by
Vogelstein and geneticist Raymond L. White of the University of Utah reported
that they had found the defective gene that causes the inherited disorder.

   This gene, called APC, turns out to be a tumor-suppressor gene that is
severely defective. Vogelstein and White believe it is inherited in a less
damaged form in many other individuals, predisposing them to colon cancer even
though they do not develop many growths, or polyps. In other cases, it may be
damaged later in life by exposure to chemicals or radiation.

   But cancer is a complex disease, and the discovery of a single gene is
unlikely to translate into a cure. Vogelstein has shown that an oncogene called
ras (because it was first found in rat sarcomas, a form of tumor) plays an
important role in development of colorectal cancer, as do the loss of at least
two other tumor-suppressing genes, one on chromosome 18 and another, especially
important gene called p53, on chromosome 17.

   While the precise sequence of these events can vary, their cumulative effect
produces colon cancer. "The fact that it may take years for these changes to
accumulate explains why colon cancer occurs mainly in people over 40 years of
age," Vogelstein said.

   Their findings already are having implications for treatment. In examining
tissues from tumors, Vogelstein and his colleagues have found that the number of
defective genes they find is a good indicator of how patients will respond to
therapy. In a study of 56 colon cancer patients, Vogelstein said, they found
that "cancers that have acquired more changes have a higher proclivity to kill
patients."

   Researchers are hopeful that this technique may be useful soon for detecting
cancer in the early stages, when treatment is most successful. Vogelstein has
found cells with a defective p53 gene in the urine of patients with bladder
cancer. He and others are looking for similar defects in colon cells shed into
feces, and the same process might prove useful in other cancers as well. These
results suggest that tumors could be found before they are detectable by other
means.

   Such advances in understanding colon cancer are encouraging because a variety
of evidence suggests that a similar cascade of genetic changes occurs in lung
and breast cancer, both of which strike most commonly in middle age or later. In
fact, that may be one of the key differences between such tumors and those of
childhood and youth, including retinoblastoma, leukemias and lymphomas. Those
apparently require fewer genetic mutations for full-fledged malignancy.

   The case for breast cancer is particularly compelling. Last December,
geneticist Mary-Claire King of UC Berkeley reported strong evidence for the
presence of a breast cancer susceptibility gene analogous to APC. And in
independent work, geneticist Mark Skolnick and his colleagues at the University
of Utah reported that a benign condition known as proliferative breast disease
-- similar to the development of polyps in the colon -- is a mark of increased
risk of breast cancer.

   These results suggest that it should be possible to identify women at
unusually high risk of breast cancer, so that they can then be monitored more
carefully for early detection of the disease.

   Researchers have also identified at least two genes that play a significant
role in metastasis of breast cancer. Last December, molecular biologist Pierre
Chambon of the National Institute of Medical Research in Strasbourg, France,
reported the discovery of an oncogene that is activated in the late stages of
breast cancer. The gene is the blueprint for a protein that dissolves the tissue
matrix that keeps the tumor confined.

   This April, molecular biologists Lance A. Liotta and his colleagues at the
National Cancer Institute reported the identification of a new tumor-suppressor
gene associated with breast cancer. Healthy forms of the gene apparently prevent
the metastasis of breast cancer cells. Its loss is correlated with poor survival
and rapid death.

   "Unfortunately, more than 60% of patients with newly diagnosed (breast)
tumors have metastasis," Liotta said. And in many cases this metastasis is
undetectable by conventional means. A search of tumor cells for deletions of the
new gene, he said, could identify those women who should be treated more
aggressively to prevent relapse.

   The discovery that cancer is so genetically complex is actually quite
promising, said NCI's Harris. "This gives us many more opportunities to
intervene."

   One very promising way to intervene is through the tumor-suppressor genes.
Last year, molecular biologist Wen-Hwa Lee and his colleagues at UC San Diego
reported that the insertion of a tumor-suppressor gene called rb into human
prostate tumor cells grown in dishes sharply reduced the ability of the cells to
form tumors when injected into mice. The rb gene is one of the key genes in
cancer, because defective rb genes have been linked to breast cancer, bone
cancer and one form of lung cancer. Similarly, Vogelstein and his colleagues
demonstrated that insertion of a healthy p53 gene, another of the half-dozen key
genes, into cultured human colon cancer cells significantly reduced their
proliferation.

   Of course, modification of genes in human tumor cells is a goal that still
lies far in the future, because of both the ethical constraints associated with
genetic engineering in humans and the technical problems associated with the
need to insert a healthy gene into every cell of a tumor.

   But gene therapy may not be necessary. It may be possible, for example, to
develop drugs that will mimic the activity of a tumor-suppressing gene such as
p53. Alternatively, researchers may be able to stimulate tumor cells to produce
additional quantities of tumor-suppressing proteins. And because p53 and some
other tumor-suppressing genes play a role in many different types of cancer, a
single drug could have broad utility.

   A more immediate goal is to block the activity of oncogenes. Molecular
biologist Dennis Slamon of UCLA has found an oncogene that plays a key role in
the development of both breast and ovarian cancer. It produces a protein growth
factor that binds to a specific site on the surface of tumor cells, called a
receptor, thereby stimulating growth.

   Slamon is treating women with advanced breast and ovarian cancer with
monoclonal antibodies -- special antibodies prepared from mouse tissues -- that
bind to the receptor for the oncogene, preventing the protein itself from
binding and stimulating growth. Although the tests just started, preliminary
results suggest that the monoclonal antibodies are slowing down tumor growth.

   Similar therapies are being tested by oncologist John Mendelsohn and his
colleagues at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, who have
developed an antibody that inhibits the action of an oncogene and tested it on
19 lung cancer patients. At Georgetown University in Washington, a group headed
by Marc Lippman has begun clinical trials with 11 patients with breast and other
types of cancers using pentosan polysulfate, a carbohydrate that halts the
action of another oncogene known to stimulate tumor growth.

   Finally, molecular biologist Thomas Waldmann of NCI is using monoclonal
antibodies that target the receptor for a growth stimulating protein called
interleukin-2. It has not yet been shown to be a classical oncogene, but it acts
like one in a cancer called T-cell leukemia, which is normally lethal within 20
weeks. Waldmann has treated nine such patients with monoclonal antibodies so far
and has found that eight underwent a partial or complete remission of the cancer
-- extremely encouraging results.

   Although more work remains to be done, the future of therapy with oncogenes
remains very promising, Harris said. "This society made an investment in the
1970s -- the war on cancer," he said. "At that time, a lot of scientists had a
lot of questions about whether the money would be well spent. I don't think that
is a concern anymore."

The Steps to Colon Cancer

   The initiation of cancer is a complex process that involves the interaction
of many genes. Some, tumor suppressor genes, normally serve to keep cell growth
in check and must be either inherited in a defective form or inactivated by
carcinogens in order for a tumor to be formed. Others have a normal function in
the cell but promote the growth of tumors when they are mutated into oncogenes
by a carcinogen. The example given is colon cancer, the second most common form
of cancer, but a similar process occurs in other forms as well.

   * Many people are born with a genetic defect in one of their tumor suppressor
genes, leading to the formation of small polyps.

   * When a mutation -- caused by radiation or a chemical carcinogen -- occurs
in one of the polyp cells to form an oncogene, the polyps grow larger.

   * A mutation inactivating a second tumor suppressor gene leads to formation
of still larger polyps.

   * A mutation in another tumor suppressor gene converts the polyp into a
malignant tumor.

   * A final mutation, perhaps one creating another oncogene, causes malignant
cells to split off from the tumor and establish themselves elsewhere in the
body.

GRAPHIC: Drawing, The Steps to Colon Cancer, MICHAEL HALL / Los Angeles Times


                             1562 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 49 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30

BODY:
                       ** COMPANY REPORTS **
                       Genetic Therapy Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30                            1991                 1990

Revenue                                133,373               22,640
Net loss                             1,270,000              911,122
Shares outst                         6,769,502            5,728,513
9mo rev                                256,352              140,458
Net loss                             3,451,000            2,794,000
Shares outst                         6,075,724            5,719,365



LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1991


                             1563 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    November 11, 1991, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F31

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: Star Technologies Earns Profit in Quarter

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Star Technologies Inc., a Sterling-based maker of computer components,
reported a profit of $ 233,000 in the quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with a
loss of $ 256,000 in the same quarter a year earlier.

   In the quarter, the second of the company's fiscal year, revenue was $ 9.3
million, up 18 percent from $ 7.9 million in the year-earlier quarter.

   The company attributed its revenue growth to strong sales of its array
processors, which perform mathematical computations, to its major customer,
General Electric Medical Systems, and increasing sales of an image generator
used in flight simulation and similar training.

   For the first six months of its fiscal year, Star's profit was $ 571,000,
compared with a loss of $ 225,000 in the same period the year before. Revenue
was $ 18.8 million, up 13 percent from $ 16.6 million.

   MedImmune Inc., a Gaithersburg biotechnology company, reported a profit of $
100,000 in the third quarter, compared with a loss of $ 1.2 million in the same
period last year.

   The company began shipping a product it developed, a drug to treat an
infection called cytomegalovirus. Revenue in the quarter ended Sept. 30 was $
2.4 million, $ 1.2 million of it from that product. That compares with revenue
of $ 500,000 in the year-earlier quarter.

   In the first nine months of the year, the company's profit was $ 1.6 million,
compared with a loss of $ 2.5 million in the same period of last year. Revenue
was $ 10.4 million compared with $ 1.8 million.

   Genetic Therapy Inc., a Gaithersburg biotechnology company whose products are
largely still in the development stage, reported that it lost $ 1.27 million in
the third quarter, compared with a loss of $ 911,122 in the same period last
year. The company went public in late July.

   Revenue in the quarter was $ 133,373, compared with $ 22,640 last year.

   Genetic Therapy said that its loss for the first nine months of the year was
$ 3.5 million compared with $ 2.8 million in the same period a year earlier.
Revenue was $ 256,352 compared with $ 140,458.?


                             1564 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   November 6, 1991, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE C2; ROUNDUP

LENGTH: 594 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   ECONOMY

   Gasoline prices showed a modest increase for the week ended yesterday, the
American Automobile Association reported. The average nationwide price for a
gallon of self-serve regular unleaded was $ 1.13, up 0.4 cent, said the auto
club's survey. New construction contracts declined 5 percent in September,
according to McGraw-Hill's F.W. Dodge forecasting unit. Since January, new
construction has fallen 10 percent. COMPANIES

   Sales of North American-made vehicles fell 12.7 percent in the Oct. 21-31
period, according to industry figures.

   Three Japanese semiconductor makers said they are negotiating to form a
research consortium to develop computer chips for use in high-definition
television. NEC, Matsushita and Mitsubishi also said they are considering
potential U.S. partners.

   C&S/Sovran of Norfolk and Atlanta says it was willing to merge with a small
Georgia bank that now accuses the company of reneging to pursue a bigger deal
with NCNB. An attorney for C&S/Sovran said the company was trying to complete
the merger with First Federal Savings Bank. Discussions continued until the
Brunswick, Ga.-based bank filed a lawsuit seeking to halt C&S/Sovran's proposed
$ 4.3 billion merger with NCNB.

   Sara Lee Corp. agreed to pay $ 62.5 million for a 25 percent equity stake in
Playtex Family Products, a leading maker of tampons and baby products.

   American Personal Communications will make its first call today in Washington
on a tiny wireless telephone, kicking off the first trial of any significant
size of what is known as a personal communications network. The company, a
Baltimore-based consulting firm and former cellular telephone operator, is part
of a joint venture with The Washington Post Co. to test a new generation of
portable telephones within a network covering parts of downtown Washington,
Baltimore and Dulles International and National airports.

   Sunbeam-Oster will move its headquarters from Pittsburgh to Providence, R.I.

   GM Europe has invested another $ 58 million in its Hungarian operations,
allowing it to increase production at a plant near Budapest. The investment
brings GM's total expenditures at the plant to $ 193 million.

   Apple Computer asked the Court of International Trade to reverse a tariff on
imported computer displays from Japan. Apple uses the displays in its Macintosh
PowerBook 170 notebook computer. The tariff was imposed in August after a ruling
by the International Trade Commission.

   Genetic Therapy, a Gaithersburg biotechnology company, signed a cooperative
research and development agreement with the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute of the National Institutes of Health. An NIH scientist and the company
will work jointly to develop gene therapy treatments for pulmonary diseases.

   IBM will make advanced computer chips for Apple Computer, a previously
undisclosed facet of their big technology pact that was revealed in an SEC
filing. The products are "reduced instruction set computing" chips, a type of
microprocessor developed for computer workstations that is now becoming popular
for personal computers. EARNINGS

   Emerson Electric said its fourth-quarter profit rose 3 percent.

   PEOPLE

   Charles Keating Jr.'s trial can proceed, as the judge refused to dismiss the
charges against the former Lincoln Savings boss, ruling there was enough
evidence to proceed on 18 of the 20 counts.

   Neil Benjamin, a futures trader and associate member of the Chicago Board of
Trade, was fined $ 35,000 and suspended for 30 days by the CBOT for violating
trading rules.


                             1565 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    NOVEMBER 4, 1991, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 280 words

HEADLINE: Francis Crick, DNA Pioneer, To Be Honored by Exploratorium

BODY:

    Dr. Francis Crick, leader of the research group that revealed the
double-helix structure of DNA and paved the way for the biotechnology
revolution, has been named to receive the 15th annual award for lifetime
scientific achievement by the Exploratorium, San Francisco's unique science
museum.

   The British physicist and biochemist, working with biologist James D.
Watson, the late Rosalind Franklin and physicist Maurice Wilkins, discovered the
molecular structure of the genes that govern all heredity in 1953.

   Together with Watson and Wilkins, Crick won the Nobel Prize in 1962.  The
team's double-helix discovery proved to be the century's most important advance
in biology, and has led not only to the science of genetic engineering but also
to the first attempts at treating major human diseases through gene therapy. The
Human Genome Project, a 15-year $ 3 billion effort to decipher the genetic code
in every one of the 100,000 genes that make up human heredity, is a direct
consequence of the discovery of the double helix.

   Crick has since turned his scientific focus to problems in the neurobiology
of vision. Crick will receive the Exploratorium's award at a dinner at the
museum in the Palace of Fine Arts on November 19.

   Also named to receive the museum's award for contributions to the public
understanding of science was Don Herbert, the television personality known as
Mr. Wizard. A citation as the year's outstanding science teacher went to Tayeko
Kaufman, an eighth-grade science resource specialist at the Kentfield Middle
School.

   Information about tickets for the Exploratorium awards dinner is available by
telephone phone at (415) 561-0322.



                             1566 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 November 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1384 words

HEADLINE: All About/Genetic Engineering;
Biotech's Biggest Sales So Far Are on Wall Street

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

BODY:

   By most commercial measures, the biotechnology revolution is still in its
infancy: scores of new companies continue to form each year, research spending
consumes a high percentage of revenues and profits are scarce. But biotechnology
is rapidly becoming big business after years of being largely big hopes.

   Last month, for example, the Food and Drug Administration approved the use of
the first genetically engineered drug to treat septic shock, an often fatal
bacterial infection common in hospitals. The expected annual sales: hundreds of
millions of dollars in a few years.

    How big biotechnology has become depends on definitions. One leading annual
study by the accounting firm of Ernst & Young focuses on companies that "use
biological processes" to make new consumer products, alter production
technology, or improve the environment and on the companies that concentrate on
making equipment or materials for them. By that measure, annual product sales
already top $4 billion.

   Considerably more is already being spent if one adds in the products and
applications of large multinationals in the drug, chemical, food and energy
industries that have been investing in biotechnology since the 1970's.

   The first big sellers have been medicines, but a trickle of new agricultural
and animal husbandry products has begun to flow as well. Several companies have
staked out environmental market niches for their genetically engineered or
purified strains of bacteria, like cleaning up oil spills. And technologies
developed to help bioengineers are showing up in surprising places. A technique
for duplicating fragments of genes has been used to provide evidence linking
murderers to the scenes of their crimes.

   "There are real products and real companies now," said G. Steven Burrill,
author of Ernst & Young's annual survey. Indeed, 1991 is likely to be the year
that Amgen, producer of genetically engineered anti-anemia and chemotherapy
drugs, becomes the first of the biotech start-ups to crack lists of the top 500
industrial companies in sales.

   Such developments have fed a bout of biotech fever on Wall Street. The market
capitalization of the nearly 200 publicly traded companies has jumped to about
$40 billion, almost double the level a year ago. Biotech companies sold more
than $2 billion worth of stock in the first six months of 1991.

New Techniques
Shortening the Road To the Marketplace

    People have been involved in biotechnology ever since they began using yeast
to ferment beer and leaven bread thousands of years ago, but the current
revolution dates from the first successful efforts to splice genes from one
organism into another, which occurred in 1973.

   The second breakthrough came two years later when researchers figured out how
to fuse antibody-producing cells to fast-growing cancer cells in mice. That
allowed them to make quantities of identical or "monoclonal" antibodies.
Entrepreneurs then saw the door swing open to a vast array of potential products
to diagnose and treat diseases.

   Since these breakthrough discoveries, a series of refinements and supporting
inventions have played a major role in speeding the transition from research to
marketplace and in opening up new areas for exploration. In gene splicing for
example, there have been a steady stream of improved techniques to identify,
isolate, modify, transport, join and duplicate pieces of DNA.

   Coming are technologies based on genetic products. Researchers, for example,
are experimenting with genetically altering cows to make them secrete drugs in
their milk. The technique, dubbed "pharming," would turn animals into living
"bioreactors" that might replace expensive manufacturing lines for producing
drugs.

The Pioneers
Early Leaders Have Been Sold

    The biotechnology business provides a certain amount of support for the old
saw that pioneers are easily identified by the arrows in their back. In the
early 1980's, the recognized leaders in the community of start-up companies were
Genentech Inc. and the Cetus Corporation in the San Francisco Bay Area, Biogen
Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., and the Genex Corporation in Gaithersburg, Md.

   Genentech introduced the first genetically engineered products but did not
achieve enough commercial success to maintain its independence. Hoffman-LaRoche,
the giant Swiss drug company, gained majority control of Genentech in 1990. Last
week, Genentech won a patent infringement suit in Japan against the Toyobo
Company over a drug known as TPA, used to treat heart attacks.

   Cetus invented polymerase chain reaction, the most widely used technology for
duplicating gene fragments, and managed to get to market in Europe with
Proleukin, an anti-cancer drug. But it never became profitable and unable to get
quick approval for Proleukin in the United States, Cetus agreed last summer to
be acquired by the Chiron Corporation, its Emeryville, Calif., neighbor.

   Genex fell by the wayside early in the decade. By the time it was acquired by
Enzon Inc., in June, only disappointed investors and close followers of
biotechnology were aware it still existed. Biogen developed more slowly than
investors had anticipated and went through a reorganization. But it became
profitable in 1989 and is still independent.

   The new leaders among the still independent start-ups -- in addition to Amgen
-- include Chiron, Immunex and Genzyme in the medical field. Centocor, which
received F.D.A. approval for its septic shock drug, and Xoma, which is still
seeking approval for its alternative, are also seen as potential winners. Last
week a Federal court ruled that Centocor's drug infringes on Xoma's patent.

   Each of these companies has been actively acquiring smaller concerns -- or
their technology -- and forming marketing and production alliances with major
companies. Companies like Johnson & Johnson and Schering-Plough are helping
start-ups get products to market and sponsoring research.

Future Products
The Biggest Impact May Be in Farming

    Most of the attention to date has been focused on therapeutic products. The
first such product, human insulin for diabetics manufactured in bacteria, was
brought to market in 1982 by Eli Lilly. Genentech's human growth hormones came
next in 1985. Both now have sales of more than $500 million. They have been
surpassed by Amgen's erythropoietin, which should approach $1 billion this year.

   But in the long term, biotechnology's biggest impact may be on agriculture.
Genetically engineered bacteria can increase the resistance of crops to early
frosts. Products in the pipeline show promise for increasing the tolerance of
crops to diseases, pests and herbicides, reducing their need for fertilizer and
increasing nutritional value.

   Genetically engineered vaccines are also filling the pipeline. Another
medical field still in the developmental stage is gene therapy: the injection of
manufactured genes into individuals who lack the common chemical codes to fight
certain inherited diseases.


HOW TO PATENT GENETIC PRODUCTS



   Although a number of fine points remain to be settled, the main legal
roadblocks to development of biotechnology were cleared in the early 1980's. The
single most important decision was a 1981 Supreme Court ruling that genetically
engineered microbes are patentable. Equally important, scientists managed to lay
down generally accepted ground rules for what precautions should be observed in
developing and deploying genetically engineered organisms.

   Today, at least in the United States, the key battles are usually over the
ownership of particular products or processes. Eastman Kodak is currently locked
in a dispute with Cetus and Hoffman-LaRoche over its rights to the polymerase
chain reaction process Cetus invented. A battle between the Scripps Institute
and Genentech is focused on how different a bioengineered product has to be from
a natural one to be patentable.

   More fundamental problems are still being argued elsewhere. The European
Patent Office recently rejected its policy that genetically engineered animals
are never patentable. It ruled that E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company could
patent a breed of research mice made especially susceptible to tumors, but the
European Community has yet to take a definitive stand.

CORRECTION-DATE: November 17, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

   An "All About" article on Nov. 3 discussing sales of biotechnology products
referred incorrectly to a drug meant to treat septic shock. Centocor Inc.
produces a drug that has been endorsed by an advisory committee to the Food and
Drug Administration, but it has not received approval from the F.D.A. itself.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Genetically engineered immune cells in a human blood vessel;
Amgen workers manufacture a drug, Neupogen. (Photographs from Amgen Inc.)

Graphs: "The Biotechnology Industry at a Glance," shows revenues and net losses
for all public companies, 1990 and 1991; current revenue and cost breakdowns
(Source: Ernst & Young)

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1991


                             1567 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                    November 2, 1991, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 945 words

HEADLINE: Key blood cell isolated, scientists say;
Finding may help treat cancer, genetic ailments

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    California scientists say they have isolated the long-sought "mother cells"
that generate all the blood cells in the body, an achievement that could
dramatically improve the treatment for cancer, blood diseases and genetic
disorders.

   Scientists at Systemix Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif., a biotech company founded
by a scientist at Stanford University's medical school, said the firm received a
patent this week on its method of purifying human stem cells and on the cells
themselves.

   If borne out by scientific data soon to be published, the feat would mean
that physicians would soon have an unprecedented means of restoring a patient's
blood and immune systems when they are damaged by radiation, chemotherapy or
disease.

   The so-called "hematopoietic stem cells" isolated by the researchers are
unique in that they can give birth to any of the red and white blood cells and
platelets that circulate in the body. Scientists believe that giving a patient
purified stem cells would be so much safer and quicker-acting a method of
rebuilding a patient's blood-forming cells that it could virtually replace the
traumatic and risky bone marrow transplants used now in patients undergoing
aggressive cancer treatments or who have severe blood diseases.

   In addition, the availability of purified stem cells is viewed as a potential
boost for gene therapy. Genes designed to treat inherited disorders would be
more effective and last longer when implanted in stem cells. Up to now, genes
have been inserted in other blood cells because scientists could not identify
the stem cells.

   "The implications are that you could manipulate the entire blood system,"
said Dr. Leonard Zon, a pediatrician and hematologist at Children's Hospital.
For example, doctors could remove a patient's stem cells before administering
massive doses of radiation or chemotherapy for cancer, then return the stem
cells to regenerate the bone marrow.

   At present, doctors remove large amounts of bone marrow, which contains many
other cells besides stem cells and is sometimes contaminated with cancer cells.
Side effects that sometimes occur when the marrow is returned to the patient
include vulnerability to infection and a reaction by the bone marrow against the
patient's own tissue.

   Normally making up only 1 in 200,000 blood cells, the stem cells are unique
in the body. They are the only cells that can renew themselves by making copies
of themselves, and they are the only cells that can produce any one of the
various red cells, white immune system cells or cells that make platelets for
clotting.

   Before birth, the developing fetus has a pool of stem cells that
differentiate into all the types of cells that circulate in the body. That pool
remains through life as a source for replacing cells when they die or are
damaged.

   Their existence was discovered more than 35 years ago, but up to now
scientists had been unable to isolate and purify them because they are so scarce
and because they were indistinguishable from other blood cells.

   Systemix scientists said they finally tracked down the cells by using
molecular tools that stripped away all other types of cells in bone marrow,
leaving pure stem cells.

   The proof of their identity was made possible by earlier work in which Irving
Weissman of Stanford's medical school implanted human immune system organs into
mice. When the Systemix scientists gave the candidate stem cells to these mice
after exposing them to lethal radiation, the stem cells reconstituted their
blood and immune systems, allowing the mice to survive.

   News of the feat has already created excitement among medical researchers,
although none contacted by the Globe yesterday had seen a scientific report of
the work. All therefore responded cautiously.

   "The question is, how pure are these stem cells? What other cells are
present? The whole hematology community wants to know," said Zon.

   Charles Baum and Bruno Peault, researchers at Systemix, and Weissman, who is
a founder of the company but remains at Stanford, have submitted a paper to the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Weissman was scheduled to
discuss the research for the first time in public in Seattle Monday at the 15th
Bristol-Myers Squibb Symposium on Cancer Research.

   Scientifically, tracking down and isolating the stem cells "is truly
important work," said Richard Mulligan, a researcher at the Whitehead Institute
in Cambridge. However, he said, translating the achievement into clinical use
may not be as straightforward as it first appears. If and when therapies become
available, "then it becomes a monumental advance," Mulligan said.

   The first clinical experiments with the purified stem cells are slated to
begin within a few months at Stanford, the company said. Officials indicated
that the cells would be extracted and purified from the bone marrow of patients
who were about to be given massive doses of radiation or chemotherapy for
advanced cancer. The crucial question is whether a small amount of the stem
cells can, as scientists believe, quickly and safely repopulate the bone marrow
areas with new blood-forming tissue, which would rebuild the entire assortment
of blood cells.

DIAGRAM;
How stem cells generate all other blood cells

   Stem cells isolated by California scientists can generate the entire array of
blood cells that carry oxygen and defend the body against infection. Physicians
hope to use purified stem cells, instead of bone marrow transplants, to rebuild
patients' blood systems after exposure to lethal radiation or chemotherapy or
when stem cells are diseased.
SOURCE: Bristol-Myers-Squibb;
GLOBE STAFF CHART

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1991


                             1568 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 253 words

HEADLINE: Patents;
Cell Advance May Help Bone Marrow Problems

BYLINE: By Edmund L. Andrews

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In a development with potentially revolutionary implications, Systemix of
Palo Alto, Calif., a small medical research company, obtained a patent this week
on isolated human stem cells, which are bone marrow cells that serve as the
progenitor for all other kinds of red and white blood cells.

   The cells could make it easier to carry out bone marrow transplants for
cancer patients, and the company said they are likely to be important in future
attempts at gene therapy, the treatment of diseases by introducing new genes
into a person's body.

    The patent is also significant, and probably controversial, because it is
perhaps the most audacious attempt yet to patent a naturally occurring component
of the human body.

   But the Patent and Trademark Office and the courts have long approved of
patents in which an inventor is the first to isolate human genes and even
naturally occurring bacteria if an inventor has isolated them in a way that does
not exist in nature.

   Because all other kinds of blood cells are offspring of stem cells, the stem
cells can potentially be used to re-create the entire blood system of a person
whose bone marrow may have been destroyed through radiation in cancer therapy.
Stem cells account for only one-half of 1 percent of all the cells in bone
marrow. Researchers at Systemix said they were the first to isolate and purify
these cells.

   Patent 5,061,620 was granted to Irving Weismann, co-founder of Systemix,
along with Charles Baum, Bruno Peault and Ann Tsukamoto.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1991


                             1569 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1991 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            November 1, 1991 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 531 words

HEADLINE: News in Brief

BODY:

   Study: Gene therapy may lead to cancer cure

   WASHINGTON - In research that may help lead to a cure for cancer in humans,
scientists have used gene therapy to rid mice of existing cancer by triggering
the animals' own immune system to destroy tumor cells.

   "This is the first time that this type of gene therapy has been shown to cure
an animal of an already established tumor," said Dr. Drew Pardoll, a cancer
researcher at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, where the study
was conducted.

   Scientists cautioned that the Hopkins findings, which are published in
today's issue of the journal Science, are preliminary.

   "If regressing cancer is indeed what they've done, then that's a very
exciting sort of finding," said Dr. Michael Blaese, an expert in gene therapy at
the National Cancer Institute.

   Court rules vs. IRS in fraud case

   A federal judge ruled yesterday the Internal Revenue Service violated a West
Roxbury man's privacy by seizing shredded papers from his garbage and piecing
them back together to build a tax fraud case.

   U.S. District Judge Joseph L. Tauro concluded that Alan Scott, 39, a
bookkeeper who was previously convicted of embezzlement, had a "reasonable
expectation" that shredding his trash would protect his privacy rights.

   Tauro granted a motion by Scott's lawyer, Charles McGinty, to suppress the
reconstructed papers at Scott's upcoming trial on charges he filed fake refund
claims $325,000.

   The evidence led to Scott's indictment in August 1989 for filing 47
fraudulent claims for $325,000 through the IRS computer filing system. He is
accused of pocketing $162,000 before he was nabbed.

   McGinty predicted that the government's case against Scott is "dead" without
the evidence suppressed by Tauro.

   Group predicts $9B state tax take

   Massachusetts will collect $9.1 billion in state taxes in fiscal 1992, $800
million more than the official estimate, an independent budget watchdog group
estimated yesterday.

   The new forecast from the Massachusetts Taxpayers Foundation comes as Gov.
William F. Weld seeks agreement with legislative leaders on a revision of the
administration's $8.3 billion projection.

   Michael Widmer, executive vice president of the Taxpayers Foundation, warned
there will be no revenue surplus despite his group's higher numbers.

   "We will need every dollar of revenue in order to balance this year's
budget," he said, referring to unrealistic non-tax revenue assumptions in the
$13 billion budget.

   Clarification

   In an article published Wednesday, The Herald reported on a new New Hampshire
presidential primary trial heat poll, taken Oct. 20-24 by Maguire Associates of
Concord, Mass.

   The article stated that the poll was of the same 501 registered voters the
firm had polled in March. Actually, Maguire Associates attemped to call back all
501 voters but was only able to reach 300 voters in the October survey.

   But a Maguire Associates pollster said the margin of error cited in the
article - 4 to 5 percent - is accurate, and that "the numbers stand," showing
Paul Tsongas leading the current pack of presidential hopefuls in New Hampshire,
but New York Gov. Mario Cuomo being the big leader if he runs.

   Compiled from Herald staff and wire report

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1570 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    November 1, 1991, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 352 words

HEADLINE: Cancer researchers cite promising gene therapy

BYLINE: Houston Chronicle News Services

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Researchers in Baltimore have achieved a high rate of cure in
mice that were given cancer and treated with experimental gene therapy that
boosts the immune system to kill the cancer.

   Though similar strategies have been used before with other genes, the 70
percent cure rate -- which was higher than had been achieved previously --
suggests this specific way of stimulating the immune system is especially
promising.

   However, ""we're still somewhat a ways from beginning trials in humans,''
said Dr. Drew Pardoll, an assistant professor at Johns Hopkins University.

   The study, reported today in the journal Science, used interleukin-4 (IL-4)
as a stimulant.

   Previous experiments employing other ""cytokines'' -- hormones that one cell
may release to trigger action by another cell -- had shown cure rates below 50
percent.

   IL-4 recruits immune system cells to the site releasing the substance.

   Researchers at Johns Hopkins took kidney cancer cells grown in the laboratory
and inserted extra genes for IL-4 into them.  The cells produced large amounts
of the substance.

   The cells were then injected into mice, where they took hold and proliferated
into tumors.  As they were growing, however, the cells poured out IL-4, which
called in natural tumor-killing cells, called T-lymphocytes, and programmed them
to kill the specific cancer cells in the tumor.  Ultimately, those T-lymphocytes
completely destroyed the tumors.

   Tumors that arise naturally in animals are known to stimulate IL-4
production, but apparently not in sufficient quantity to lead to a cure.  By
beefing up IL-4 production in the tumor where T-lymphocytes are programmed for
killing, the mice were able to boost their immune response to kill the cancer.

   In another experiment, researchers injected cultured kidney cancer cells
under the skin of mice.

   The cancer cells had no extra IL-4 genes.  In six days, after the cells had
become tumors, cells from the same cultures that had been altered to produce
IL-4 were injected under the skin at another site in each mouse.

   All IL-4-producing tumors were destroyed.


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1991


                             1571 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    November 1, 1991, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A22

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: Cancer in Mice Is Cured by Gene Therapy

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: David Brown, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A research group in Baltimore has achieved a high rate of cure in mice that
were deliberately given cancer and then treated with an experimental form of
gene therapy that boosts the immune system to specifically kill the cancer.

   Though similar strategies have been used before with other genes, the 70
percent cure rate -- which was higher than had been achieved previously --
suggests this specific way of stimulating the immune system is especially
promising.

   The study, reported today in the journal Science, used interleukin-4 (IL-4)
as the immune system stimulant. Previous experiments employing other "cytokines"
-- hormones that one cell may release to trigger action by another cell -- had
shown cure rates below 50 percent. IL-4 has the effect of recruiting immune
system cells to the site releasing the substance.

   In one experiment, researchers at Johns Hopkins University took kidney cancer
cells that had been grown in the laboratory and inserted extra genes for IL-4
into them. The cells then produced large amounts of the substance.

   The cells were then injected into mice, where they took hold and proliferated
into tumors. As they were growing, however, the cells poured out IL-4, which
called in natural tumor-killing cells, called T-lymphocytes, and programmed them
to kill the specific cancer cells in the tumor. Ultimately, those T-lymphocytes
destroyed the tumors.

   Tumors that arise naturally in animals are known to stimulate IL-4
production, but apparently not in sufficient quantity to lead to a cure. By
beefing up IL-4 production where it is needed -- in the tumor where
T-lymphocytes are programmed for killing -- the mice were able to boost their
immune response sufficiently to kill the cancer.

   In a second experiment, the researchers injected cultured kidney cancer cells
under the skin of another group of mice. These cancer cells had no extra IL-4
genes. In six days, after the cells had become tumors, cells from the same
cultures that had been altered to produce IL-4 were injected under the skin at
another site in each mouse.

   As in the first experiment, all IL-4-producing tumors were destroyed.
Significantly, however, in 70 percent of the mice all the tumors arising from
the unaltered cancer cells were also destroyed. That happened because the
T-lymphocytes stimulated by the IL-4-producing tumor circulated through the body
and were able to ferret out the distant tumors as well.

   As it happened, when the cured mice were reinjected with fresh cancer cells
100 days later, half the animals immediately killed off those new cells,
essentially curing themselves again.

   The experiments are models for metastatic cancer, in which tumor cells that
arise in one organ spread to distant ones. Metastatic cancer in humans is often
incurable because it is impossible to kill tumor cells in many different sites
without fatally damaging normal organs. One goal of gene therapy is to amplify
the body's natural ability to detect abnormal from normal cells, and kill them.

   It is possible that a similar technique could be used to treat human cancer.
Tumor cells removed during surgery could be altered to produce large amounts of
IL-4 and reintroduced into the patient. The T-lymphocytes so stimulated would be
specific for that particular tumor, and theoretically able to find even
microscopic metastases.

   "This is a model for treating your specific cancer -- not just your type of
cancer, but your exact cancer," said Paul T. Golumbek, one of the Hopkins
researchers.

   Researchers at the National Institutes of Health in recent weeks have treated
two patients with tumor cells altered to produce large amounts of "tumor
necrosis factor," a naturally occurring substance that, among other things,
kills tumor cells. The team headed by Steven A. Rosenberg at NIH is also
experimenting with cells altered to produce another cytokine -- interleukin-2 --
in cancer patients.


                             1572 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                October 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1253 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A3-16

   Boris Yeltsin offered drastic reforms and proposed to take charge of the
Russian republic in a grim speech to legislators. He said he intended to lift
price controls by year's end and to speed up the privatization of agriculture
and light industry.  Page A1

    News analysis: The vote in Poland has increased the pressure for braking
Poland's economic reforms. Almost 60 percent of the electorate stayed home, and
most of the parties that ran campaigned for looser money and help for the
country's failing state enterprises.  A3

   Preparations for the Mideast talks, especially concerning safety issues,
continued as President Gorbachev ventured out of the Soviet Union for the first
time since the aborted coup, arriving in Madrid along with some Arab and Israeli
delegates.  A1

   Palestinians carried an olive branch as they arrived in Madrid for the peace
talks. The blustery language of Palestinians in the past has been replaced at
the talks by sound bites, cellular phones and faxes.  A14

    An ambush of a bus of Jewish settlers was carried out by unidentified gunmen
who killed two Israeli adults and wounded five children. The passengers were on
their way to a rally to urge that Israel not exchange land for peace at peace
talks. A15

   Jordan's King Hussein fears a "dark phase" A16

   The "the" that brought Mideast rivals to table A15

   A Protestant version of the I.R.A. is helping to drive up the toll of
sectarian violence in Northern Ireland. Government officials say a new
generation of Protestant gunmen is nearly matching the mostly Roman Catholic
Republican organization in reprisal killings. A13

   Europeans warn Serbs to accept plan or face sanctions A10

   Zaire's president sees opposition leaders A3

   Salvadoran foes debating a new police force A6

   Kurds' chief challenges rivals over Iraq talks A8

National A18-24

   Inadequate Medicaid payments to hospitals and nursing homes by states are
leading to a number of multimillion-dollar judgements forcing governments to
increase their payments to levels that more nearly reflect the costs of
treatment. A1

   A gloomy assessment on the economy was presented by Alan Greenspan, the
chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, who said it had turned sluggish. Mr.
Greenspan gave no indication whether this assessment meant that the Fed would
soon act to lower interest rates. D1

   A Federal prosecutor went to Egypt to interview a Saudi investor in the Bank
of Credit and Commerce International about the bank's dealings. The investor
recently hired a former White House aide for his legal team, but Justice
Department officials denied that the aide was involved in bringing the two
together.  D1

   One man's repeated drunken driving has exposed the nationwide shortcomings of
the courts, judges and the law. When the police in Massachusetts stopped the
27-year-old after he ran over and killed a man, they found he was driving
without a license and had been convicted of drunken driving eight times. A18

   America's stubborn poverty rate, which resisted even the benefits of economic
expansion in the 1980's, remains high not because it must, but because the
country wants it that way, two recent academic studies conclude. A20

   Inquiry on Thomas leak unnerves some in SenateA18

   Taking a new tack in politics: Apologizing A18

   Sunspot activity termed severe A19

   Kansas City group fights jailing of 20 A22

   Bush rules out tax cut now but vows to revive the economy A21

   California court widens homosexuals' shield against bias A19

   U.S. agency accused of manipulating car crash tests A24

Regional B1-4

   A return of a needle-exchange plan for intravenous drug dealers is being
planned by the Dinkins administration, senior officials said. The move is
designed to help slow the spread of AIDS and is a reversal of health policy for
the Mayor. A1

   Marijuana clouds have grown wispy in recent years. In New York and throughout
the country, lighting up is no longer hip, not in high school, not at college,
not at most social events and, with the advent of widespread drug testing,
certainly not on the job. A1

   Dr. Leonard Jeffries Jr. will stay on as chairman of the City College black
studies department for another eight months while officials continue to assess
the performance of the professor, who has made racially charged remarks about
Jews and other whites. B1

   The feud between governor and judge in New York over financing the court
system sheds light on the complicated and somewhat intimate relationship of
Mario Cuomo, the judicially minded politician, and Sol Wachtler, the politically
minded Chief Judge. B1

   Mayor Dinkins defended his trip that he plans to take to Germany as an
expenses-paid "working vacation." Bristling with indignation, the Mayor said
there was nothing wrong with accepting free trips and questioned the motives of
his critics. B1

   The father of a slain Utah tourist told a jury how his fatally wounded son
had chased a band of knife-wielding young men in a Manhattan subway station and
collapsed. Sherwin Watkins told the jury he had administered a blessing to his
22-year-old son, Brian, who was still breathing. B3

   Syracuse University is retrenching after a decade of spectacular growth.
Already, the university has instituted a budget cut that included a salary
freeze for all employees and called for studies that could lead to the
elimination of major academic programs. B1

   Staten Island Democrats criticize Dinkins B3

   Is Linus guarding the pumpkin patch B3

   Powell wins City Council runoff election B3

   Opinions vary on '92 bid by Cuomo (including his) B2

Business Digest D1

Sports B6-13

   The scintillating World Series ended but people were still talking, not
because of the Cinderella nature of the teams but because of the intensity that
produced a succession of breathtaking games. The final game, won by the Twins
after Jack Morris's 10 shutout innings, was a case in point. A1

   Baseball: Morris says he won't exercise option B7

   Showalter to get Yanks' post today B7

   Fitting ending to storybook Series B12

   Yanks and New York arguing over dollars B12

   Colleges: N.C.A.A. sets new rules B9

   Columns: Berkow on Series B7

   Football: Giants' big oversight B7

Science Times

   Restoring lost wetlands: possible but not easy C1

   Bats lose ground to ignorance and greed C1

   Modern alchemists transmute nuclear waste C1

   Gene therapy experiment seeks to fight cholesterol C3

   Political violence in Zaire imperils AIDS studies C3

Obituaries B5

   Sir Andrzej Panufnik, composer and conductor

Fashion Page A25

   With no major trends, variety wins

   Patterns

Arts/Entertainment

   Critic's Notebook: Remembering Bill Graham C13

   Theater: "Cabaret Verboten" C16

   Music: Yevgeny Kissin C13

   Classic Music in Review C14

   Dance: Kirov Ballet in Washington C13

   Word and Image:Harold Brodkey reflects on his novel C13

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

   Editorials A26

   Plausible revolution in health

   Japan's worldly new leader

   The flights from City Hall

   Topics: Play by play

   Letters A26

   A. M. Rosenthal: One homeland each A27

   Russell Baker: The joys of autumn A27

   William B. Quandt: Keep U.S. pressure on the Madrid talks A27

   A. B. Yehoshua: Israel, look to Sadat A27

   Sari Nusseibeh: Palestinians seek peace A27

   Ze'ev B. Begin: Back to Camp David A27

   Milton Viorst: Hang tough, Bush A27

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1991


                             1573 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                October 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1015 words

HEADLINE: A New Gene Therapy To Fight Cholesterol Is Being Prepared

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   MOVING with a swiftness that far exceeds expectations of just a few months
ago, researchers are preparing to use a new type of gene therapy against a
lethal hereditary illness, a rare disorder that results in extreme cholesterol
buildup throughout the body and early death, usually from a heart attack.

   Scientists at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor recently vaulted over
the biggest hurdle to gene therapy experiments, winning permission from two
important government panels that monitor attempts to manipulate human genes.

    By early next year, Dr. James Wilson, associate professor of internal
medicine at the university, and his colleagues hope to insert new genes into the
liver cells of patients afflicted with familial hypercholesterolemia, a disease
perhaps best known for killing Stormie Jones, a Texas girl who died last year at
the age of 13 after a heart-liver transplant failed.

   The radical new treatment is planned as a long-term and perhaps permanent
therapy for the cholesterol disease, which now can be ameliorated only
temporarily with drugs and blood-cleansing techniques, or, in rare cases, with
organ transplants.

Ideal Gene Therapy

    And though only a few hundred people in the United States suffer from a form
of the disorder severe enough to qualify them for the initial gene therapy
trials, the researchers said the approach may eventually prove valuable for the
treatment of less extreme cholesterol diseases, as well other liver ailments.

   "This is the sort of true gene therapy we've all been striving for," said Dr.
Dusty A. Miller of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. "You
do the treatment once, and it persists for the lifetime of the patient. I'm very
excited by this."

   Dr. Miller was one of the scientists who reviewed the proposal for the Human
Gene Therapy Subcommittee of the National Institutes of Health, which must
approve any gene therapy experiment supported by Federal funds.

   That panel, and the larger Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, approved the
proposal without dissent earlier this month. It now goes to Dr. Bernadine Healy,
director of the institutes, who is expected to approve the project within weeks.

   Final permission must come from the Food and Drug Administration, which Dr.
Wilson said was very likely to approve the trials by early December. He said he
intended to start the experiments before February.

Different Therapy Procedure

    That optimism stands in dramatic contrast to feelings expressed late last
year, when he and his co-workers reported their results from experiments on
rabbits and predicted the technique would need another four or five years before
it would be fit for humans. But since then they have worked intensively to
improve the method, and they now believe it is ready for clinical use.

   The new approach differs markedly from other gene therapy experiments
currently under way to treat an inherited immune disorder called adenosine
deaminase deficiency and malignant melanoma. In those efforts, genes are
installed in white blood cells and the cells reinfused into the bloodstream,
with the hope that the added genes will propagate proteins to thwart the
illness. But because blood cells are relatively short-lived, the technique
requires periodic reinfusions of genetically altered cells, usually once or
twice a month.

   By contrast, the new procedure calls for genetic alteration of liver cells,
which are much hardier and longer lived. Patients who suffer from
hypercholesterolemia are born without working copies of the gene that allows
liver cells to produce a vital receptor protein. When working normally, the
receptor pokes through the surface of the liver cell and helps mop up passing
molecules of low-density lipoprotein, often known as the bad form of
cholesterol. Once inside the cell, the cholesterol is broken down and excreted
as bile acid.

   Without receptors to clean up excess lipoprotein, patients may have
circulating cholesterol levels four to five times those of healthy people. As a
result, thick, yellowish cholesterol plaques collect under the knuckles, elbows
and knees and along the coronary arteries, often causing multiple heart attacks
before the age of 10.

Using Part of Liver

    To treat the disorder, the researchers will surgically remove about 15
percent of a patient's liver, and isolate cells from the mass of tissue.  Using
an innocuous virus as a delivery vehicle, the scientists will insert in the
liver cells a copy of the gene that produces the receptor protein.

   Several days after the initial surgery, the treated liver cells will be
reinfused into a small vein that feeds into the liver, a procedure lasting about
an hour. If all goes as planned, the infused cells will settle into the liver
capillaries and begin functioning as healthy liver cells should, generating
receptor proteins to help cleanse the body of cholesterol.

   Dr. Wilson hopes the implanted cells will lower a patient's cholesterol
levels by perhaps 50 percent, a decline he thinks will be great enough to allow
conventional treatments, like drugs, to bring cholesterol levels toward normal
amounts.

   Yet several unknowns remain. Dr. Richard Mulligan of the Whitehead Institute
for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass., who helped develop some of the
techniques now being attempted, said he was not sure the cell implantation
procedure would work for more than a few weeks or months. He suggested different
surgical methods might eventually be necessary for the operation to succeed over
the long term.

   Other researchers questioned whether patients whose blood cholesterol levels
were five times greater than normal would truly benefit from the relatively
minor decrease expected.

   But some doctors said that with a disorder as deadly as familial
hypercholesterolemia, any new therapy is welcome.

   "Most surgical procedures have real risks," said Dr. Fred D. Ledley,
associate professor of cell biology and pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine
in Houston. "But in desperate diseases, you do desperate things."

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "New Kind of Gene Therapy"

    * People with hypercholesterolemia lack working copies of the gene that lets
liver cells make a vital receptor protein that helps absorb harmful cholesterol.
In experimental therapy, about 15 percent of the liver will be removed and
copies of the gene will be inserted.

    * Several days later, the altered liver cells will be reinjected into a
small vein that feeds into the liver. If all goes as planned, the long-lived
cells will settle into the liver capillaries and begin generating receptor
proteins to help cleanse the body of cholesterol.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1991


                             1574 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 October 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 7760 words

HEADLINE: Open Positions on Short Sales Up 5.8% on Nasdaq

BODY:

   The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the
number of actively traded shares sold short, and not yet covered, in the month
ended on Oct. 15 rose by 17.8 million, or 5.8 percent, to a record 324.8
million.

   The previous record was set in the monthlong period ended Sept. 15, when open
positions on short sales of active issues totaled 307.1 million shares.

    Open positions on short sales in 1,218 less-active over-the-counter
securities were at 36.5 million shares, up 12.6 percent, from 32.4 million in
the earlier period.

How the Short-Sale Strategy Works

    In a short sale, investors, betting that a stock's price will fall, sell
borrowed stock in anticipation of buying back an equal number of shares later at
a lower price, thereby making a profit. The number of shares in which a short
position is still held by investors is totaled by each exchange at the end of a
reporting period and represents the "short interest" for that period.

   The short-interest figures from the N.A.S.D. are made public seven business
days after the 15th day of each month.

   In the latest period, the following N.A.S.D. stocks showed changes in open
short positions of 10,000 shares or more:

Short Interest

Security Name                      10/15/91    9/13/91

0 Telefonos de Mexico*               661,503 1,016,109

3Com Cp* T                          211,398   178,932
50 Off Stores Inc TS                868,470   139,966
A A O N Inc                          14,045     1,170
A C T V Inc*                            497    28,498
A D C Telecommun Inc T               77,564    45,623
A D M Tronics Unlim                  17,595     1,824
A D V A N T A Cp T                  887,867  1,031,083

A E S Cp (the) T                    186,993   120,529
A M E T E C H Inc                       605    23,302
A R I X Cp T                          2,376    12,425
A S T Research Inc T               2,330,008 1,610,723

A T C Environmntl*                   79,332    91,295
A T N N Inc                         122,477   214,163
Acclaim Entertainmnt T              595,369   790,693
Action Staffing Inc*                 78,689   433,597
Action Staffing Wt A*                78,530    96,338
Acxiom Cp T                          23,475    44,528
Adaptec Inc T                        67,036    53,259
Addington Resources T                49,347    11,465
Adobe Systems Inc* T               2,587,415 2,646,637

Adtec Inc T                          20,000       889
Advan Promotion Tech T              127,980    76,865
Advanced Enviro A                   158,964     5,712
Advanced Enviro Wt A*               102,100     5,090
Advanced Logic Res T                167,876   135,223
Advanced Med Prods                    2,581    15,423
Advanced Nmr Sys Inc*               289,569   246,961
Advanced Polymer Sys T               79,487    20,230
Advanced Telecommun T                91,017    10,549
Affiliated Banc Cp T                 69,673    84,540
Ag Svcs of Amer T                       445    21,516
Agency Rent A Car* T                103,982   114,744
Agristar Inc                          6,641    27,337
Aicorp Inc T                         53,335    33,351
Air Wis Services Inc T               97,256   224,227
Air-Cure Environ Inc                 26,524    15,200
Airship Intl Ltd*                   124,471    12,182
Ajay Sports Inc*                     29,830    49,050
Akzo N V Adr* T                      19,140     37,111
Alco Intl Group Inc                  18,945    54,700
Aldus Cp* T                         602,725   409,978
Alex Brown Inc T                    468,732   442,121
Alexander Baldwin T                  62,312    91,715
Alias Research Inc T                606,276   838,640
Alkermes Inc T                       97,775     7,043
Alliance Pharm Cp T                 523,100   425,689
Allied Cap Advisers                   9,725    83,975
Allied Waste Inds N                  20,687    78,977
Allwaste Inc* T                     221,310   576,118
Alpha 1 Biomedicals*                122,603   199,898
Alpha Solarco Inc                    83,578    96,593
Altera Cp T                         106,141    68,360
Amer Aircraft Cp                     17,675     3,447
Amer Bankers Ins Gp T                98,905    46,400
Amer Biogenetic Cl A*               166,707   120,064
Amer Biogenetic Wt A*                80,492    26,937
Amer Bus Comp Cp                   1,187,390 1,289,469

Amer City Bus Journl* T             107,231   117,931
Amer Claims Evaluat T                17,210     1,038
Amer Dental Laser T                 265,050   221,892
Amer Drug Screen Wts*                 5,934    22,000
Amer Drug Screens*                   17,492     1,660
Amer Film Tech Inc* T               422,123   437,197
Amer Greetings Cp A* T               97,495    80,672
Amer Health Svcs T                   43,963    56,091
Amer Intl Pet Cp                    389,135   415,435
Amer Med Tech Inc                    70,465    31,399
Amer Network Gp Inc*                      0     91,843
Amer Plastics Chem                   39,273     5,532
Amer Power Convers T               1,777,791 1,362,709

Amer Republic Bncp T                130,557   118,487
Amer Savings Fl Fsb                  31,481   125,262
Amer Software Inc A* T               80,375    95,831
Amer TV Commun Cp A* T               66,679    43,271
Amer West Airline* T               1,415,438 1,311,784

Ameralia Inc                        100,600     2,798
Ameritrust Cp T                     248,704   235,424
Amgen* TS                          3,219,089 5,609,793

Amtech Cp T                         269,528   244,213
Amvestors Fin Cp T                  502,984   545,803
An Con Genetics Inc                   6,000    25,130
Analysts Intl Cp T                   20,303     9,275
Angeion Cp                          465,130   485,931
Anglo Swiss Mining                  400,979       930
Apertus Tech Inc T                    3,059    16,138
Apple Computer Inc* T              1,957,155 1,852,499

Applebee's Intl Inc T               162,324   183,101
Applied Biosystems* T               161,021   143,933
Applied Immune Sci T                116,600    59,351
Applied Materials* T                948,974   547,224
Archer Commun Inc                   517,185   535,320
Armanino Foods Dist                   8,032    24,415
Armanino Foods Uts N                 22,388         0
Artel Commun Cp T                    12,743       665
Artisoft Inc T N                     65,887         0
Artistic Greetings T                187,524    13,264
Aspen Wind Inc                       14,997       320
Assix Intl Inc* T                    75,775    92,187
Assoc Banc Cp T                      75,450    28,206
Assoc Commun Cl A T                   9,500    29,800
Astro Med Inc New T                   3,953    14,740
Astrocom Cp                           3,680    15,880
Atlantic Se Airlines T               35,691     8,928
Atmel Cp T                          256,786   278,603
Atratech Inc                         19,398         0
Au Bon Pain Cl A T                  686,576   881,688
Audio Commun Network                    800    13,967
Autodesk Inc* T                     948,415  1,027,548

Automated Sec Adr T                 488,840   562,905
B A R R A Inc N                     229,549         0
B B T Finl Cp* T                    531,265   484,583
B E I Electronics T                   18,622   32,800
B H A Gp Inc Cl A T                  38,791    18,303
B I Inc T                           141,395   110,441
B M C Software Inc T                107,889   143,000
B M C West Cp T                      30,150   105,550
B P I Enviro Pfd A                   22,775     8,995
B W I P Hldg Cl A T                  12,401       665
Baker Hughes Inc Wts* T               22,116      501
Banc One Cp Pfd C T                  11,259    21,514
Banta Cp T                           45,376     7,433
Barrett Res Cp T                      4,054    15,352
Barringer Technology*                 4,473    16,053
Barry's Jewelers Inc T               51,087    27,131
Baybanks Inc* T                    1,545,372 1,533,850

Berger Hldgs Ltd                      4,707    54,521
Bertucci's Inc T                     14,919    36,538
Betz Labs Inc* T                    110,665    88,658
Big O Tires Inc T                     6,397    21,859
Bindley Wstn Ind* T                 603,506   562,232
Bio Tech Gen Cp T                   562,219   462,777
Biocontrol Tech Inc                  26,046    44,942
Biogen Inc* T                       351,809   275,959
Biomatrix Inc T                         298    16,863
Biomechanics Cp Amer*                48,467     6,502
Biomet Inc* T                      1,380,782 1,292,442

Bioplasty Inc T                     145,239   126,968
Black Warrior Wireli                 57,161     8,551
Boatmen's Bancshares T              237,344   128,850
Boca Raton Cap Cp                     6,039   674,200
Body Drama Inc Se 0 N                81,850         0
Bohemia Inc T                         2,557    34,158
Borland Intl Inc T                 2,692,871 2,551,777

Boston Bncp T                         6,007    18,695
Boston Five Bancorp T               343,714   323,547
Boston Tech Inc T                   773,613   788,423
Breakwater Res Ltd T                  17,001    5,870
Bristol Hldgs Inc                    30,262    56,578
Bristol Res Cp Wt 95                  4,400    14,400
Bristol Resrh Uts 95*                12,585    22,655
Broadcast Intl Inc T                 56,828       868
Brunos Inc T                       2,835,421 2,714,669

Brush Creek Mining                    3,814    35,561
Buffets Inc T                      1,951,215 1,863,607

Burnup & Sims Inc T                 715,939   836,856
Bytex Cp T                           84,817    60,950
C A P Rx Ltd*                       216,330   230,552
C C A Inds Inc* T                     5,827    26,532
C C C Franchising Cp               2,572,841   76,660

C E C Industries Cp                  16,876         4
C E Software Hldg* T                  8,858    21,362
C M Communications                   15,373     1,948
C O R Therapeutics T                 61,755     9,550
Cabot Medical Cp T                  735,237   788,624
Cadema Cp*                          212,829   275,714
Caere Cp T                          113,847   148,315
Cal Biotech Inc* T                  119,006    32,740
Cal Microwave Inc T                  39,212    16,437
Calgene Inc* T                      366,056   106,432
Calgene Inc Pfd* T                      288    11,810
Calif Beach Restr                    80,868   125,868
Cambridge Biotech Cp T              505,136   386,141
Cambridge Neurosci T                131,350    76,340
Candela Laser Cp T                  135,091   108,309
Cannon Express T                     21,467     7,777
Canon Inc Adr* T                    151,598   140,627
Canterbury Education*                26,020     3,500
Canyon Resources Cp* T              118,836    51,480
Cardinal Distr* TS                 1,526,412 1,488,127

Cascade Intl Inc T                   449,667  162,848
Casey's Gen Stores* T                67,497     5,959
Catherines Stores Cp T                2,606    17,153
Cato Cp The Cl A T                  163,475    62,357
Celebrity Resorts*                   77,915    33,035
Cell Tech Inc* T                     16,398     5,293
Cellpro Inc T N                      11,216         0
Cellular Inc* T                     607,517   589,653
Cellular Tech Svcs                   10,795       645
Cellular Telephone                    9,931    33,914
Centex Telemanagemnt T             1,826,561 1,991,659

Centigram Comm Cp Se 0 N             48,000         0
Centocor Inc* T                    4,898,105 4,544,318

Centocor Inc Wts 94 T                   300    38,636
Central Bncshs South T               10,703    28,935
Centurion Mines Cp                      950    40,822
Century Medicorp* T                  56,457    31,411
Cephalon Inc T                      190,680   154,352
Cetus Cp* T                         107,606   461,245
Champions Sports Inc                348,031   485,031
Chandler Ins Co Ltd T                65,668    55,302
Chantal Pharma Cp                   131,146    30,289
Charming Shoppes Inc* T             257,851   218,012
Charter Golf Inc* T                  16,607    48,587
Checkpoint Sys Inc* T                97,166    70,668
Chemical Fabrics Cp T                   260    13,167
Chipcom Cp T                        126,069    13,161
Chips & Tech Inc* T                 904,634   790,954
Chiron Cp* T                       1,092,696  871,783

Chittenden Cp T                         926    23,590
Choice Drug Sys*                     19,365       826
Cintas Cp* T                        164,579   123,154
Circon Cp T                         500,007   384,809
Cirrus Logic Inc T                  474,985   749,722
Cisco Sys Inc T                    2,096,194 2,028,169

Citizens Utilities A T               80,949    44,335
Clean Harbors Inc T                 515,677   551,083
Clearly Canadian Bev               1,106,253 1,118,959

Clinical Tech Assoc*                230,654   215,821
Clinical Tech Wts*                        0    12,898
Clothestime Inc The T               224,014    61,298
Club-Theatre Network                 18,032     1,471
Coastal Healthcare T                 22,186     5,200
Cognex Cp T                          25,762    13,547
Collagen Cp* T                     1,811,804 1,107,726

Collective Bancorp T                 67,662    20,300
Colorocs Cp T                       474,339   526,419
Columbia Hospital Cp T               28,892    14,248
Comcast Cp A* T                    1,158,894  398,754

Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl* T            3,569,913 3,254,037

Command Credit Cp                    15,654         0
Command Security Cp                     120    30,950
Commerce Clearing B T                22,222       143
Commercial Fed Cp T                   4,571   133,222
Commun Entert Cl A                   16,858    31,329
Commun Entertainment                 81,091    25,853
Community Hlth Sys T                 24,298     6,732
Comparator Sys Cp                    13,570         0
Compression Lab Inc T              2,839,133 2,613,969

Compucom Sys Inc T                   13,762       979
Compumed Inc                          2,480    16,093
Computer Ntwk Tech T                 93,595    44,037
Computer Prod Inc* T                 16,399       365
Comtrex Systems Cp                   32,733    17,545
Comverse Tech Inc                      6,676   52,282
Concord Camera Cp T                 317,852   213,183
Cons Papers Inc T                   154,955   142,117
Constellation Bncp T                374,524   398,967
Consul Restaurant Cp* T             113,604     3,615
Cooker Restaurant Cp T               28,238    16,562
Coors Adolph Co B* T                 85,759    61,651
Copytele Inc T                     2,281,979 2,340,727

Cordis Cp T                          45,925    24,409
Corestates Fin Cp* T                361,192   293,241
Corrections Cp Amer T               590,652   569,194
Cortex Pharm Wts A*                       0    18,700
Cracker Barrel Old* T               167,347   154,282
Cragin Finl Cp T                    269,521   145,091
Cray Comp Cp T                      571,004   503,198
Creative Tech Cp*                    32,952    79,944
Crestar Finl Cp* T                  595,679   609,435
Crestmont Finl Corp T               106,957   206,354
Criticare Sys Inc T                  82,134     7,848
Crop Genetic Intl Cp* T             106,330    59,126
Crowley Finl Svcs                    49,906    32,371
Crown Resources Cp T                119,075    97,429
Cryomedical Sci*                    252,334    68,912
Cryomedical Sci Wt B                 20,775    53,267
Crystal Oil Co Pfd A* T               6,583   138,293
Curative Tech Inc T                  40,687     9,725
Cyanotech Cp                          1,030    15,522
Cygnus Therapeutic T                 359,425   23,877
Cytogen Cp* T                      1,568,148 1,681,037

Cytrx Cp*                            86,643    39,804
Cytrx Cp Wts A*                      73,921    28,075
D E K A L B Energy B T               12,582    34,880
D E P Cp T                          188,000   153,171
D N A Plant Tech Cp* T              111,497    11,055
D S C Commun Cp* T                  744,698   618,005
D V I Financial Cp T                639,450   322,736
D V I Finl Cp Wts T                  20,025     3,340
Danek Gp Inc T                      132,000   118,774
Data Switch Cp* T                   184,040   213,157
Datascope Cp T                      457,282   314,467
Datron Systems Inc T                  3,147    16,837
Deb Shops Inc T                      36,761    22,805
Delchamps Inc T                      12,572     1,000
Dell Computer Cp* T                1,372,448 1,173,692

Deposit Guar Cp* T                  113,456    86,462
Diagnostic Sciences                       0    10,897
Dibrell Brothers Inc TS             507,502   261,074
Digi Intl Inc T                      47,640    23,174
Digital Microwave Cp T              374,696   642,154
Digital Sound Cp T                   14,197    30,183
Digital Sys Intl Inc T               64,246   147,141
Dime Financial Cp Ct T               15,899     1,128
Dimensional Vis Gp*                 162,288   181,047
Dionex Cp T                           5,256    20,103
Direct Connect Intl*                 27,797       900
Docucon Inc                          68,243    41,921
Dollar General Cp T                 142,545    64,183
Dominion Bkshs T                    291,559   310,782
Doskocil Cos Inc T                   85,750    33,518
Dresdner Bk Ag Adr*                 112,929   123,082
Dress Barn The T                      7,182    20,917
Driefontein Cons Adr*                57,882    24,714
Drug Emporium* T                    277,561   227,143
Drug Screening Sys                  136,714   187,793
Durr Fillauer Med* T                177,169   203,993
Duty Free Intl Inc T               3,051,408 2,674,637

Dynamic Oil Ltd                      19,116       626
Dynatronics Laser Cp                 26,689    14,127
E M C O N TS                         78,845    63,166
E S S E F Cp T                       26,500    38,810
E X E C U T O N E* T                221,234   164,831
E Z C O R P Cl-a T                   14,460     2,950
E Z Em Inc T                         12,831       776
Easel Cp T                          104,122   122,613
Education Alternativ                  2,650    31,128
Egghead Inc T                       784,543   854,350
El Paso Electric Co T                27,035   102,238
Electric Gas Tech                    41,445    29,987
Electro Kinetic Cl A                      0   200,979
Electromagnetic Oil                  19,535    50,476
Electronic Arts Inc T              1,675,534 1,613,862

Electronic Tech Gp*                  51,750    26,584
Empi Inc T                           50,649    20,190
Employee Benefit T                  439,050   235,472
Enclean Inc T                       415,796   391,086
Encore Computer Cp                   16,373    56,447
Endotronics Inc                      22,434    10,001
Energy Ventures Inc T                 1,152    13,407
Environmntl Element T                 18,119   29,370
Enzon Inc T                         258,804   224,486
Equitex Inc T                        62,479   405,569
Erly Industries Inc T                48,043    62,986
Europa Cruises Cp                     4,240    15,351
Everex Systems Inc* T               281,752   185,399
Exabyte Cp T                        449,905   289,792
Excel Tech Inc                       64,761     3,950
Executive Telecard T                452,589   497,159
Exploration Co The                  196,871    29,600
F H P Intl Cp T                     504,937   418,341
F I N D S V P Inc*                  171,230   156,830
F N B Rochester Cp T                 17,424     2,292
Facelifters Home Uts                 21,365   167,000
Failure Gp Inc (the) T               36,593    21,003
Fastenal Co T                      1,120,829 1,077,903

Federated Bk S S B T                 33,010     1,473
Ferrofluidics Cp T                   68,461    79,591
Fidelity Med Inc Wts*                12,000         0
Fifth Third Bncp T                  372,911   246,180
Filenet Cp T                         65,211    51,413
Firetector Inc*                           0    15,403
First Alabama Bcshs T                54,651    26,615
First Amer Cp Tenn T                 11,147    57,020
First Cons Fin Cp T                 145,341   129,944
First Fin Hldg T                      7,863    65,286
First Florida Banks T                96,315   106,548
First Liberty Fin* T                 58,710    93,194
First Peoples Fin Cp* T             126,926   169,080
First Security Utah T                10,926   275,398
First Team Sports T                 109,832    98,444
First Tenn Natl Cp T                 36,705    10,584
First Western Fin Cp T              300,357   561,186
Fischer Imaging Cp T                  1,537    13,086
Fleer Cp T                          478,593   510,718
Foliage Plus Inc                     15,829         0
Food Lion Inc Cl A* T              1,499,383 1,032,208

Food Lion Inc Cl B* T               148,218    98,705
Foremost Cp Of Amer T                64,462     2,175
Forest Oil Cp* T                    415,747   315,649
Forum Group Inc T                    82,910    53,097
Fountain Pharm*                     226,956   189,392
Fountain Pharm Wts A*                93,449    46,300
Fourth Financial Cp T                19,330    31,770
Fred Meyer Inc T                     16,583     6,455
Frontier Adjusters                    1,534    20,000
Furon Co* T                         101,121    88,825
Future Med Prods                    282,417    43,383
G K Svcs Inc Cl A T                  32,484    57,703
Galagraph Ltd Ord*                   32,193    42,474
Gantos Inc T                        558,661   659,225
Garnet Resources Cp T                36,939    25,900
Gen Binding Cp T                     25,403   148,135
Gen Parcel Svcs Inc*                      0    10,490
Genetic Therapy Inc T                56,445    10,980
Genetics Instit Inc* T              812,041   847,368
Genlyte Gp Inc T                     49,759     2,442
Gensia Pharm Inc T                  240,948   113,693
Gentner Commun Cp Ut N              254,915         0
Genzyme Cp T                        288,475   211,028
Geodynamics Cp T                     12,858       425
Geonex Cp T                         141,814   152,362
Gibson Greetings Inc T               38,275    13,499
Giddings Lewis Inc T               1,044,612  724,205

Gilbert Assn Inc A T                 22,590       198
Goal Systems Intl T                 112,235    60,136
Good Guys Inc The T                 259,609   241,067
Grant St Nat Bk                      11,401         0
Grant Tensor Geophys T              337,334   221,135
Great Lakes Bncp* T                 149,996   100,017
Great Oaks Finl Cp*                 138,632       218
Great Oaks Finl Wts*                  6,850    31,888
Greater N Y Sav Bk T                136,660   102,288
Greenwich Pharm Inc T              2,657,368 2,605,397

Grossman's Inc T                     31,688    20,168
H B O Co* T                         264,880   141,966
H M O America Inc T                1,486,913 1,304,843

Handex Environmental T               49,764   159,991
Harding Associates T                  1,258    25,080
Harmon Inds Inc T                    14,960     2,163
Hauser Chem Research T              424,470    32,848
Health Club TV Ntwk                  32,813    16,536
Health Images Inc* T                 50,893    30,676
Healthcare Compare T                193,005   162,463
Healthcare Svcs Gp T               1,835,092 2,009,708

Healthinfusion Inc T                 14,819     1,909
Healthsource Inc T                   15,898    52,675
Hechinger Co Cl A* T               2,059,653 2,089,687

Hemacare Cp Wt 92 S2*                87,935    77,000
Hemodynamics Inc                     42,930    54,330
Henley Gp Inc The T                 104,872   266,750
Heritage Bancorp Inc T              175,905   203,850
Highveld Steel Adr*                  10,823       150
Home Intensive Care* T              176,092   422,853
Home Office Referenc T               15,436    33,321
Homecall Inc*                        88,350         0
Homecare Mgmt Inc                     2,035    19,508
HON Inds Inc T                      195,084   160,985
Horsehead Res Dev T                  58,460    73,208
Howard Svgs Bank NJ T              1,193,530 1,218,394

Huntington Bcshs T                   40,564    24,470
I C O S Cp T                        806,487   689,010
I H O P Cp T                       1,016,326  939,041

I I S Intell Info T                  17,581         0
I L C Tech Inc T                      6,937    52,246
I M N E T Inc T                      42,213    81,556
I N B Fin Cp T                       15,590    64,311
I N T E R S O L V T                  36,262    55,298
I P L Systems Inc A T                52,505    37,374
I P S Health Care                   210,659    38,850
Idan Software Inds                   14,400     1,600
Imatron Inc* T                      124,939    73,054
Immucell Cp                         217,257   241,453
Immucor Inc T                        46,008    21,168
Immulogic Pharm Cp T                 62,558    46,933
Immune Response Cp T                742,806   209,727
Immunex Cp T                       1,467,106 1,413,172

Immunomedics Inc T                  414,608   493,565
IMRE Cp                             327,742   268,249
Imre Cp Uts 96                       22,900    12,600
In Focus Systems Inc T               65,602   170,137
In Home Health C Wts                 98,308    62,036
In Home Health Inc*                 133,047   119,601
Independence Bncp Pa* T               5,405    19,012
Independent Enter Gp                  6,877    34,474
Info Mgmt Tech Cl A*                 37,611    24,390
Info Resources Inc* T                88,846    66,033
Info Solutions Inc                   11,466        67
Informix Cp T                        55,244    31,852
Insituform Gp Ltd T                   5,817    80,031
Insituform No Amer A T                9,266    26,652
Integrated Circuit T                 47,555     3,456
Integrated Devic Tec T              691,337   678,512
Integrated Sys Inc T                 34,716    75,539
Integrated Waste Svc T               461,605  450,633
Intel Cp* T                         355,672   975,060
Intelligent Elec T                 3,145,900 3,337,432

Interactive Media                    12,940     2,200
Interface Inc A T                   731,186   833,544
Intergraph Cp* T                    204,544   415,962
Intergroup Healthcar T               84,562     4,047
Interneuron Pharm*                   26,563   159,069
Interphase Cp T                       3,100    25,509
Interstate Bakeries T                 3,757    16,831
Intervoice Inc T                    395,844   598,518
Intl Absorbents Inc                  11,141       180
Intl Bus Schools Inc                 40,935     1,500
Intl Bus Schools Wts*                46,000     1,000
Intl Cablecasting                    65,015    87,271
Intl Dairy Queen A T                440,830   310,536
Intl Microelectronic T               43,821     3,635
Intl Superconduct*                   44,610       510
Intl Testing Svcs                     5,000    15,925
Intl Totalizator Sys T               10,510       211
Invacare Cp TS                      251,629   435,564
Investors Fin Cp T                  141,332    91,125
Iomega Cp* T                         76,737    15,485
Ion Laser Technology                 14,100     1,900
Isomedix Inc T                        2,317    15,285
J A M Inc                            16,749         0
J Baker Inc T                       799,862   580,860
J L G Industries Inc T               32,044     4,291
J S B Financial Inc T               110,284    55,887
Jean Philippe Frag* T                11,750    23,823
Jefferson Bkshs Va T                  4,177    19,060
Jennifer Convertible*                64,153    17,407
Jones Intrcable A T                 664,984   642,966
Juniper Features Ltd                 14,000    37,725
K Swiss Inc Cl A T                  152,771   209,387
Kaman Cp A NV T                       3,030    15,242
Kasler Cp* T                         14,750    30,042
Kelly Services Cl A T                92,799    76,931
Kentucky Central A T                761,543   778,948
Key Production Co T                  77,838    67,450
Key Tronic Cp T                      37,570    18,570
Kinder Care Lrn Ctrs                 37,963     7,586
Kitchen Bazaar Inc                        0    11,595
Knowledgeware Inc T                1,301,165 1,962,139

Koll Mgmt Svcs Inc T                 11,214    40,244
Komag Inc T                          62,631    22,931
Kushner Locke Co T                   82,694    44,796
L A Entertainment                    71,833    23,797
L D D S Comm Cl A T                 347,606   334,165
L M Ericsson Tel Adr* T            1,977,185 2,007,043

L T X Cp* T                          53,168   130,397
L V M H Moet Adr* T                  88,050   150,630
Ladd Furniture Inc T                242,979   128,988
Lam Research Cp T                    66,500    35,612
Lance Inc T                          72,909    32,695
Landmark Graphic Cp* T              619,966   407,952
Laser Recording Sys*                 49,840    29,840
Lasermaster Tech Inc T              366,724   402,150
Laserscope T                        505,313   770,112
Lectec Cp T                         115,091    66,964
Legend Foods Wts 92*                 34,935   212,627
Legent Cp* T                        266,286   351,311
Leslie's Poolmart T                  35,175    73,796
Liberty Natl Bncp* T                 13,315    61,526
Lidak Pharm Cl A*                     8,349    29,024
Lidak Pharm Wts A*                   30,010         0
Lifecore Biomedical T               469,387   384,884
Liposome Tech Inc T                 101,318    34,560
Little Switzerland T                 64,656   107,144
Loewen Group Inc T                 1,000,597 1,029,344

Longwood Group Inc*                  11,235       700
Lotus Development Cp* T            1,943,641 1,079,219

Luther Medical Prod                  22,487     4,722
Luxtec Cp                            36,728         0
M C I Comm Cp* T                   1,386,946  839,922

M I P S Computer T                 2,249,304 2,075,594

M S Carriers Inc T                   29,861    11,180
M T C Electronic                     17,000       483
Machine Technology T                   5,090   15,230
Macmillan Bloedel T                1,577,006 1,528,845

Magna Group Inc T                   141,271    94,772
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg T               565,267   422,936
Magnetech Cp Wts*                    21,500     4,000
Mail Boxes Etc T                    398,363   437,064
Main St Main Inc                     36,925    51,380
Main St Main Inc Uts                  5,250    41,856
Marcam Cp T                         269,503   334,311
Mark Twain Bcshs T                   50,308    21,360
Markitstar Inc                       36,454         0
Marquest Med Prod T                  13,772    33,263
Marrow Tech Inc Cl A* T             766,233   737,322
Mascott Cp                            4,825    31,301
Mast Keystone Inc                    11,678         2
Matrix Service Co T                  63,932    46,694
Maxtor Cp* T                         947,891 1,022,495

McCaw Cellular A* T                1,509,016 2,018,871

McCormick Co NV* T                   23,470     9,741
Medco Containmnt* T                1,030,795 1,338,230

Medex Inc T                          31,000     1,228
Medical Care Intl* T                 405,041  469,910
Medical Imaging T                   275,591   340,064
Medical Innov*                      208,278   136,274
Medical Marketing Gp T              233,575   174,354
Medical Tech Sys Inc*               105,140   124,035
Medical Tech Sys Wts*                34,000         0
Medicine Shoppe Intl T             1,303,397 1,455,043

Medicis Pharm Cl A*                 671,867   450,559
Medicis Pharm Wts A*                818,621   776,485
Medicis Pharm Wts C*                 28,600    64,100
Medicus Sys Cp T                      1,562    30,298
Medimmune Inc T                           0    29,856
Medisys Inc                          16,439    27,999
Medivators Inc N                     12,900         0
Medphone Cp*                        394,711   265,169
Members Service Cp                    5,001    28,699
Mentor Cp The* T                    975,387   992,391
Mentor Graphics Cp* T              1,003,818  784,902

Merchants Natl Cp T                  86,846    55,057
Meridian Bncp Inc* T                 29,323    70,994
Meris Labs Inc T                     15,397     3,422
Merisel Inc T                        22,645     5,954
Merit Medical Sys* T                 70,571    41,892
Meritor Savings Bank T              961,379   982,627
Mesa Airlines Inc T                  10,212    28,211
Metalclad Cp                        125,899   181,148
Metcalf Eddy Cos Inc T                1,000    62,448
Michael Foods Inc T                2,337,958 2,433,975

Michaels Stores Inc T               665,520   622,606
Micro Energy Inc                    287,422   257,047
Micro Healthsys Inc T               548,969   485,995
Microage Inc T                      266,797   211,878
Microdyne Cp T                       33,046    55,578
Micrografx Inc T                    392,757   358,073
Micronetics Inc                           0    16,013
Micropolis Cp* T                    426,432   364,740
Microprose Inc T N                   10,800         0
Microsoft Cp* T                    2,264,653 2,280,102

Mid Atlantic Medical T              661,287   696,930
Midlantic Cp* T                    5,011,002 4,663,829

Miller Herman Inc T                 181,826   138,981
Millicom Inc* T                     627,599   778,939
Minorco Adr*                         39,784     5,735
Mirror Tech Inc                      21,653    11,439
Mobile Telecomm Tech T               66,883   108,973
Mobley Enviro Svcs A T N             18,985         0
Molex Inc Cl A* T                    55,585    18,195
Mosinee Paper Cp T                   40,353    24,436
Movie Superstore*                     1,213    13,571
Mr Coffee Inc T                     205,094   230,917
Multimedia Inc T                     32,703    64,413
Mycogen Cp T                        102,291    86,827
Mylex Cp T                          181,580   171,072
N A C Re Cp* T                      600,260   665,330
N E C Cp Adr* T                      90,411    17,014
N E S B Cp T                        210,479   135,776
N M R Of Amer Inc* T                106,000    46,802
N Y C A L Cp T                        6,692    36,966
Natl Beverage Cp T N                 20,354     4,135
Natl Community Bks T                198,768   277,355
Natl Comp Sys Inc T                  75,621     8,467
Natl Data Cp T                      400,499   362,905
Natl Techteam Inc                    26,628     4,812
Naylor Inds Inc T                          0   10,588
Nellcor Inc T                       125,360    59,931
Neogen Cp                             16,713    4,978
Neolens Inc                         176,495   187,740
Neorx Cp* T                          286,090    3,442
Network General Cp T                393,940   317,040
Network Systems Cp* T              1,162,491  845,277

Neurogen Cp T                        54,441     4,703
Neutrogena Cp T                     389,103   317,414
New England Bancp                    94,847         0
New York Bancorp Inc T               32,800    14,246
Newpark Res Inc T                    67,225     1,853
Newport Cp T                         18,619     4,484
Noise Cancellation                  118,330   133,862
Non Invasive Mon Sys*                     0    43,051
Nona Morelli's II                   338,873   375,233
Nordson Cp TS                        58,669    81,094
Nordstrom Inc* T                   1,022,205  906,475

North Amer Biologicl T               20,747     2,777
North Lily Mining Co                 15,014     2,855
North Star Universal T              741,981   688,755
Northern Tr Cp T                     98,112    86,046
Nostalgia Network*                   17,228     2,915
Nova Pharm Cp* T                    133,709    30,478
Novell Inc* T                      2,016,982 1,892,338

Novellus Systems Inc T              245,442   337,562
Nucorp Inc Delaware* T               14,887    25,158
Nuvision Inc T                       11,135       650
Nycor Inc* T                         26,932    42,343
Nycor Inc Cl A T                     19,457    34,816
Nytest Environmental                582,771     4,708
O R E X A N A Cp*                    26,510       395
O'Charleys Inc T                     43,834    28,749
Occupational Urgent T               727,364   807,212
Octel Commun Cp* T                  218,793   172,459
Officeland Inc                        3,800    14,900
Old Kent Fin Cp* T                  261,902   203,825
Omni Cap Gp Inc T                    23,274       115
Oncogene Science Inc T               11,576     1,550
Oncor Inc*                          117,608    51,934
Opticorp Inc                          8,000    40,050
Oracle Systems Cp* T               2,493,967 2,201,623

Orbit Intl Cp T                       3,542    26,029
Oregon Metallurgical T               82,870   122,062
Orthopedic Svcs Inc T                31,015     17,084
Oshkosh B Gosh Cl A* T              282,905   252,413
Oxford Health Plans T                14,994     1,477
P H P Healthcare Cp T                27,819     2,100
P L A T I N U M Tech TS             450,622   304,392
Paccar Inc T                         81,432    63,439
Pace Medical Inc*                    33,445    11,432
Pacific Dunlop Adr* T               548,002   571,244
Pacific Intl Svc Cp* T                1,107    28,511
Pacificare Health T                 745,806   276,982
Paging Network Inc T N               47,025          0
Pamet Systems Inc                    40,306    51,776
Pantheon Inds Inc                    77,077    10,657
Parametric Tech Cp T               2,139,593 2,158,208

Park Commun Inc* T                  202,962   229,952
Partech Hldgs Cp                     20,804         0
Paul Harris Stores T                  2,185    18,643
Paychex Inc T                       153,043   167,182
Penwest Ltd T                       316,685   343,252
Peoples Heri Fin Gp T               494,805   505,035
Peoples Telephone T                  10,036    29,970
Personal Comp Prod                  112,900    13,706
Pharmacy Mgmt Svc T                 498,097   486,513
Pharmakinetic Labs T                509,191   377,435
Pharmatec Inc                        18,556     1,200
Pharmchem Labs Inc T                 14,990     4,884
Phoenix Laser Sys*                  261,238    33,354
Phoenix Tech Ltd T                  115,333    72,490
Photographic Science                 39,451    56,750
Pic N Save Cp* T                    119,004   137,976
Pioneer Hi Bred Intl T               79,307    20,000
Polymerix Inc*                            0    29,352
Possis Cp T                         565,791   538,588
Powell Inds Inc T                   650,784   738,116
Premier Bncp Inc T                   76,486   117,914
Presstek Inc T                      829,359   796,371
Preston Cp* T                        21,040     3,104
Price Co The* T                    3,004,884 2,642,591

Prime Bncp Inc TS                         0    15,396
Prime Cellular Inc                   15,500     1,000
Progress Software Cp T               50,956    18,000
Prospect Gp Inc T                     1,280    13,863
Proteon Inc T                       192,066   143,697
Provident Life Cl A T                     0    21,141
Pub Svc Co N H                       22,411    60,755
Puget Sound Bncp T                  267,398   587,910
Puritan Bennett Cp T                379,635   392,671
Pyramid Technology T                208,225   158,252
Q V C Network Inc* T                294,328   204,790
Quadra Logic Tech T                  72,879    91,808
Quadrax Cp                            3,910    47,738
Quadrax Cp Wts C N                   39,750    50,000
Quadrex Cp T                         32,940   150,298
Qual Med Inc T                       32,645    21,568
Quantum Cp* T                      1,275,607 1,182,608

Quantum Hlth Res Inc T               39,308    57,169
Quarterdeck Office T                457,732   409,496
Quartz Mount Gold Cp T               10,253         0
Quiksilver Inc T                    544,821   561,944
R 2000 Cp                            75,074       154
R C M Tech Inc*                     183,139   195,387
R P M Inc* T                        651,530   570,760
Radius Inc T                         16,905    45,286
Radyne Cp                                41    14,371
Rally's Inc T                       573,758   627,692
Random Access Inc*                   13,837    54,350
Rasterops T                         106,098   198,702
Ratners Gp Pref Adr T                25,322    15,305
Raycomm Trans Pfd C                  10,252       152
Raycomm Transworld                   28,073     2,102
Refac Tech Dev Cp T                  13,461         0
Regeneron Pharmaceut T               44,695    26,771
Regis Cp T                           68,909    56,926
Repap Enterprises Cp T              177,002   198,968
Repligen Cp T                        73,115     42,611
Research Industries T               864,593   665,731
Restor Inds Inc                      23,320     6,645
Reuters Hldg Plc Adr* T            2,342,331 2,364,246

Richardson Elect Ltd T              116,494   104,788
Riggs Natl Cp The T                 511,797   415,803
Roadway Motor Plaza T                15,576         0
Roadway Services Inc T              192,243   237,529
Robern Apparel Inc                        0    32,891
Robern Apparel Wts A                 10,634         0
Rogers Cantel Mob B T                 4,400    20,502
Ropak Labs                            2,059    26,105
Ropak Labs Wts                      101,750       200
Roses Stores Inc T                  270,289   280,506
Ross Cosmetics Dist T                21,548     4,071
Ross Stores Inc T                    28,842    43,577
Rouse Co* T                        3,734,698 3,826,766

Royce Laboratories*                 180,636   211,987
Ryan's Family Steak* T               99,189    32,764
Ryka Inc*                           162,848    140,634
S A F E C O Cp* T                   107,778    90,714
S C I Systems Inc* T                750,348   761,074
S G I International                 146,169   124,313
S O I Inds*                             637    61,509
Salick Health Care T                 55,150    43,579
Saratoga Brands Inc                  14,977     1,000
Sasol Ltd Adr*                       21,120     5,500
Savannah Foods Inds T               866,923   791,067
Schield Mgmt Co                      16,290       360
Scimed Life Sys Inc* T              653,286  1,668,811

Scitex Cp* T                        874,487   586,493
Scorpion Tech Inc A                 206,749    11,224
Seafield Capital Cp T                 2,319    22,572
Seagate Tech* T                     980,971   943,875
Seahawk Deep Ocean                   10,412    21,018
Second Natl Bncp T                  113,343   150,653
Sentex Sensing Tech                 701,058  1,154,794

Sepracor Inc T N                     52,914         0
Sequent Computer Sys* T             941,085  1,250,535

SFFed Cp T                           36,252    21,845
Shared Medical Sys* T                42,998    57,651
Sharper Image Cp T                   26,855     1,059
Sheffield Inds Inc                      175    80,433
Shorewood Pkging Cp T               109,483   207,782
Showbiz Pizza Time T                 37,315    59,364
Sierra On Line Inc T                794,723   775,967
Sierra Semiconductor T               78,168   243,241
Sigma Aldrich Cp T                  169,734   197,793
Silicon Valley Bncsh T              831,218   795,021
Site Based Media Inc                  1,480    21,579
Skywest Inc T                        37,728    14,164
Smith Intl Inc Wts B*               147,191         1
Smithfield Foods Inc T               50,263    33,008
Society Cp T                        777,657    76,005
Software Publishing* T              588,321   473,326
Software Spectrum T                   1,313     36,627
Software Toolwks Inc* T             781,087  1,525,642

Solectron Cp T                       48,495    30,220
Somanetics Cp                        20,457   120,222
Somanetics Cp Wts A                  13,375     2,000
Somatogen Inc T                     159,298   149,019
Sonic Cp T                          232,613   122,451
Sonoco Products Co T                 42,621    57,826
Sound Advice Inc T                  103,342   123,960
South Carolina Natl T               742,166   719,255
Southern Pac Pet Adr*                13,553     1,499
Southland Cp                         32,738    15,075
Spartan Motors Inc TS               177,658   150,286
Spectrum Info Tech                  253,642   212,628
Spectrum Info Wts A                   12,900        0
Spinnaker Software T                    579    22,606
St Jude Medical Inc* T              354,073   381,054
St Paul Cos* T                      144,955   211,769
Stake Technology Ltd                 25,799    14,115
Stansbury Holding T                  11,158       551
Staples Inc* T                     1,919,001 2,247,835

Starstream Commun Gp                 10,929         0
State O Maine Inc T                  17,294     2,617
State Street Boston T               477,189   415,880
Stateswest Airlines                 512,511  1,108,834

Stewart Enterpr Cl A 0 N             30,700         0
Stewart Stevenson T                   66,366   47,853
Stolt Tanks Terminal T               25,824    12,581
Stor Furnishings                     16,948     2,285
Stryker Cp* T                       361,414   420,891
Sudbury Inc T                         6,905    23,421
Sulcus Comp Cp Wts A                 20,301     7,288
Sulcus Computer Cp                  537,596   302,365
Sulcus Computer Pf A                 149,261   84,834
Sulcus Computer Wt B                334,100   297,100
Sumitomo Bank Of Ca T               219,196   159,939
Summagraphic Cp T                    52,912    28,277
Summit Health Ltd T                   1,276    14,071
Summit Tech Inc T                  2,124,168 1,973,684

Sun Microsystems Inc* T            3,782,259 2,390,899

Sun Television & App T                    0    11,003
Suncoast Plastics T                   1,539    19,101
Sungard Data Systems* T             175,362   162,322
Sunrise Tech Inc T                  459,768   366,786
Super Rite Cp T N                    62,473         0
Surgical Laser Tech T               494,055   478,834
Swank Inc New                        16,251     1,198
Sybase Inc T                         65,301    25,772
Symantec Cp T                       176,241   163,033
Symbolics Inc T                      40,678     4,286
Symix Systems Inc T                  15,576     1,751
Syncor Intl Cp Del T                 49,843     9,144
Synergen Inc T                     1,111,212  757,026

Synoptics Commun Inc T             1,185,953 1,043,623

Syntellect Inc T                     89,104   108,148
Synthetech Inc                       52,933    68,244
System Software T                   495,052   675,324
Systemed Inc* T                     445,851   518,069
Systemix Inc T                       24,028     3,356
T B C Cp T                           10,689    31,494
T C A Cable TV Inc T                 13,160       794
T Cell Sciences Inc* T              114,230    71,462
T E T R A Tech Inc T                337,811    78,738
T J Intl Inc T                      373,992   346,330
T J Systems Cp                       21,525         6
T P I Enterprises T                 173,536   158,786
T S I Cp* T                         106,349    75,393
T S S Ltd*                           37,097    20,940
T W Holdings Inc T                 2,043,856 1,929,579

T*hq Inc                             64,145   338,720
T2 Medical Inc T                   2,572,929 2,838,514

Takecare Inc T                      408,020   292,818
Tandon Cp T                          20,665     9,011
Tanknology Environ T                 10,063    27,842
Tech Data Cp T                       67,736    23,173
Telco Systems Inc T                  16,360       201
Tele Commun Inc A* T               8,757,908 7,071,716

Tele Commun Inc B* T                 20,000         0
Tele Commun Inc Rts* T               23,004     7,167
Telematics Intl Inc T                19,585     6,390
Telxon Cp* T                        492,569   363,554
Teradata Cp* T                      192,204   203,484
Thermodynetics Inc                  635,624   773,963
Tide West Oil Co                     60,504    31,381
Top Source Inc                       39,746    83,361
Topps Co Inc The* T                 819,418   871,887
Total Research Cp*                  104,470    49,912
Trans World Music Cp T                8,587     32,470
Transmedia Ntwk Inc                  87,637    71,455
Treadco Inc T N                      179,400        0
Trimble Navigation T                699,307   522,591
Trimedyne Inc T                     704,129   145,998
Trinity Capital Ent N                13,275         0
Trinity Capital Uts N                29,200         0
Trinity Capital Wt B N               23,305         0
Tround Intl Inc                      19,249    29,765
Trustco Bank Cp Ny T                125,943    44,047
Tseng Labs Inc T                    246,056   134,398
Tyco Toys Inc* T                   1,153,328  983,503

Tyco Toys Inc Wts 93* T             244,825   208,749
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A* T            2,019,547 2,007,539

U S A Waste Service T                51,549    41,409
U S Alcohol Testing                  63,695     1,760
U S Facilities Cp T                  85,751   128,656
U S Healthcare Inc* T              1,640,219 1,812,459

U S Long Distance Cp T               63,347    34,660
U S Pawn Inc*                        22,185   129,330
Unicomp Inc                             372    42,000
Unigene Labs Wts B                  255,279    57,964
Unilab Cp T                          37,310    22,309
Union Bk T                          247,294   225,245
Uniquest Inc                         14,937     1,782
United Artists Cl A* T               96,354   114,725
United Artists Cl B* T               51,856    18,650
United Cities Gas Co T               18,819     6,551
United Ins Cos Inc* T               151,431    72,541
United Medicorp Inc                   5,877    62,948
United N M Fin Cp T                  27,488    48,200
United Stationers T                 146,232   227,038
Us Trans Sys Inc*                   435,741         0
Utah Medical Inc T                   140,174  109,562
Utah Shale Land                      12,020       277
V L S I Tech Inc T                  100,089   111,093
V M X Inc T                         127,723   114,832
V T N Cp                             19,674     8,614
Vaal Reefs Explr Adr*               225,938   139,078
Valley Forge Sci Cp*                 92,276    75,654
Valley National Cp T               1,964,835 2,043,563

Valley Systems Inc T                 27,228    15,295
Value Health Inc T                  730,833   823,737
Vanguard Cellular A T               192,523   232,856
Vans Inc T                           15,289   619,158
Vector Aero Wts 96                   29,900       500
Vector Aeromotive                    33,445     7,770
Vencor Inc T                         53,061    25,092
Verifone Inc T                      441,976   709,132
Versa Tech Inc T                          7    12,751
Vestar Inc T                         46,918       419
Vicor Cp T                           96,720     24,553
Video Lottery Tech T                363,666   589,102
Videocart Inc T                    2,298,430 1,589,596

Vimrx Pharm Inc*                     63,030    27,120
Vimrx Pharm Wts A*                   45,495    11,085
Vinland Prop Tr Sbi                  13,577     1,600
Vision Tech Intl                     15,954    35,654
Visual Equities Inc                  98,166     3,061
Vystar Group Inc                     13,006        28
W C W Western Canada                 23,723    13,528
W P P Gp Plc Adr* T                 242,659   175,036
Wasatch Education                    14,454     1,648
Washington Mut Sv Bk* T             615,641   407,736
Waste Technology Cp                  38,931    18,235
Waterford Plc Adr Ut T              106,215    92,515
Watts Industries A T                335,770   267,655
Wavetech Inc                         70,130    84,175
Weitek Cp T                         298,064   383,913
Welkom Gold Hldg Adr*                37,119     3,600
Wellfleet Commun Inc T              114,746    65,350
West One Bancorp T                  126,094    97,785
Westmark Intl Inc T                 464,036   477,212
Westmoreland Coal Co T               12,558    24,717
Westwood One Inc* T                 521,452   613,756
Wet Seal Inc Cl A T                 136,080   153,678
William Sonoma Inc T                288,912   275,741
Wolf Financial Gp T                 213,977   301,607
Wolverine Exploratio* T             195,787   179,899
Wordstar Intl Inc T                  20,456     7,717
Worthington Inds Inc T              125,721   160,099
Wyman Gordon Co T                    13,794     2,620
X L Datacomp Inc T                    5,790    24,300
X O M A Cp* T                      3,779,227 3,866,810

Xicor Inc T                          22,194     1,250
Xilinx Inc T                        260,691   114,693
Xscribe Cp                               85    26,602
York Financial Cp T                 140,049    114,084
York Research Cp T                 1,802,723 1,714,490

Zebra Tech Cp Cl-a T                147,937    88,722
Zenith Labs Inc T                    56,711    74,137
Zeos Intl Ltd T                     327,537   194,310
Zilog Inc T                         116,174   130,443
Zoom Telephonics Inc T               94,166    80,410
Zygo Cp T                             20,037     5,366


* Could be involved in arbitrage
S Stock split or dividend
N New
R Revised
T Nasdaq Natl Market System

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1991


                             1575 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   October 22, 1991, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 238 words

HEADLINE: Baylor consolidates its AIDS research

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Baylor College of Medicine has consolidated its $ 10 million AIDS research
program into a single center under one director.

   The new AIDS Research Center will be directed by Dr. William T. Shearer,
professor of pediatrics at Baylor, and co-directed by Dr. Janet Butel.

   Shearer has directed a $ 3 million pediatric AIDS treatment and research
effort that included a wide variety of Texas Medical Center hospitals.

   ""This effort is solid proof of Baylor's commitment to solving the mystery of
this catastrophic disease,'' Shearer said.

   Among the AIDS-related research now being pursued are studies of gene therapy
that might ""turn off'' the production of the human immunodeficiency virus
within the human body; of how the virus behaves at the molecular level; and
treatments for tuberculosis and other infections that are complications of the
AIDS virus infections.

   The center also will undertake educational and preventive efforts that
include screening for HIV, AIDS prevention among high-risk teen-agers and
programs to train volunteers and foster families to work with children who have
the disease.

   A faculty advisory group will oversee the center's research efforts as well
as outreach programs that will be based at places like the Harris County
Hospital District's Thomas Street Clinic.

   The center is similar to other AIDS research efforts already established at
major medical centers across the nation.


LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1991


                             1576 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

              October 22, 1991, Tuesday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS QUESTION U.S. PLAN TO PATENT GENES;
BIOTECH: ATTEMPT TO CLAIM RIGHTS TO GENETIC SEQUENCING WITHOUT KNOWING THEIR
FUNCTIONS RECEIVES MIXED REVIEWS AT HUMAN GENOME TALKS IN SAN DIEGO.

BYLINE: By NORA ZAMICHOW, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The federal government's effort to patent hundreds of human genes before it
is understood how those genes function in the human body ignited fierce
criticism at a meeting of international experts Monday in San Diego, as some
scientists said such a move could turn into a frantic scientific gold rush and
quash cooperation among researchers.

   San Diego biotech officials gave mixed reviews to the government's action:
some said the government was meddling, others said they approved.

   Until recently, scientists have applied for patents after they understood a
gene's function in the human body and how it could be used for treatments. But,
last June, officials with the National Institutes of Health applied for a patent
that would cover the rights to 340 pieces of genetic sequencing without knowing
the function of those pieces.

   At the third annual human genome conference that started here Monday,
scientists said the U.S. government's action would have a chilling effect on the
collaborative international effort to uncover the human genome, or the genetic
blueprint for human beings.

   "Indiscriminate patenting is not a good thing," said Kenichi Matsubara, vice
president of the international Human Genome Project and head of the Japanese
Genome Project. "Patenting hundreds of thousands of sequences without knowing
their function is destructive to cooperative efforts."

   Scientists' 15-year, $3-billion quest to identify the human genome, or
genetic blueprint, is an international endeavor, although 75% of the research is
conducted in the United States. In deciphering the genome, scientists hope to be
able to identify and repair defective genes -- preventing diseases before
symptoms occur.

   U.S. government officials said Monday that they were only holding their
options open and acting in the best interests of American biotech industry when
they filed a patent application on the brain-tissue work of Dr. Craig Venter of
the Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, which is affiliated with the
NIH.

   "By not filing the patent application, we ran the risk of potentially missing
the boat," said Reid Adler, director of the Office of Technology Transfer at the
National Institutes of Health. "This was not an act of imperialism."

   Ivor Royston, San Diego Regional Cancer Center president and a consultant for
the gene therapy company Genesys Therapeutics Corp., said he approved of the
government's action.

   "As an American promoter of the U.S. biotech industry, I think this is a good
idea," he said.

   But others said the government's involvement was unnecessary.

   "Look, there's oil in Texas and we don't know where it is," said Ted Greene,
chairman of Amylin Corp., a San Diego biotech company. "If somebody is going to
buy up every bloody lease they can find, and anybody comes along and does
legitimate exploration, then (that person) has to pay a toll to whoever is big
and brutal enough to lock up those leases. I don't like it."

   Under the patent law, inventions have to be novel and useful, Adler said.
Federal law also requires government laboratories to identify potentially
patentable developments, he said.

   The patent was filed with the U.S. Patent and Trademark office, which has not
yet ruled on the application.

   Adler dismissed the notion that the patent application would stifle
international collaboration or promote secrecy among the researchers. "When you
file a patent application, you make a disclosure," said Adler, who added that
several companies had expressed interest in the American government's ability to
patent some of its findings.

   Adler said he hoped the move to file a patent application would generate
discussion among industry officials as well as scientists about the government's
best course in protecting industry without sacrificing science. American
government officials, he said, had not yet decided whether to apply for
international patents.

   "It costs $100 million to bring a drug to the marketplace," said Charles
Cantor, principal scientist for the Department of Energy's Human Genome Project.
"The thinking is that, if companies don't have protection, they would be
reluctant to go ahead with drug development. . . . But, in the best of all
possible worlds, these things wouldn't be patentable."


                             1577 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

               October 20, 1991, Sunday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1555 words

HEADLINE: CLUES GAINED ON PATH TO GENETIC MAP;
SCIENCE: ABOUT 600 SCIENTISTS WILL GATHER HERE FOR THE THIRD ANNUAL HUMAN GENOME
CONFERENCE.

BYLINE: By NORA ZAMICHOW, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists' 15-year, $3-billion quest to identify the 3 billion chemicals in
the human genetic blueprint is called the "Holy Grail" of genetics.

   It also has been likened to a Rosetta stone that could revolutionize
medicine, allowing doctors to treat diseases before there are even symptoms.

   It also has been blasted as a pork-barrel project that will deprive
individual scientists of funds and squash creativity as the big science endeavor
sops up more than its share of money and talent.

   The international Human Genome Initiative, described by some as the most
important project in the history of biology, holds the promise of creating a
genetic map that researchers could use to find and repair defective genes that
cause diseases such as Huntington's and Alzheimer's.

   "It's like a manhunt for a criminal. If you don't know where the criminal is,
you can't mount a good search," said Theodore Friedmann, professor of pediatrics
at UC San Diego and a pioneer in gene therapy. "But, if you know he's in Des
Moines or San Diego, you can surround the town and start looking."

   Starting Monday, about 600 of the world's scientists will gather in San Diego
for three days to discuss their progress and debate thorny ethical issues during
the Third Annual Human Genome conference.

   Although the endeavor is touted as international, about 75% of the research
is now conducted by U.S. scientists, said Charles Cantor, the principal
scientist for the Department of Energy on the Human Genome Project. England,
France, the Soviet Union and Japan also are participating in the work, and U.S.
scientists hope those countries will step up their involvement as the research
promises to be beneficial to all mankind.

   "This could be a turning point in medicine. Medicine is currently treating a
disease once it happens," said Ron Davis, professor of biochemistry and genetics
at Stanford University. "But, with this, you can determine someone will suffer
problems, and you treat those problems before they happen. . . . Many doctors
have said that $3 billion is very inexpensive when you think of the impact on
health."

   The same project, however, has been criticized by others as a folly that's
squandering scientists' time and valuable resources.

   "This project was so clearly pork barrel," said Martin Rechsteiner,
co-chairman of the biochemistry department at the University of Utah School of
Medicine. "This is not scientifically valuable. It's not a smart way to spend
money. We don't need to know this information, and I still maintain that most of
this will be gibberish that we won't be able to understand."

   But the chorus of opposition is clearly quieting as scientists plow ahead
with the Human Genome Project, a scientific mega-venture with a $140-million
budget for U.S. researchers for the 1991 fiscal year, Cantor said.

   The human genome is the genetic blueprint of human beings. Deciphering this
blueprint, or map, scientists believe, will eventually allow them to determine
cures for as many as 4,000 diseases caused by single genetic defects and others
that are caused by many genes working together that cause diseases such as
cancer, diabetes, and alcoholism.

   As a result of this project, scientists hope to create the gene map of a
"generic" human being. This map will hold 3 billion bits of information, but
among that mass of information, only one-tenth of 1% will differ between any two
individuals, said Dr. Glen Evans, head of the molecular genetics laboratory at
the Salk Institute. Because of the inherent similarities among individuals' gene
maps, the information will be universally useful.

   Genetic information is encoded in DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid. DNA is
composed of chromosomes that hold smaller units called genes, which determine a
person's individuality. Humans have about 100,000 genes in 23 pairs of
chromosomes.

   There are four chemicals called bases in DNA. The 3 billion bases in the
human genome are strung together like colored beads on a necklace. If the DNA in
one human cell could be unwound, it would form a thread more than 5 feet long
and less than 50-trillionths of an inch across.

   Today, scientists are trying to identify the location of each of those 3
billion bases, a process called sequencing. It now costs $1 to $4 to sequence
each base, Cantor said.

   But, with 3 billion bases to identify, the cost is prohibitive. "We would
spend every dollar on the bases alone, and obviously we can't do that," Cantor
said.

   Scientists are on schedule in sequencing DNA and mapping genes, which is
slated to take 15 years, Cantor said. But that schedule depends on advances
still expected to be made in laboratory technology.

   "Progress is being made in bits and pieces," said Davis of Stanford
University. "It's going to be slow. The problem is we can't tell people that
life is going to be better next year. There is not going to be much impact on
Americans by next year; this is long-term."

   This week, scientists will grapple with several key issues, including whether
to patent the sequencing information.

   One of the most controversial issues to rock the genome community is whether
it's appropriate to patent the genetic information that's being deciphered, said
Dan Koshland, professor of molecular biology at UC Berkeley and an organizer of
the conference.

   Last summer during a congressional briefing, molecular biologist Craig Venter
said that the National Institutes of Health plan to file a patent on his
sequencing of the human brain genes. His announcement caused a firestorm.

   "The argument is that, if you don't allow some patenting, companies will be
unwilling to go in on this," Koshland said. "Others, however, say this is basic
information, and one shouldn't patent it."

   During the conference, scientists also will focus on several other issues,
including:

   * Model organisms. Because portions of genomes share similarities, scientists
are sequencing animals and plants to help them pinpoint the locations and
functions of human genes.

   "We find sequences of other organisms are very helpful," Koshland said. "You
can't carve up human beings. . . . Fruit flies aren't cuddly and loving like
cats, so people aren't upset if you study their genetics."

   Scientists will present their latest discoveries on model organisms, having
forged ahead with gene sequences of the fruit fly Drosophilia melangaster and
the worm C. Elegans.

   * Specific genes. Several scientists will present their efforts in
deciphering specific key genetic sequences, including those responsible for
causing the Fragile X Syndrome (a form of retardation), familial breast cancer,
and a type of dysfunctional sexual development in males known as Kallman
syndrome.

   The quest for the human genetic blueprint is peppered with hurdles, including
one basic problem: how to keep track of the flood of information that's being
generated. One human genome sequence, if written out, would fill 200 1,000-page
phone books, Cantor said. But because scientists will be sequencing genomes for
animals as well as plants, the sheer volume of information will be mountainous.

   "It's an explosion of information," said UCSD's Friedmann, who studies the X
chromosome. "You can't write things down in little notebooks anymore, and you
need to have access to data all over the world. It's a very difficult problem."

   The problem is so complicated that scientists have even coined a phrase for
it: Infomatics, or how a mass of information can be efficiently stored and
accessed.

   In this way, scientists are trying to catch up to their own project.

   "It's like the space program. When the announcement was first made that we
were going to have a space program, it wasn't completely clear how to do it,"
said Evans of the Salk Institute. "We're now making tools, hardware as well as
software, to do this."

   Last year, Evans and his colleagues at Salk received a $10-million federal
grant to create a freezer-library of 16,000 DNA fragments that make up human
chromosome 11, which has about 5,000 genes.

   "Making a map of a genome is like assembling a jigsaw puzzle," Evans said.

   Today, scientists still don't have enough of the jigsaw puzzle completed to
help those suffering diseases.

   "We know, for instance, that Huntington's disease is on chromosome 4. But
knowing that doesn't help the patient," Evans said. "But, if we know it's there
and, if we can find which gene, we can understand the causes of the disease,
have diagnostic tests and get an idea of what type of therapy to apply."

Genetic Blueprint

   In the Human Genome Initiative, biologists hope to learn the identity of each
of the 3 billion chemicals that make up the human genetic blueprint, known as
the genome, in order to identify the causes of genetic diseases.

   Each cell of the human body (except red blood cells) contains 23 pairs of
chromosomes, each a packet of compressed and entwined deoxyribonucleie acid
(DNA).

   The 46 chromosomes contain about 100,000 short segments of DNA, called genes,
that define all the characteristics of each human.

   The genetic information contained in each gene is encoded in the sequence of
four repeating chemicals, called bases, in the same way that information in
words is encoded in the sequence of letters. The four bases are called adenine
(A), thymidine (T), cytosine (C) and guanine (G).

GRAPHIC: Drawing, Genetic Blueprint, PAUL GONZALES / Los Angeles Times


                             1578 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     October 20, 1991, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Magazine; Page 12; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6317 words

HEADLINE: ONE LAST CHANCE;
OVARIAN CANCER IS KILLING DIANE HINTON. CONVENTIONAL TREATMENTS HAVE FAILED. NOW
HER LIFE DEPENDS ON AN EXPERIMENTAL THERAPY THAT WOULD BLOCK THE ACTION OF A
DEADLY GENE.

BYLINE: By LINDA MARSA, Linda Marsa is a Los Angeles-based science writer who
contributes to Omni and The Scientist.

BODY:

   DIANE HINTON HAS NO TIME TO WAIT PATIENTLY. OVARIAN cancer is killing her by
inches. She knows a cure would be a miracle. But even a small miracle would do:
just a treatment that would work, even temporarily, to shrink the tumors that
have sprouted inside her abdomen during the past two years and defied an arsenal
of conventional therapies. All she wants is more time -- a year, even six months
-- to be with her husband and three young sons.

   So early one summer morning, Diane and her husband, Scott, drive to Los
Angeles from their home in Hanford, near Fresno. Diane is about to become one of
the first women to test a radical new cancer therapy developed by researchers at
UCLA that mobilizes biological defenses to halt tumor growth.

   Diane, 31, sits cross-legged on a hospital bed in UCLA's Clinical Research
Center, waiting. She is in a quiet third-floor room within the university's
sprawling medical complex. Barely 5 feet tall and weighing about 85 pounds,
Diane wears baggy black shorts and a print cotton top she bought in the
children's department. Illness has caused much of the flesh on her bones to
waste away. But her face retains a haunting beauty, illuminated by enormous
slate-blue eyes that blaze with a spirit that two surgeries and months of
harrowing chemotherapy have been unable to extinguish.

   Her husband, Scott, 33, with the dark hair and eyes of his Indian forebears,
leans on the windowsill next to his wife's bed and absently picks at the sleeve
of his blue T-shirt. Behind him, hazy late-afternoon sunlight streams in through
a window, bathing the beige and peach room in a warm glow that hints of eternal
summer.

   A tall man, with his shirt sleeves rolled up and tie loosened, saunters into
the room. "Hi, I'm Denny Slamon," he says, greeting the Hintons with the easy
familiarity of a small-town mayor. Dennis Slamon is the physician-scientist who
heads the research team that devised the new treatment. The Hintons have talked
to Slamon on the telephone, but this is the first time they've met.

   Facing Diane and Scott, Slamon leans his large frame against the bureau and
explains what will happen in the next few days. He makes no promises: This is
only the first phase of clinical trials designed to merely test whether the new
treatment is toxic -- nothing else. The treatment has reduced tumors in
laboratory animals, but there's no guarantee how it will behave in humans, he
adds, nor is it known if it will have any side effects. It is a practiced speech
Slamon obviously has given before; his only deviations are to answer the
Hintons' questions, which he does patiently.

   After about half an hour, Slamon pauses, crosses his arms against his chest
and studies Diane and Scott carefully. "You know," he says finally, shaking his
head, "I really don't understand why people would voluntarily take a drug that
might kill them. You two have some quality time left. Yet you're giving us a
week of that time. As far as I'm concerned, you're the real heroes here."

   "We don't feel like heroes," Scott says.

   "We feel this is my last chance," Diane adds.

   DIANE HINTON IS ONE OF 20 WOMEN -- 10 WITH BREAST CANCER and 10 with ovarian
cancer -- who have come to UCLA Medical Center this past spring and summer to
participate in these clinical trials. For them, as for Diane, all other
treatments have failed, and the time they have left is measured in weeks and
months, not years. And like Diane, they are ordinary women, with husbands and
children and jobs, who try to cope as best they can with the catastrophe that
has taken over their lives.

   They have volunteered to spend four days getting poked and prodded and having
their insides photographed by the latest high-tech nuclear-imaging cameras in
order to help advance medical science. Perhaps they can leave some kind of
legacy, so that their daughters and other women will be spared the same fate.
About one woman in nine will be stricken with breast cancer in her lifetime;
this year alone, 175,000 American women will fall victim to breast cancer;
another 20,000 will be afflicted with ovarian cancer. About 57,000 women will
die of these cancers in 1991.

   The treatment being tested is designed to halt the action of a deadly
renegade gene known as an oncogene -- one of thousands of genes packed into the
two microscopically thin strands of DNA that are coiled inside the nucleus of
each human cell. In the past decade, scientists discovered the existence of
oncogenes, cancer-causing genes that send signals to healthy cells, prompting
them suddenly to turn malignant. Experts now believe that oncogenes -- about
five dozen have been identified -- may be the culprits in virtually all forms of
cancer.

   The oncogene targeted by the UCLA clinical trials triggers unchecked tumor
growth in virulent forms of breast and ovarian cancer. The therapy uses a mouse
antibody, developed by researchers at Genentech, a South San Francisco
biotechnological firm, to neutralize the action of this oncogene. Laboratory
mice are injected with the deadly human oncogene and they churn out an antibody
to fight off the invader. Like a key in a lock, the antibody binds with the
tumor cells and stops them from receiving substances needed for their growth.

   The research being performed at UCLA is pushing back the frontiers of medical
science. This therapy is part of a new generation of genetically engineered
treatments in preliminary tests at top research centers around the country. In
one way or another, all of these therapies capitalize on medical science's
understanding of how flaws in our DNA, the master molecule of heredity and
regulator of the cells, can cause a host of inherited defects and chronic
illnesses.

   Several types of cancer -- breast, ovarian, lung and melanoma -- and a rare
genetic disorder, adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, are the targets of these
research teams' initial experiments. But within the next year, scientists plan
to test treatments for renal, head, neck, prostate and pancreatic cancers, a
number of forms of leukemia and a rare type of emphysema, as well as a strategy
to aid in liver transplants.

   Scientists are excited because these genetically derived treatments hold the
promise of being the long-sought "magic bullets" -- the precisely targeted
therapies that zero in on where cell function goes awry at the first or second
step. This explosion in clinical trials based on genetic science indicates, says
W. French Anderson, a gene-therapy pioneer at the National Institutes of Health,
that "after many years of thinking of gene therapy only as a way to treat a
genetic disease, investigators have broadened their outlook considerably."

   On the immediate horizon, experts are confident that gene-therapy techniques
will be used not only to cure classical genetic disorders but also to harness
the body's natural defenses to combat killers such as cancer, heart disease and
AIDS. And in the distant future, it may be possible to reprogram our genes to
slow our biological clocks and cure all the ills associated with aging. The
ultimate hope is prevention, and the ability to intervene before the damage is
done -- inserting genes that guard against the onset of certain diseases or
replacing defective genes that trigger chronic ailments -- rather than treating
an illness after it's gone on a destructive rampage. Scientists compare it to
the difference between stomping out an ember and trying to contain an already
raging fire. Or, in the case of the highly toxic chemotherapies used to combat
cancer, destroying so much healthy tissue in the process, it's the pinpoint aim
of a pistol instead of a bazooka blast.

   The first attempt at gene therapy in humans was performed in 1980 by Martin
Cline, a UCLA professor of medicine. In unsanctioned experiments in Israel and
Italy, Cline removed bone-marrow tissue from two women stricken with
beta-thalassemia, an often fatal blood disorder caused by a defective hemoglobin
gene. The marrow cells were incubated in the laboratory with quantities of a
functional hemoglobin gene and then inserted back into the patients. But the
experiment failed because the genes did not function properly, and Cline was
disciplined by the NIH and UCLA.

   Only in the last decade has science advanced to the point that researchers
have the biotechnological tools to splice genes into cells and deliver these
fragments of DNA to their desired targets. And only in 1989 did the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration approve the first experiment in which foreign genes,
cloned from human tissue, were implanted into patients. More important, the
public seems to be growing increasingly comfortable with the idea of scientists
tinkering with our genes, quieting fears that we had crossed the threshold into
a frightening Brave New World where we can play God by altering our DNA.

   On May 22, 1989, in the first sanctioned gene-transfer experiment, an NIH
team headed by Dr. Stephen Rosenberg, of the National Cancer Institute and
including Dr. R. Michael Blaese, also of the NCI, and Anderson, of the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, inserted a foreign gene into a human patient.
Ultimately, eight patients with advanced melanoma, a fatal form of skin cancer,
received infusions of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL), special white blood
cells that the body's immune system unleashes to fight cancer; a foreign marker
gene was spliced into the TIL cells. Though the experiment had no therapeutic
value, it was a key step in laying the groundwork for actual gene therapy. "It
proved foreign genes could survive intact long enough to be useful for therapy
without doing any damage to the patient," Rosenberg says.

   But it was the second such experiment, conducted by a team headed by
Anderson, assisted by Rosenberg and Blaese, that was considered the watershed.
On Sept. 14, 1990, at the NIH, an i.v. tube was inserted into the arm of a
4-year-old girl suffering from ADA deficiency, a severe immune deficiency caused
by the absence of the gene that regulates the production of an enzyme crucial to
keeping the body's immune cells functioning. The strategy was to insert copies
of the gene in hopes that it would produce the enzyme.

   The procedure itself was astonishingly routine and took less than half an
hour, but it marked the dawn of a new era in medicine: the age of human gene
therapy.

   Since then, the girl has returned once a month for repeat infusions, and her
immune function appears to be vastly improved; in fact, her parents report that
when the entire family caught colds last winter, she got well faster than anyone
else. A 9-year-old girl with the same condition was added to the trial last
January, and Anderson expects to test this technique on two more patients soon.

   Rosenberg's team has gone a step further. Four patients with melanoma have
received blood cells fortified with a gene that produces a tumor-necrosis
factor, a lethal enzyme that is programmed to attack malignant tissue. They plan
to treat another 50 patients within the next year. "Right now, we're only
looking at melanoma," Rosenberg says. "But if this works, we can use it on other
cancers."

   Slamon's team at UCLA is taking a different approach, one that starves tumor
cells of substances needed for growth. Current treatments for women with
recurrent breast and ovarian cancer -- such as radiation and chemotherapy --
aren't very effective; they kill normal, healthy tissue, and the side effects
are nightmarish. "The appeal of this approach," Slamon says, "is its precision,
that it may be a more effective way to treat advanced cancers, and it appears to
have no side effects."

   Similar therapies are being tested by a team headed by John Mendelsohn,
chairman of medicine at New York's Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, which
has developed an antibody that inhibits the action of an oncogene and tested it
on 19 lung-cancer patients. At Georgetown University in Washington, a group
headed by Marc Lippman, director of the Vincent T. Lombardi Cancer Center, has
begun clinical trials with 11 patients with breast and other types of cancers
using pentosan polysulfate, a carbohydrate that halts the action of another
oncogene known to stimulate tumor growth.

   But amid all of this scientific ferment, others sound a note of caution. In
the next five to 10 years, these biologically derived treatments may become
potent weapons in our therapeutic arsenal, used in combination with other
therapies, says Bruce A. Chabner, director of the division of cancer treatment
for the National Cancer Institute. "But they haven't as yet proved to be any
more effective than what's currently available. They're also too expensive and
labor-intensive to produce to be used on a broad scale," though costs may
decrease as techniques are refined.

   Others worry about the long-range consequences. "There's a distinction
between traditional pharmaceuticals and genetically engineered ones -- a
distinction that has been lost," says Marc Lappe, a bioethics expert at the
University of Illinois in Chicago. "We might be inadvertently making permanent
alternations in the human genome. This is never considered in these protocols."

   But to Rosenberg, the benefits outweigh the risks. "Right now, we're dealing
with the basic biology of life itself, and we're in the infancy of the
development of these therapies. But last year 515,000 Americans died of cancer
in spite of our best available treatments -- that's more Americans than died in
all of Vietnam and World War II. So it's obvious we need better ways to treat
cancer, and we have to use every tool at our disposal." What drives the Stephen
Rosenbergs of this world are the Diane Hintons.

   SCOTT HINTON GUNS THE MOTOR OF HIS 16-FOOT SPEEDBOAT, and the craft bursts
into noisy life. Diane and the three boys -- James, 13, a dark and introspective
adolescent; Joel, 11, freckle-faced and sensitive, and Joseph, 10, with blond
hair, blue eyes and a killer smile -- sway sideways as the boat lurches forward,
bobbing across the waves on Lake Kaweah, a reservoir about 40 miles east of
their home in Central California. The kids take turns water-skiing. Each one
glides expertly across the water; their faces shine with happiness as Scott tows
them back and forth across the lake. Then it's Diane's turn. She deftly skims
the waves for about 15 minutes, bouncing like a delicate doll. But she firmly
grips the line tethered to the boat, drawing on surprising reserves of strength.
"For almost a year, our lives revolved around my cancer," Diane says later,
sinking back onto the seat cushions of the boat. "Now we're trying to get back
to some semblance of normalcy. I could sit around and snivel until I die. Or I
can live until I die. I've decided to live."

   Diane and Scott live in Hanford, a prosperous farming town of about 30,000
with quaint antiques shops, clean streets and well-tended lawns. They enjoy
small-town life: church barbecues and camping trips in the summer, dirt biking
and skiing at Badger Pass in Yosemite during the winter.

   The Hintons arrived in Hanford in 1983, mired in debt because the cafe they
owned near Sacramento was a casualty of the 1982 recession. But they put down
roots and flourished. Scott made decent money running his own construction
company, while Diane kept the books and took care of the house and the kids. The
Hintons were able to afford a pool and a hot tub in the back yard of their
four-bedroom home, the boat and dirt bikes for Scott and the boys.

   In early 1990, Diane started to experience some cramping and constipation.
She thought it was a minor problem that could wait a couple of months until she
went in for her annual gynecological examination. Her doctor felt a
grapefruit-size mass in Diane's abdomen. He thought it was a fibrous cyst and
urged her to get it removed, though, he assured her, it was nothing to worry
about. "What are the chances of its being cancer?" Scott had asked.

   "It's very unlikely," answered the doctor, dismissively waving his hand.
"This woman is 30 years old. Cancer would be doubtful."

   On Friday, April 20, 1990, Diane was wheeled into surgery. Twenty minutes
later, her doctor burst through the doors of the operating room. "She has
cancer, and it's everywhere," he told Scott, his face flushed and his eyes
filled with tears. "I'm afraid your wife doesn't have much of a future."

   Scott collapsed on the floor, sobbing. Diane remained in surgery for another
four hours, and doctors performed a hysterectomy. All Scott could think was: How
was he going to tell his wife she was dying?

   Their family closed ranks. Diane's mother and Scott's mother, who are both
named Joanne, took turns driving down from Sacramento -- sometimes, they joked,
they'd pass each other on the freeway -- to help Scott and look after the kids
while Diane received the chemotherapy treatments that left her incapacitated.

   "The drugs destroy your mind," says Diane, whose weight plummeted from 112 to
86 pounds. "I'd wake up in the morning thinking, 'I've just got to get through
this day.' I'd lie there trying to find distractions. Some days, I couldn't get
out of bed."

   This went on for four punishing months. But Diane and Scott, who are deeply
religious Missionary Baptists, did not doubt that they would beat this, and
their faith sustained them. Diane's "second-look" surgery, where doctors check
the status of the cancer, was scheduled for Oct. 11. The Hintons were convinced
they were about to put this nightmarish episode behind them. But doctors
discovered her cancer was even worse -- hundreds of new tumors had spread
through her abdominal cavity. "The chemo had done nothing," Diane recalls. "Four
months of my life down the drain, and it did no good. We were devastated."

   While Diane recovered from the surgery, Scott gathered his three sons around
him. "Your mother is going to be all right for a while," he told them. "But then
she'll get sicker and sicker, and she won't get better."

   DENNIS SLAMON IS A MAN IN A HURRY. HE'S 6-FOOT-3, AND HIS long strides
swallow up the hallway that leads to his cluttered laboratory, adjoining his
cubbyhole of an office on the 11th floor of the Factor Health Sciences Building,
a gleaming brick-and-smoked-glass structure that towers over the east end of the
UCLA campus. This is Slamon's turf, and he commands the bustling corridors like
a benevolent, if exacting, paterfamilias. Even his wardrobe is dictated by
expediency. He owns 20 or so long-sleeved dress shirts in the same style -- 10
in powder blue and 10 in white -- several pairs of black or gray slacks and "a
collection of maroon ties," he explains with a toothy grin.

   The son and grandson of Pennsylvania coal miners -- his grandfather and two
uncles were buried alive and rescued three times in cave-ins -- and the first
member of his family to attend college, Slamon slam-dunked his way through a
combined MD and Ph.D. program at the University of Chicago in five years (it
normally takes more than six years). Since coming to UCLA in 1979 as a
post-doctoral fellow in oncology, he has raced up the ranks, in 1988 becoming
director of clinical research for the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, an
NIH research center at UCLA. Earlier this year he was named chief of the
Division of Hematology-Oncology at the UCLA School of Medicine.

   But the accomplishments he seems proudest of are those of his research team
-- a dedicated group of technicians, students, post-doctoral fellows and
colleagues, some of whom have worked together since 1983. They've journeyed from
a vague suspicion about the role played by a particular oncogene in promoting
out-of-control growth in certain cancers to testing a treatment on patients --
"from bench to bedside," he says -- in less than seven years. This is warp speed
in scientific circles, where such a breakthrough can consume much of a medical
career.

   Their strategy was elegantly simple, rooted in established science.
Scientists know certain genes either promote or stop cell growth. "So if cancer
is an abnormality in growth," Slamon explains, "then the logical place to look
for problems is in genes that regulate growth. Our search started out as a
fishing expedition, but we got lucky because we were fishing in rich waters."

   The actual medical detective work, though, was tedious; from start to finish,
Slamon estimates it took half a million hours in the laboratory. The team's
first step was to use DNA probes to detect any aberrations in genes that govern
cell growth in a series of human breast-, lung-, colon- and ovarian-cancer tumor
samples. Probes are fragments of DNA that are produced using genetic-engineering
techniques developed in the early 1970s. Because of the special properties of
DNA -- even tiny bits of DNA will attach themselves only to segments of DNA that
have the same structure -- a probe can be programmed to ferret out a specific
gene. Once these microscopic scientific sleuths are unleashed in a petri dish,
they home in on their identical twins like radar.

   After nearly 18 months of peering at tumors through microscopes, Slamon's
team came up with a promising lead. "One of the things that jumped out at us was
that, in breast cancer, a particular gene was altered, and the alteration was
that multiple copies of it were made," Slamon explains. "So the next question
was: Does this mean anything? or was it just something that happens as part of
the general disarray of a cancer cell? So we looked at the patient's history. We
discovered that patients with extra copies of this gene were more prone to an
early relapse and more prone to a shortened survival. Once we saw that
correlation, that set off alarm bells, and we knew we were onto something."
Later they found the same correlation in ovarian cancer.

   These were heady but grueling days. It was not unusual for Slamon to spend
the entire night at the laboratory, baby-sitting an experiment, or for his
colleagues to work around the clock. "Dennis had a thriving lab in a very small
space -- about 600 feet -- and the place was always packed," recalls Michael S.
Press, a pathologist at USC who has known Slamon since medical school and who
has collaborated with him on several projects. "You practically had to take a
number to get bench space -- and if you left for a few minutes, someone would
take your place. But there was a tremendous esprit de corps because we were
doing valuable work."

   The congestion has eased, thanks to the addition of two more laboratories.
But Slamon's work hours are no more civilized -- he rarely hits the freeway to
his home in Woodland Hills before 10 at night, and he frequently works till
midnight. Nailing down exactly why multiple copies of this gene -- known as
HER-2/neu -- can prompt tumor cells to behave so aggressively took four years.
In May, 1989, Slamon's group proved to the satisfaction of the scientific
community that the HER-2/neu oncogene is amplified (meaning that there are extra
copies of the gene in the DNA of the tumor cell) in about 25% to 30% of human
breast and ovarian cancers. Cancer patients with the HER-2/neu amplification
relapsed and died sooner than those without extra copies of this oncogene.

   Based upon these findings, Slamon's team moved on to formulating a treatment.
The approach he devised stemmed from a simple premise. Each one of our genes has
a different job and sends out a genetic signal (or code) that sparks a critical
chain reaction. The HER-2/neu gene, for example, codes for the production of a
growth-factor receptor. These growth-factor receptors sit on the surface of the
cell and receive signals like tiny antennae; they bond with growth factors,
which are produced by another gene.

   The union of the factor and receptor triggers the production of new cells. So
it's logical that if there are too many HER-2/neu genes coding for the
production of too many growth-factor receptors, an overproduction of cells will
result. One way to halt this process is to block the union between factor and
receptor, or in some way thwart the action of the receptor.

   Knowing this, researchers at Genentech developed a series of antibodies that
prevent this linkage. They injected mice with the substance produced by this
oncogene, and the animals' immune systems went into overdrive, churning out
antibodies to ward off this foreign invader. Slamon's team then identified which
of the mouse antibodies was the most effective in inhibiting the action of the
oncogene in human tumors. "Once we satisfied the FDA's requirements," Slamon
said, "we were ready to go."

   Some scientists, however, believe that Slamon -- and other researchers like
him -- are in too much of a hurry, and that such human trials may be premature.
"Based on basic science established years ago, using one antibody only briefly
reduces tumor growth. Two different antibodies are needed to be effective,"
explains Mark I. Greene, a researcher at the University of Pennsylvania. He is
hoping to have clinical trials under way early next year to test antibodies to
combat pancreatic cancer.

   "The risk here," he continues, "is if the one-antibody approach doesn't work,
people get discouraged. So there's no real reason to rush into this, especially
when we know it's not the most effective way."

   Greene's criticisms reflect the divisions that exist in medical science
between researchers who want every variable checked before going forward and
physicians who are desperate to try anything that shows promise of easing their
patients' suffering.

   DIANE AND SCOTT HINton lapsed into a deep depression after her second
surgery. But slowly, they came to terms with their situation. If Diane was under
a death sentence, they were going to enjoy the time she had left. Last January
they took a lavish weeklong vacation, indulging their every whim at Disney
World, and they began to have fun again.

   Diane embarked on another round of chemotherapy, but again, it did nothing.
"We made a conscious decision then not to have treatment," she explains. "We
knew the implications of that decision, but all these therapies were doing was
making me sick." Diane's fate, they felt, was in God's hands.

   But Diane's mother, Joanne Allen, refused to give up. In early April, a brief
item in the business section of the Sacramento Bee caught her eye. Genentech was
involved in an experimental test using antibodies for women with advanced breast
and ovarian cancer. Galvanized, Allen grabbed the telephone. Two days and dozens
of phone calls later, she got Dennis Slamon on the line.

   He referred her to Dr. Beth Karlan, a gynecological oncologist and surgeon at
Cedars Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. A former student of Slamon's, Karlan
was screening ovarian-cancer patients for the trials. Scott had Diane's doctor
send slides of Diane's tumor to Karlan to see if Diane had the HER-2/neu
oncogene present.

   And then they waited. After two months, the Hintons assumed that Diane hadn't
qualified for the trials.

   At about 7 one Tuesday evening in late June, the phone rang. When Scott heard
Karlan's voice, he instinctively knew he was about to get the first bit of good
news he had had in a year. "It's Dr. Karlan," Scott told Diane.

   "Yes!" she cheered, thrusting two clenched fists over her head in jubilation.

   ON A MORNING A WEEK later, Diane and Scott sit, chattering nervously,
waiting. It is a little before noon when an orderly finally arrives with a
wheelchair for Diane to escort her to her treatment. The Hintons' excitement is
palpable. Scott jokes with the orderly, and Diane beams with affection at her
high-spirited husband as his raucous laugh echoes down the hushed hallway.

   The elevator takes them down to one of the lower floors of the medical
complex, and the orderly pilots them through the maze of tunnels connecting each
building. Karlan is waiting for them outside a tiny, airless room cluttered with
equipment, where she will insert a catheter -- essentially a piece of plastic
tubing -- into Diane' stomach. Later, the catheter will be used to channel the
antibody to the tumors inside her abdominal cavity.

   Karlan, 34, is like a ray of sunshine in these claustrophobic corridors. With
her thousand-kilowatt smile, luminous hazel eyes and iridescent-gold, three-inch
heels, she exudes a soothing glow. "How are you today?" she asks as Diane
clambers onto a gurney and is prepped for the procedure.

   Slamon dashes in, a stethoscope around his neck. He glances at Karlan's
elegant beige pants suit -- Karlan's sartorial splendor is legendary -- and
can't resist cracking wise. "Dr. Karlan likes making a fashion statement when
she comes out of the operating room," he says, rocking back on his heels and
grinning like a mischievous schoolboy. The Harvard-educated Karlan blushes as
she snaps on a pair of surgical gloves.

   But beneath the banter, it is obvious that Karlan and particularly Slamon are
even more excited than the Hintons. The clinical trial represents the
culmination of years of work, and there is an expectant charge in the air. Once
the catheter is inserted, Diane is transported by gurney to the Nuclear Medicine
Department two floors down, with an entourage trailing behind that includes
Slamon, Karlan, another doctor, two nurses, Scott and a reporter.

   First, Diane will be injected with a tiny, 100-milligram dose of the
antibody, followed by a chaser of technesium sulfur colloid isotope, which emits
radioactive signals so the doctors can see whether the antibody is being
distributed throughout the abdomen. For all the cutting-edge technology used to
devise this mouse antibody and to monitor its course throughout the body during
the clinical trials, administering the antibody itself is as unremarkable as a
blood transfusion.

   "I'll do the infusion," Slamon says with a proprietary air, gingerly cradling
in his hands the plastic pouch containing the precious fluid. The moment of
truth has arrived. Scott leans over the gurney, his face suffused with love, and
gives his wife a quick kiss for luck. And then, in a flash, it is done: Slamon
attaches the pouch to an i.v. stand and plugs the i.v. tube into the catheter.

   Forty-five minutes later, the pouch is drained and Diane is shuttled to
another room. There, an imaging camera is positioned over Diane's waist so it
can detect the radioactive "footprints" of the technesium-laced antibody
flooding throughout her abdomen, which shows up on the computer screen as tiny
white dots.

   Afterward, Diane is injected with a specially prepared radioactive isotope,
by which iodine-131 molecules are chemically attached to the antibodies. "Right
now, we're using the iodine-131 isotope merely to follow the antibody through
the body (once it leaves the abdomen and enters the bloodstream) and see where
it is going," Slamon explains. "But in the future, it could be another
therapeutic approach, and we may use antibodies with a radioactive isotope
attached to radiate tumors."

   Because the iodine piggybacks onto the antibody, and therefore can home in on
the cancerous cells, iodine in bigger doses could be used as a lethal payload to
kill tumors. The appeal of this approach is that it attacks tumors with far more
precision than conventional radiation treatments, where healthy tissue is
destroyed along with the malignancies.

   "I'm going to glow in the dark," Diane jokes as she is injected with another
radioactive substance -- this time a fluorine-18 isotope that measures the
metabolic activity of her tumors. Diane stoically spends the next four hours
lying inside a PET scanner, which takes fluorine-enhanced electronic photographs
of her tumors. These will be compared with later PET scans to determine whether,
in fact, the antibody has stopped or curtailed the tumors' action.

   It is early evening before all the tests to record the data needed for these
clinical trials are finally completed. Diane is wheeled back to her room at
about 7. It is after 8 when she is given another infusion of what the doctors
believe may be a therapeutic dose of the antibody. (The first few women in the
trials received only small doses of the antibody because they were testing for
toxicity; but now that it's clear that the antibody is safe at the lower level,
researchers are upping the dosages they administer to women in the trials to
determine how much can safely be tolerated.)

   Then, suddenly, one of the nurses grabs Slamon as he is coming down the
hallway to check on Diane. "The mouse antibody," the nurse gasps. "She's had a
bizarre reaction to the mouse antibody." Slamon's face turns ashen as he hurries
into the room. He doesn't see Diane right away because Scott and a nurse are
standing around her bed.

   When Scott and the nurse step aside, Slamon sees Diane sitting up in bed --
wearing a huge mouse mask.

   Everyone, including Slamon, dissolves into laughter. As Diane pulls off the
mask, she confesses, "I've been planning this for days."

   THREE DAYS LATER, ALL the tests to monitor the antibody in Diane's body have
been completed. Diane and Scott leave the hospital and return home to pick up
the threads of their life. They will be back for a follow-up in a month. But
even if the treatment has no effect, it has given them something they thought
they had lost forever: hope.

   It will be several more weeks before the first phase of these clinical trials
are completed, and months more before all the data are assessed. It won't be
until early 1992 that Slamon's team gears up for the next, expanded phase of the
trials, which will measure the effectiveness of this therapy in several dozen
patients (patients in the initial trials will be included in later tests, which
will encompass more patients). Some of the testing will be done at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering in New York City and perhaps at other cancer-research centers in
order to handle the larger volume of patients.

   Satisfying the FDA's requirements for testing a new treatment is expensive
and time-consuming. The first phase of these particular trials, for example,
cost nearly $1 million ($150,000 came from an NIH grant, $800,000 was provided
by Revlon, and the remainder came from an assortment of funding sources). This
therapy will go through two more expanded trials -- the third phase may
encompass several hundred patients -- to determine whether it actually works. If
all goes extremely well -- which rarely happens -- the treatment will then wind
its way through the often Byzantine FDA review process and could be approved for
general-public use by 1994.

   The competition to be among the first to devise new approaches to treatment
is fierce. And the political infighting that goes on in the jockeying for grants
-- particularly for research on "women's diseases" such as breast and ovarian
cancer, which are notoriously underfunded -- often seems more like roller derby
than civilized rivalry among highly educated professionals.

   But Dennis Slamon seems to keep up this frenetic pace without breaking a
sweat. Having powerful friends helps. Like Brandon Tartikoff, former chairman of
NBC Entertainment and the current head of Paramount Pictures. Through a
circuitous set of circumstances, Tartikoff, who was stricken with Hodgkin's
disease, a form of lymphatic cancer, became Slamon's patient more than a decade
ago.

   Over the years, Tartikoff's wife, Lilly, asked Slamon repeatedly if she could
raise funds to help advance his work. "I made that commitment after he saved
Brandon's life," says Lilly Tartikoff. "That day when Dennis said Brandon was
going to be fine, I felt I wanted to give something back."

   Slamon was reluctant to take advantage of their relationship -- until three
years ago, when Lilly Tartikoff delivered an ultimatum. She was going to do
something for cancer research -- with him or without him. He finally relented.

   She immediately swung into action. She buttonholed Ronald Perelman, chairman
of Revlon, and persuaded him to donate $2.4 million over three years to
establish the Revlon/ UCLA Women's Cancer Research Program. She also organized a
benefit to raise money and to publicize the Revlon program. The first affair
netted more than $300,000, and the benefit is now an annual event.

   It is an early Friday evening in August, the end of a long day at the end of
a long week, but Slamon is in an expansive mood. He will turn 43 in a few days,
and he plans to celebrate his birthday fishing for salmon off the coast of
Alaska. He relaxes in his sparsely furnished office, where the only personal
touches are the compact-disc player perched on the windowsill and the collection
of CDs -- soft jazz, classical music and show tunes -- Slamon listens to when he
is alone.

   "I think I could be successful in private practice," he says, in a rare
moment of reflection. "But here you get an idea about something and the leads
start to pay off. I can't imagine a return greater than that -- and this isn't
altruism or dedication."

   Looking to the future, he's optimistic. Even if the treatment fails, plenty
has been learned already. These experiments can only deepen science's
understanding of cancer's biological mechanisms.

   Diane Hinton has subsequently undergone another surgery to remove her tumors.
There are indications that chemotherapy, which earlier failed to kill the
tumors, may now be working. Doctors believe she may live at least another year,
but Slamon won't speculate on whether the antibody has altered Diane's reaction
to the chemotherapy -- or whether she has found her miracle. Nor will he reveal
the results of the first phase of the clinical trials until they are presented
at scientific meetings, which should occur in the next three or four months.

   But he can't hide his excitement about the discoveries being made in his and
other laboratories. "There's more here -- lots more," he says. "This is only the
beginning."

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, COVER: Dianne Hinton: fighting her own genes for
survival. ; Photo, COLOR, Scott and Dianne Hinton. ; Photo, COLOR, Diane Hinton,
surrounded by sons James, 13, standing; Joseph, 10, left, and Joel, 11. ; Photo,
COLOR, Dr. Dennis Slamon in his UCLA laboratory. ; Photo, COLOR, Spiritually
hanging tough: Scott and Diane Hinton aboard their bicycles in Hanford. ; Photo,
COLOR, Dr. Beth Karlan, a key research collaborator.  Steven A. Heller


                             1579 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 20, 1991, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A6

LENGTH: 1203 words

HEADLINE: Individual 'Genetic Privacy' Seen as Threatened;
Officials Say Explosion of Scientific Knowledge Could Lead to Misuse of
Information

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: David Brown, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Leaders of the American effort to map human genes say individuals should have
a "right to genetic privacy," which they concede will be difficult to ensure
because of an upcoming explosion in genetic knowledge.

   "Speaking as a citizen, I think genetic information should be absolutely
private. The idea that there will be a huge data bank of genetic information on
millions of people is repulsive," James D. Watson, director of the National
Center for Human Genome Research, told a House subcommittee Thursday.

   But already the ability to "fingerprint" individuals by genetic tests is in
common use in courts, the Nobel laureate said. He speculated that in 10 years,
such forms of identification may be reducible to simple bar codes, easily stored
and transmitted.

   "I shudder at the thought of all this information in the hands of a malicious
head of the FBI," Watson, one of the two people who first described the
structure of DNA, told the House Government Operations subcommittee on
government information, justice and agriculture.

   "Individuals must have control over the acquisition of personal genetic
information," Bernadine Healy, director of the National Institutes of Health,
told the panel. "Genetic information is especially personal because it can
identify health risks we inherit from, and often share with, our families, and
that are built into our bodies at a very basic biological level."

   That a physician -- or insurance company -- can use results of genetic tests
to draw inferences about a person's relatives "is one way in which genetic
information is different from other sorts of medical information," said David J.
Galas, director of the Energy Department's human genome research program. But,
Galas said, even for more conventional medical information, "the ethical, legal
and social issues . . . have never been properly addressed."

   The NIH and the Energy Department are directing the Human Genome Project, a
15-year effort to determine the location, and eventually the chemical sequence,
of all the genes contained in human DNA. So far, about 3,000 of an estimated
100,000 or more genes have been located with some precision.

   Among sticky questions about genetic testing mentioned by witnesses were
whether: A doctor who discovers that a patient has a gene for a treatable
inherited disease can ethically tell the patient's relatives they should be
tested, even if the patient objects.

   Parents have the right to have their children tested for an untreatable
disease of middle age, such as the inherited neurological disorder Huntington's
disease, thus presumably burdening those who have tested positive with several
decades of anxiety.

   A health insurer should be allowed to charge more for a policy sold to
someone who is a "carrier" of a disease gene, such as that for sickle-cell
anemia, because of the chance that the person's child will have the disease and
incur high medical bills.

   Employers should be allowed to order the testing of a prospective employee
for genetic traits as part of the now permissible gathering of "job-related
medical information."

   Over last two years, NIH has spent $ 6 million researching ethical, legal and
social questions related to genetic research. This year, 5 percent of the genome
project's budget will be used for research and public education of these issues,
an amount Watson said eventually could grow to 10 percent.

   "We don't want to have the genome in front of us and then scratch our heads
about what this all means," Healy said.

   Several witnesses told stories, however, suggesting that "discrimination by
genotype" already exists.

   Paul R. Billings, a medical geneticist at California Pacific Medical Center
in San Francisco, testified about an unmarried Wisconsin woman who, after
hearing that a nephew had been diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, inquired at a
clinic whether she could be tested for the gene, which is carried by about 1 in
25 people of Anglo-Saxon ethnicity. Although a test was available, she decided
not to take it.

   Some time later, Billings told the panel, the woman married. Her husband's
health insurer -- which used the clinic and presumably had access to records
there -- told her that if she did not have the cystic fibrosis test done, the
company would not insure her or her husband. To give birth to a child at risk of
developing cystic fibrosis, both the woman and her husband would have to be
carriers of the gene implicated in the disease. If both parents have the gene,
there is a 1 in 4 chance their child will develop the disease.

   In a second case, Billings told of a man in an eastern state who had an
inherited form of muscular dystrophy and was refused life insurance, despite a
letter from his doctor stating that the symptoms -- mild leg weakness -- had not
changed in 20 years and did not threaten his life expectancy. Soon afterward,
the man's automobile insurance -- provided by a different company but serviced
by the same broker through whom he had sought the life insurance policy -- was
canceled, even though his driving record was excellent. Muscular dystrophy was
cited as the reason.

   Watson and Healy told subcommittee Chairman Robert E. Wise Jr. (D-W.Va.) that
it will be about two years before the NIH-sponsored legal and ethical panels
will have recommendations for ways to prevent abuse of genetic information.

   In April, Rep. John Conyers Jr. (D-Mich.) submitted a bill that would protect
genetic information maintained by the federal government and regulate the
disclosure of such information. But many experts believe the threat of abuse
lies more with genetic records held privately, rather than by the government.

   In a survey of more than 500 U.S. companies, the congressional Office of
Technology Assessment found that only 1 percent had policies on genetic testing
of applicants or employees. According to the report, released this month, half
of the companies' health officers said they considered genetic testing
"generally acceptable" to "inform employees of their increased susceptibility to
workplace hazards"; 62 percent said the decision to perform such tests should be
the employer's.

   Several witnesses told the subcommittee they feared that as public discussion
of genes becomes increasingly widespread, people will equate their chromosomes
with their destiny.

   "When we have the final human genome, it is not as if we will have a total
picture of a person, the way that if you have a photograph you know how a person
looks," W. French Anderson, a physician now doing gene therapy experiments on
patients at NIH, told Rep. Al McCandless (R-Calif.). "There is an enormously
complex interaction between the environment and the person."

   Anderson said he is concerned that if an employer or an insurance company
learns that someone carries a gene that puts that individual at higher risk for
developing a brain tumor, for example, many will conclude a brain tumor is
inevitable.

   "It doesn't mean that at all. It might mean an increase of 1 in 100,000
risk," Anderson said. "It is not the intentional misuse of genetic information
that worries me so much as the unintentional misuse. We are not going to define
human beings in any kind of definitive way."


                             1580 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 October 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 254 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY BRIEFS

BODY:


   * Barnett Banks Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., will acquire CSX Commercial
Services Inc., the education finance servicing business of CSX Corp., Richmond.
Terms were not disclosed.

* Fries Entertainment Inc., Los Angeles, a producer of television movies and
other programming, has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.



   * McArthur/Glen Group, Washington, a developer, said its Pacific West Outlet
Center in Gilroy, Calif., had doubled its size by opening 32 new stores.

* Norsk Hydro, Oslo, an energy, chemicals and metals group, said it would take a
special charge of 500 million kroner, or about $75 million, to cover costs
related to a restructuring in its agriculture and magnesium divisions. The
charges would be included in the third-quarter results.

* Petro-Canada, Calgary, Alberta, will sell 5 percent of the Syncrude oil sands
project to Mitsubishi Oil Co., Japan, for $132.5 million (Canadian).

* Rolls-Royce P.L.C., London, said its Cooper Rolls joint venture had received
contracts from South American gas and oil companies valued at $80 million.

* Saab Automobile A.B., Stockholm, a unit of Saab-Scania A.B., said General
Motors Corp., Detroit, had placed orders of more than $100 million with 17
suppliers recommended by Saab.

* Somatix Therapy Corp., Alameda, Calif., and Genesys Therapeutic Corp., La
Jolla, Calif., two gene-therapy companies, will merge. Genesys shareholders will
receive 0.50413 share of new Somatix common stock for each Genesys common share.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1991


                             1581 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 18, 1991 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 256 words

HEADLINE: March of Dimes to donate $2 million for Salk addition

BYLINE: CHERYL CLARK, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The March of Dimes has agreed to contribute $200,000 a year for the next 10
years for a new addition to the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La
Jolla. The money will be in addition to the $1.2 million the philanthropy
provides to the Salk Institute yearly. Delbert Glanz, the Salk's executive vice
president, said the $200,000 brings the institute that much closer toward
reaching its goal of $20 million needed to pay for new building.

   The institute so far has raised $11 million, he said. The new building will
be devoted to expanded research in birth defects, acquired immune deficiency
syndrome, brain function, cancer, gene therapy and the causes of premature
birth, Salk representatives said. Opera diva Beverly Sills, chairwoman of the
board of directors of the March of Dimes, is expected to participate in a
ceremony today when the foundation will present Salk officials with a $1.4
million check. "Today's gift marks another milestone in the institute's history
and emphasizes once again the close relationship that has developed between our
two institutions," Dr. Renato Dulbecco, Salk president, said in a prepared
statement. Situated on Torrey Pines Mesa, the Salk Institute is the March of
Dimes' largest single beneficiary.

   It was created with $22 million in donations from the charity in the early
1960s when polio-vaccine pioneer Jonas Salk conceived of a center where
scientists could work without obligation to teach or treat patients. Since then,
the research institute's budget has grown to $36 million a year.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1582 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 18, 1991 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D-1

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Investor interest is still high as biotech offerings multiply

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   With biotechnology stocks hotter than ever on Wall Street, San Diego biotech
companies continue lining up to cash in.

   Yesterday Mycogen Corp., which is developing biopesticides, became the third
company in as many days to announce that it had filed for approval to sell 2
million shares to the public. Adding to the flurry of biotech activity yesterday
was the announcement that GeneSys Therapeutic Corp., co-founded last year by
Ivor Royston, would merge with Somatix Corp., a publicly traded company in
Alameda.

   Both companies are focusing on genetic modification for the production and
delivery of therapeutic substances. Earlier this week, Cytel Corp. said it had
filed for approval of an initial public offering.

   And Gensia Pharmaceuticals Inc. has organized Aramed Inc., a subsidiary that
it is also seeking to take public. Finally, Lidak Pharmaceuticals Inc. also
announced this week that it would create a subsidiary to develop therapeutic
products based on Lidakol, the company's patented compound for the treatment of
herpes.

   It is expected that Lidak will seek funding for the new subsidiary. The
cluster of public offerings and the spinout from Lidak are being driven by
continued strong investor interest in biotech stocks. "The financial windows are
open as all get out," said Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor of BioVenture View, a
monthly industry newsletter in San Mateo.

   "The market is saying if you have a reasonable story, it will pay you for it.
"My personal opinion is that the market has also rewarded some stories that
aren't so reasonable as well." Robbins-Roth noted that there were signs early in
the summer that investors had cooled on the biotech stock group.

   Similar signs popped up again last month.

   But each time the group has roared up to higher levels. "The bottom line is
that it gives these companies a real opportunity to raise cash," said
Robbins-Roth.

   "Companies are saying, `Who knows how long the window will be open?'" The
window is certainly already crowded.

   Martin Nash, chief operating officer NeuroTherapeutics Corp., which is
seeking venture funding, said the field seeking public offering has become so
crowded it may be impossible in 1991 for those not already in the pipeline. "If
you went into an investment banker today, you wouldn't get your offering out
this year," said Nash.

   "Investment bankers are booked for the year.

   I heard that from two different accounting people at major firms. There are a
lot of companies that have their paperwork in and will come out this year, but
others will not be able to." Nash added that the flurry of public offerings has
put pressure on companies seeking the attention of venture capitalists. "The
venture people are difficult to contact because they're all in board meetings
about their own public offerings," he said. James McCamant, editor of the
Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley, agreed that pipeline for public
offerings had become clogged with the recent flurry of deals. "It would not
surprise me if the Cytel deal was delayed because the underwriters were busy,"
he said. McCamant noted that Mycogen's 2 million share offering will include
728,000 shares from insiders who had received their stock from the acquisition
of Soilserv last year.

   The offering gives Mycogen an opportunity to sell off the "overhang" from
that acquisition and raise funds, he added. McCamant also anticipated that
GeneSys merger with Somatix would result in a stronger to pioneer gene therapy
technology. "You need critical mass to make sense in a area where you have so
many unknowns," McCamant said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1583 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 15, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z7; GENETICS

LENGTH: 457 words

HEADLINE: Additional Gene Therapy Experiment Approved;
Treatment Sought for Lethal Liver Disorder

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A federal panel last week granted permission for the first human gene therapy
to correct a lethal form of an inherited liver dysfunction. The disease, called
hypercholesterolemia, is characterized by high blood cholesterol levels (above
700) and life-threatening coronary artery disease leading to angina and heart
attacks even in childhood.

   The gene therapy experiment was approved by the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee (RAC) of the National Institutes of Health, which evaluates the
scientific merit and ethical implications of testing genetic engineering
therapies on human patients.

   The next step is a final review by the Food and Drug Administration.

   "There are still a couple of tests (for the FDA) that will be completed
within the next week or two," said James M. Wilson, the project's chief
investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan
Medical Center. He sees no major obstacles to approval. "My time frame is
January 1 to start."

   If the FDA review is favorable, the liver trial would become the first human
gene therapy to take place outside of the NIH.

   In familial hypercholesterolemia, the liver is unable to remove lipids (fats)
from the blood because a liver cell protein called the low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) receptor does not work. Wilson's plan is to remove an egg-size portion of
a patient's liver and insert into the liver cells the gene that produces the
normal LDL receptor. Once the corrected cells are returned to the body through a
vein leading to the liver, they are expected to implant and grow.

   Wilson's experiment is to see if the cells will then make a normal version of
the protein, enabling the liver to cleanse the blood of lipids.

   So far, three human gene therapy trials are underway in the United States.

   On October 8, Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National Cancer
Institute, injected live, genetically altered tumor cells into the thigh of a
46-year-old man suffering from advanced malignant melanoma, the most deadly form
of skin cancer. The American Cancer Society projects that 6,500 people will die
of melanoma in the U.S. this year. Once this type of cancer has spread, it is
difficult if not impossible to treat.

   The cancer vaccine technique, until now only performed on mice, is aimed at
provoking an immune response to the cancer using the patient's own tumor cells.

   Rosenberg has permission to eventually treat 30 patients considered
terminally ill with advanced melanoma, renal carcinoma and colorectal cancer,
but he must report back to the National Institute of Health's RAC after the
first five patients.

   Rosenberg emphasized that the technique "is still highly experimental, and
not available or ready for general use."

GRAPHIC: CHART


                             1584 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 14, 1991, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F27

LENGTH: 1325 words

HEADLINE: Riding the Tidal Wave of New Stock Offerings

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   To market, to market, to sell a hot stock. Home again, home again, smiling
'round the clock. Yes, it's been a remarkable year for new stock offerings. A
recent study shows that American companies sold $ 37 billion in common stock
during the first nine months of this year. At that pace, the Securities and
Exchange Commission suggests, sales for the year will reach $ 49.3 billion. That
would be 13 percent higher than the record sales of $ 43.5 billion set in 1986.

   As we have noted week after week, companies in the Washington region have
participated fully in the wave of new stock offerings. The list of local stock
sales continued to grow again last week.

   The latest firm to come to market is General Kinetics Inc. of Rockville,
which hopes to sell 1.250 million shares. Of that amount, 1.0125 million shares
will come from the company while various officers will sell 237,500 of their own
shares. Prudential Securities Inc. is the underwriter.

   After the offering, the number of shares outstanding will rise to 3.2 million
and the amount controlled by insiders will drop below 30 percent. The effect
should be to improve the supply of stock available for trading in the market
place.

   The company's shares currently are trading at $ 7.25. At that price, the
company would raise about $ 9 million after expenses.

   Among the selling shareholders are Louis R. Schap, who headed the company for
many years and now is the vice-chairman. Schap will sell 90,000 shares. Director
S. Goran Stackig will sell 50,000 shares; Stanley J. Sarnowski, senior vice
president, will sell 30,000 shares; GKI president Richard A. Thompson and Steven
A. Rogers, head of the Cryptek division, each will sell 15,000 shares.

   The Cryptek division, which makes facsimile machines that are secure against
electronic eavesdropping, is the company's main engine for growth. The company
reported a profit of $ 919,000 (45 cents a share) on sales of $ 19 million for
the year ended May 31.

   Cel-Sci Corp. of Alexandria, which has spent $ 10 million in its eight years
in business, is hoping to raise another $ 10 million to help the firm pursue its
cancer and AIDS-related products, both of which have developed high visibility
in the biotech industry.

   Vice President Geert Kersten, who calls Cel-Sci "the poor man's biotech
company," said his firm will offer about 1 million units of its common stock.
Each unit will consist of five shares of stock and five three-year warrants to
buy common stock at, perhaps, $ 3 each.

   The stock now is trading at about $ 1.75, which means the offering, if
popular, could go at about $ 2 a share. Kober Financial Corp. of Englewood,
Colo., is managing the sale.

   The high road: Three area stocks hit highs last week. Genetic Therapy Inc. of
Gaithersburg, a biotech firm, which recently came out at $ 9 a share, now has
climbed to $ 18.50. And Government Technology Services Inc. of Chantilly, which
went public at $ 12, is up to $ 15.25. Meanwhile, Owens & Minor Inc. of
Richmond, which distributes hospital supplies, hit $ 20.375, and its chart shows
a continued rise since last fall.

   The low road: There are lots of things in the stock market that are hard to
believe. Fewer have been more difficult to comprehend than the sight of Riggs
National Corp., which sold at $ 41.50 five years ago, collapsing to $ 4.875 last
week. It finished the week at $ 5.125. The state of Riggs stock reflects the
strain on the bank's finances caused by real estate loans that went sour.

   Love 'em and leave 'em. Investors can be a fickle bunch. Survival Technology
Inc. of Bethesda became the darling of the stock market during the Persian Gulf
War when Uncle Sam began ordering large numbers of the automatic syringes that
allow military personnel to give themselves injections of nerve gas antidotes.

   Since then, the company has been promoting the use of its auto-injectors for
other medical purposes -- and has been showing signs of success.

   The bottom line for Survival Technology, in its report for the year ended
July 31, was a $ 2.9 million profit (99 cents a share) on sales of $ 46.7
million. However, when a one-time tax break was deducted from the 1991 results,
it left the company with a $ 1.7 million operating profit (60 cents).

   This was quite a bit better than the year before when the company lost money.
But some investors seized on the fourth quarter result to begin selling the
stock.

   In the fourth quarter, after the tax break was deducted, the earnings fell to
8 cents a share from 15 cents a year earlier.

   In Monday's trading, after the earnings were published, Survival Technology
fell to $ 17.75 from $ 21.62 1/2, off $ 3.87 1/2. In Tuesday's action, the stock
dropped to $ 16.37 1/2, down $ 1.37 1/2.

   On Wednesday, the trading quieted down and the stock added 12.5 cents to
close at $ 16.50. But the trend was down and the stock closed on Friday at $
15.75, a 27 percent loss for the week.

   Analyst and trader Steve Newby of Newby & Co. of Rockville, a strong
supporter of Survival Technology, said he didn't know why the stock plunged, but
noted that short-sellers have been active in the stock. Short-sellers hope to
profit when a stock falls.

   A recent Nasdaq report showed a "short" postion of about 144,000 shares,
quite large for a company that has only about 800,000 shares actively trading,
Newby said.

   After months of study, the D.C. Department of Finance and Revenue has
published its regulations on the taxation of out-of-state municipal bonds. The
"regs" were printed Friday in the D.C. Register, the city's official
publication, and the public has 30 days in which to file comments.

   As investors may remember, D.C. taxpayers currently are exempt from paying
D.C. taxes on interest they earn on all municipal bonds. However, after Jan. 1,
D.C. residents will have to pay taxes on the income they receive from
out-of-state bonds purchased after Jan. 1.

   Bonds issued by the District, Puerto Rico, Guam and the U.S. Virgin Islands
will remain tax-exempt for D.C. taxpayers.

   Many questions have been raised about the impact of this new rule on mutual
fund shareholders. Many D.C. taxpayers own shares in mutual funds that invest in
tax-exempt bonds from scores of states. These funds make both interest and
capital gains payments to their shareholders -- some of which may come from D.C.
bonds but most of which comes from other states.

   To make the matter even more complicated, many shareholders reinvest these
payments, using them to buy additional shares in the bond fund.

   Tomas Pintado, a senior D.C. tax auditor, said that D.C. taxpayers will
receive instructions on how to report bond-fund income when they get their 1992
D.C. tax return forms late next year. The new rules will apply to tax returns
covering 1992 income.

   The regs, which cover 10 typewritten pages, contain several formulas intended
to show taxpayers how to figure out what they owe the D.C. government.

   Pintado said D.C. residents could obtain a copy of the regs by calling
202-727-6104, which is the Taxpayer Service office at the Department of Finance
and Revenue. Pintado said that if callers leave their names and addresses, he
will send them copies of the regulations.

   The revolving door keeps spinning at Johnston, Lemon & Co. Research Director
Sheryl R. Skolnick, after 14 months on the job, has quit J&L to go to a
better-paying position at Advest Inc., a medium-sized securities firm based in
Hartford, Conn. The firm has most of its offices on the East Coast.

   Skolnick was accompanied on her trip to Advest by J&L analyst Kurt Kammerer,
who was on his second tour at J&L. Skolnick and Kammerer will work for the
Advest research department in Hartford but will be located in the Advest office
in Washington.

   Skolnick said that she and Kammerer, in their new jobs, will concentrate,
almost exclusively, on doing research in the area of health care.

   J&L was reported to be looking for new research help.


                             1585 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    October 9, 1991, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 911 words

HEADLINE: HUMAN GENE THERAPY TESTED ON CANCER;
MEDICINE: DOCTORS INJECT A MAN WITH CELLS FROM HIS OWN TUMOR THAT HAD BEEN
GENETICALLY ENGINEERED IN AN ATTEMPT TO 'IMMUNIZE' HIS BODY.

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers at the National Institutes of Health on Tuesday performed the
first experiment using human gene therapy to create a "cancer vaccine" that they
hope will "immunize" patients against their own tumors.

   Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute,
injected a 46-year-old man suffering from advanced melanoma -- a lethal skin
cancer -- with cells from his own tumor that had been genetically engineered in
the laboratory with the gene for the production of tumor necrosis factor. Tumor
necrosis factor is a potent anti-cancer toxin which is naturally produced in
small amounts by the body. It helps regulate the immune system.

   The idea is to use the genetically engineered tumor cells to stimulate the
body into recognizing the malignancies as "foreign" invaders and to spur the
immune system into attacking and destroying tumors throughout the body.

   In announcing the experiment, NIH Director Bernadine Healy predicted that the
study "will pioneer a new approach to gene therapy in cancer."

   The human body is capable of provoking an immune response against cancer on
its own, but typically it is weak. By genetically priming tumor cells to pump
out large quantities of tumor necrosis factor, Rosenberg and his NCI team hope
to hasten destruction of the malignant cells.

   "What we're trying to do now is immunize the whole body against cancer,"
Rosenberg said in an interview. "When we reinject the cells, we hope this will
marshal the immune reaction around that cancer so that the body becomes
'immunized' against it, and the immunization spreads throughout the body."

   The ultimate application could be to use such therapy early after cancer
detection. For example, it could be employed "to treat somebody after surgery
and use this to prevent the cancer from coming back," Rosenberg said. "But
that's in the future."

   Rosenberg emphasized that the work "is still highly experimental" and not
available or ready for general use. "It's just a start," he said, adding that it
probably will be one or two years "before we know if the approach is valuable."

   The injection of a substance associated with a disease -- in this case,
cancer -- to enhance the body's own immune responses to that disease is common
to all immunization theories.

   Studies of mice treated with genetically altered tumor cells have shown that
their cancers grow for a short time and then spontaneously shrink and disappear
-- leaving the mice immune to the tumor, NIH said.

   NCI researchers hope to achieve a similar result in humans, NIH said.

   Rosenberg noted that calling the substance a "vaccine" is a misnomer, since
"to a lot of people, vaccine means preventing a disease -- which is not what
we're doing." Nevertheless, the term has popularly been used to describe the
approach.

   Rosenberg and other experts said that human studies using other so-called
"cancer vaccines" that have not used similar immune system stimulants have shown
mixed or disappointing results.

   Rosenberg and his team also plan to conduct the same experiment using the
gene for the production of interleukin-2, another immune system substance that
stimulates the body's tumor-fighting lymphocytes, or cells.

   Three weeks after the "immunization," the patient's lymph nodes will be
removed near the immunization site in the thigh to harvest additional immune
system cells there, and to remove any tumors that might have formed. Rosenberg
said that he believes that cells in this region may be "the most potent
anti-tumor fighters the body has to offer."

   These will be cultivated to produce greater numbers of cells which will then
be re-infused back into the patient "as an added punch which takes advantage of
the immunization," Rosenberg said.

   The latest study is a logical continuation of Rosenberg's ongoing research,
which has involved genetically manipulated attempts to beef up the body's
existing immune defenses against cancer.

   Last January, in a different experiment, he and his team took special
cancer-killing cells naturally produced by the immune system -- known as tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes -- that also had been genetically altered with tumor
necrosis factor. These were transfused back into the patient. The idea was to
use these doctored cells as a kind of "drug" therapy to destroy tumors. This
work is continuing but it is considered too early to evaluate the results.

   Unlike standard cancer treatments, such as radiation and chemotherapy, which
can wipe out healthy as well as diseased cells, the new approach is designed to
zero in only on malignant growths.

   "I think that human gene therapy is opening up a new era of medical research
that will have payoffs in cancer and many other diseases in the years to come,"
said Dr. John Laszlo, senior vice president for research of the American Cancer
Society. "We're just at the foothills of what might be the Himalayas with our
knowledge -- but you have to start there."

   The experiment began less than 24 hours after Rosenberg received a go-ahead
from the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, a key NIH advisory committee whose
members must approve such research before it can proceed. Healy gave her
approval Monday evening.

   Rosenberg said that he plans to treat a second patient Friday, a young woman
also suffering from melanoma.

   Rosenberg has received permission to treat 30 patients and intends also to
use the therapy in patients with advanced colorectal and kidney cancers.


                             1586 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                October 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 5; National Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 1026 words

HEADLINE: Cell Immunization Tested for Melanoma

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   IN the first attempt to cure cancer by immunizing patients against their own
tumors, scientists yesterday injected genetically modified cancer cells into a
man dying of malignant melanoma.

   Dr. Steven Rosenberg, a surgeon at the National Cancer Institute who led the
research team, stressed that the treatment was highly experimental. He likened
it to the first flight of the Wright brothers.

    Dr. Bernadine Healy, director of the National Institutes of Health, said in
a statement, "The study's novel strategy will pioneer a new approach to gene
therapy in cancer."

Some Question Experiment

    But others, including some on whose work Dr. Rosenberg's approach is based,
questioned whether the work was proceeding too quickly and portrayed him as
acting to attract publicity. These critics said that his approach, although
promising in principle, needed further tests in animals before being taken to
patients.

   For example, they said, there is so far no report that anyone can cure an
animal of an existing cancer, as Dr. Rosenberg is now trying to do in patients.
The animal studies on which his work is based report a lesser achievement, the
prevention of a new cancer developing in healthy animals. And in any case, one
critic says, one of these studies shows Dr. Rosenberg's approach does not work.

   The experiment yesterday took place at 10:30 in the morning in a small room
in a clinic at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. A 46-year-old
man whose skin was bulging with lumps from malignant melanoma lay on a table
while Dr. Rosenberg injected the thigh with genetically modified cells from his
own cancer. No one else was present.

Waiting for Results

    The man will go home quickly, Dr. Rosenberg said, and in one to two months
the researchers will know if the immunization worked.

   In the meantime, Dr. Rosenberg will try to immunize other patients who have
failed standard treatments and have no other hope. Tomorrow or Friday, he said,
he will try to immunize a young woman who is dying of malignant melanoma. And he
is preparing to immunize other patients with colon and kidney cancer and,
eventually, breast cancer.

   Dr. Rosenberg and his colleagues, Dr. W. French Anderson of the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and Dr. R. Michael Blaese, Dr. Patrick Hwu and
Dr. John Yannelli of the cancer institute, had to submit their plans for
immunizing cancer patients to an extensive review because their plan required
foreign genes to be inserted into the patients' cells.

   No less than four committees scrutinized the proposal. On Monday, the last
committee, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, gave its approval.

   The work is based on animal studies by Dr. Philip Leder of the Harvard
University School of Medicine as well as by Dr. Drew Pardoll of the Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine and Dr. Richard Mulligan of the Whitehead
Institute in Cambridge, Mass.

   Cancers survive and flourish because the immune system fails to recognize and
attack them. The approach of these and other investigators, including Dr.
Rosenberg and his colleagues, is to prod the immune system into overcoming its
tolerance for cancerous tissues by administering doses of hormones by which the
immune system regulates itself.

   In their experiments, the investigators inserted genes for immune system
hormones into cells taken from a mouse's cancer. The souped-up cells were then
injected into healthy mice, in the hope that the hormones would prepare the
animal's immune systems to attack the cancerous cells that followed in a later
injection. But the injected cancer cells never took hold and the immunized mice
remained healthy.

   Dr. Rosenberg's attempt to immunize the patient yesterday was modeled on
these animal studies. He removed tumor cells from two of the lumps of cancer
growing under the man's skin. Then he added genes for an immune system hormone,
tumor necrosis factor, to the cells. After verifying that the cells were
secreting tumor necrosis factor, he injected them into the man yesterday.

   In three weeks, Dr. Rosenberg will remove white blood cells from the patient,
prime them to fight the cancer and then grow large numbers of them in the
laboratory. He will then inject them into the patient to accelerate the attack
on the cancer.

   He said he had prepared genetically altered cancer cells from half a dozen
other patients and had permission to immunize 15 patients.

   But some investigators question whether the science is ready for human
experiments. Dr. Leder, a pioneer of the approach, said he thought it would be
reasonable to prove that immunizations could cure an existing cancer in animals
before testing the method on patients. Failure to do such experiments first,
"leaves a question," he said.

   Dr. Pardoll agreed and raised an additional concern. He said he had found
that the hormone used by Dr. Rosenberg, tumor necrosis factor, was ineffective
in animal experiments. When he used it to make a vaccine, it did protect the
animals from cancer. But so did a vaccine made up simply of irradiated cancer
cells, with no tumor necrosis genes added. Tumor necrosis factor, he said, "does
not in and of itself add anything." Other hormones, in contrast, were effective,
he said.

   Dr. Pardoll said this work had been accepted for publication and he had
discussed it with other scientists. He did not call Dr. Rosenberg and tell him
about it, he said, because "it would only create bad blood between Dr. Rosenberg
and myself and I don't think it would have changed anything."

   Dr. Rosenberg said he was unaware of the work and did not believe it could be
correct. "It's just not right," he declared.

   Researchers also said they were concerned that with the enormous publicity
surrounding Dr. Rosenberg's experiment, desperate patients would have false
hopes that a cure was just around the corner.

   "It's a very high profile research activity that Steve Rosenberg is running,"
Dr. Leder said. "It's deliberately run in this way. He didn't come to you after
the experiment was successful. He came at the beginning because it might be
quite uninteresting when it's all finished."

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "Theory of a Cancer Treatment"

1. In the laboratory, tumor cells are given the gene for producing an
immune-system hormone.

2. The genetically altered tumor cells are injected under the skin.

3. They secrete immune-system hormones around teh tumor activating white blood
cells that can attack the tumor whenever they come near it.

4. Once activated, the white blood cells circulate through-out the body. They
seek out and destroy distant tumors.

(Source: Drew Pardoll, M.D., Johns Hopkins Medical School)

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1991


                             1587 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   OCTOBER 9, 1991, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 845 words

HEADLINE: Altered Cells Used To Battle Cancer
 First human experiment with new process

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    For the first time, a cancer patient was injected with his own genetically
altered tumor cells yesterday in an effort to immunize him against the incurable
cancer that was killing him.

   It will be months before anyone knows whether the experiment at gene therapy
succeeds, but even before that time, four more terminally ill patients with the
same type of malignant melanoma, a lethal and swiftly spreading skin cancer,
will be treated in the same way.

   Soon to join the experiment at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda,
Md., will be 10 other patients also near death after all conventional
anti-cancer treatments have failed -- five with advanced colorectal cancer and
five with carcinomas of the kidney.

   Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the government's major cancer
research hospital, received final permission Monday night to conduct his
experiment. Yesterday morning, his first patient, a 46- year-old man, arrived at
the center to receive an injection in his thigh containing 200 million live
cancer cells.

   As Rosenberg explained in an interview yesterday, the cells had been
surgically removed from the patient's own tumor five months earlier, then
altered by a genetically engineered virus that endowed the cells with genes for
a powerful tumor-killing toxin called tumor necrosis factor.

   ''It took us three months to incubate those cells,'' Rosenberg said with the
enthusiasm of a scientist on a life-saving mission, ''but less than three
minutes for the injection.''

   Three weeks from now, he said, his team will remove a cluster of lymph nodes
near the patient's thigh and harvest their white blood cells so they can be
cultured and multiply before being returned to the patient. The white cells,
known as lymphocytes, are particularly strong components of the immune system.
The hope is that they will be sensitized to the gene-modified tumor cells.

   From what they learned during 1 1/2 years of animal experiments, Rosenberg
and his colleagues hope that the lymphocytes now sensitized to the tumor cells
will course through the patient's body, recognize the cancer wherever it has
spread and cause the cancer cells to regress and, ultimately, disappear. The
altered tumor cells now containing tumor necrosis factor, the tumor-killing
hormone, may deliver their punch, too.

   ''The idea is to use the patients' own cancer to immunize them against their
own cancer,'' Rosenberg said. ''It's like a vaccine, but when you think of
vaccines they're usually aimed at preventing a disease, while here we're
treating a cancer that's far advanced, not vaccinating to prevent it.''

   Yesterday's unique attack came only after years of research and months of
ethical debate over the thorny issues involved in altering a human being's genes
-- even in an attempt to save life.

   NIH APPROVAL

   Rosenberg's experiment first had to win the approval of the National
Institutes of Health's powerful Recombinant DNA Committee, known as the RAC,
which was created in 1975 when genetic engineering was in its infancy. The
experiment also had to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration and,
finally, by Dr. Bernadine Healy, director of the National Institutes of Health.
Her final go-ahead came Monday night.

   At the same time, both Healy and the RAC authorized Rosenberg to conduct the
same immunization experiment in four other terminally ill malignant melanoma
patients, as well as the patients suffering from advanced cancers of the colon
and kidney.

   On Friday, the second melanoma patient will be injected with his own
genetically altered live cancer cells, Rosenberg said, and he has already begun
laboratory research to show that breast cancer cells can also be endowed with
genes for tumor-fighting hormones. If he succeeds, he said, then he expects to
receive approval to begin similar immunization experiments in breast cancer
patients who are so far advanced that all other therapies have failed.

   'HIGHLY EXPERIMENTAL'

   ''All this work is highly experimental,'' Rosenberg stressed yesterday.
''And if it succeeds, it will only be because we have been able to test the
methods on laboratory animals first. We're merely trying to open a crack in the
great stone face of cancer.''

   Rosenberg's principal colleagues in the long and controversial path toward
gene therapy are Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, and Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the cancer institute.

   Anderson has already experimented with a different gene therapy technique to
treat two young girls who were born without a functioning immune system.  He
infused white blood cells that were genetically engineered to carry immune
system components into the two children last year, and the children, now in
school, appear to be nearly normal, Anderson said.

   Earlier this year, Rosenberg tried still a different gene therapy technique
-- termed ''cell transfer immunotherapy'' -- in which white blood cells called
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes were infused into several advanced melanoma
patients. Those experiments are continuing.



                             1588 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     October 8, 1991, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 447 words

HEADLINE: PANEL BACKS USE OF GENES FOR 'CANCER VACCINE' WORK

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A key federal advisory committee Monday approved experimental use of gene
therapy in attempts to develop a "cancer vaccine" that would immunize patients
against their own tumors.

   The National Institutes of Health Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
sanctioned the proposal by Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the
National Cancer Institute, who is considered a pioneer in human gene-therapy
cancer research.

   Rosenberg intends to extract tumor cells from patients with cancer in
advanced stages, then genetically modify the cells to make them "foreign" to the
body's immune system. He will inject the altered cells back into the patient in
an attempt to stimulate the immune system into attacking the cancer.

   Rosenberg is expected to conduct the first "immunization" as soon as NIH
Director Bernadine Healy gives the final approval, expected imminently.

   The process involves removing a small piece of the patient's tumor and
inserting into the tissue genes coded for production of tumor necrosis factor or
interleukin-2, natural immune-system substances.

   The vaccine approach is a new twist in the infant field of human gene
therapy. The human body is composed of about 50 trillion cells, each of which
contains information that directs its function. The information is stored in
genes, which are made up of DNA, the genetic blueprint of life. When a gene is
destroyed or broken, the cell's function is disturbed or eliminated -- and
disease occurs.

   Human gene therapy has two basic approaches: A normal gene may be introduced
into the body to attempt to correct a defective gene or replace a missing one,
or genes may be used to assign a cell a new function or enhance its current
function.

   Earlier this year, Rosenberg began other gene-therapy experiments in patients
with advanced melanoma, a lethal skin cancer. The results of those studies have
not yet been reported.

   Gene technology has been used in humans on two previous occasions. On Sept.
14, 1990, NIH performed the first human gene therapy experiment. A 4-year-old
girl with adenosine deaminase deficiency, an inherited immune system disorder
known to afflict about 30 children worldwide, was transfused with her own white
blood cells that had been altered in the laboratory by addition of the human ADA
gene. Scientists hope the added gene will stimulate production of adenosine
deaminase, an enzyme crucial to the proper functioning of the immune system.

   Earlier, Rosenberg inserted gene-altered cells into melanoma patients, but
the genes had no therapeutic function. They were used only as "markers" to
identify other cells so they could later be recovered from blood or biopsied
tissue.


                             1589 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 8, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z4; GENETICS

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Vaccine Trial Gets Green Light at NIH;
World's First Test of Genetically Engineered Vaccine

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Researchers at the National Institutes of Health yesterday gained permission
to inoculate patients with the world's first attempt at a genetically engineered
vaccine for cancer.

   Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute, is
prepared to inject cancer patients with a genetically altered version of their
own live tumor cells. The goal is to provoke the body to mount a significant
immune response against the cancer.

   Permission for the experiment came from the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee (RAC), charged with reviewing the science, efficacy and ethics of all
human and animal experiments with altered DNA. Approval from the Food and Drug
Administration for the clinical trial was granted last week.

   Once the proposal is endorsed by NIH director Bernadine Healy, Rosenberg and
his colleagues can start testing the experimental cancer vaccine in patients.

   "I'm anxious to get started," said Rosenberg, the principal investigator.
"Our challenge now is to use gene therapy to help people with cancer."

   In the experimental technique of gene therapy, scientists extract certain
cells from the patient, alter the genetic structure of these cells in the
laboratory and then reinject the altered cells into the patient.

   Rosenberg's proposed anti-cancer vaccine is the first to use live malignant
tumor cells that have been genetically altered on human patients.

   Rosenberg has permission to treat an initial 30 patients who have advanced
melanoma, kidney cell cancer or colon carcinoma that has failed all standard
treatment. These patients are expected to live for six months or less.

   Sections of the patients' tumors have been removed and cultured in the
laboratory to insert either the gene for a hormone called tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), a powerful anti-tumor toxin, or the gene for interleukin-2, a protein
that encourages the body's tumor-fighting lymphocytes.

   Laboratory studies with mice have shown that the immune system can be
stimulated by genetically altered tumor cells. In these experiments, mouse
immune systems more readily targeted tumors with these altered genes and
attacked them.

   The human body is capable of mounting an immune response to cancer on its
own, but it is a weak one. Oncologists occasionally see what is called
"spontaneous remission" when patients are able to fight off their own tumors.
Researchers hope that the genetically altered tumor cells will heighten the
body's immune response to the cancer.

   Rosenberg's experiment is two-pronged. First, he will inject the altered
cells, carrying either the TNF gene or the IL-2 gene, into the thigh of a
patient with the aim of stimulating an immune response. These cells would
continually secrete either TNF or IL-2, presumably killing local tumor cells or
helping tumor-killing lymphocytes from the immune system to grow in number.

   Then, 21 days after the injection, Rosenberg would surgically remove the
tumor cells from the local site and drain nearby lymph nodes. From this material
he would cultivate an especially potent kind of anti-tumor cell.  The newly
cultivated anti-tumor cells would then be transfused in great numbers back into
the patient.

   Experiments in mice show that the altered tumor cells, when reinjected, grow
for a short time and then suddenly regress.

   The RAC committee is requiring Rosenberg to closely monitor the injected
tumor site for any unexpected growth. The amount of tumor injected is to be no
more than one fiftieth of the amount of tumor the terminal patients already have
in their bodies.

   Rosenberg and colleague investigator W. French Anderson also are involved in
the first trials of human gene therapy at the National Institutes of Health, in
which four adult melanoma patients and two children with a rare immune
deficiency disorder are being treated with genetically altered white blood
cells.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, STEVEN A. ROSENBERG, CHIEF OF SURGERY AT THE NATIONAL CANCER
INSTITUTE, PLANS TO INJECT 30 CANCER PATIENTS WITH THEIR OWN LIVE TUMOR CELLS.


                             1590 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 8, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z6

LENGTH: 1212 words

HEADLINE: Tinkering with the Essence of Humanity;
Scientists and Theologians Debate the Morality of Genetic Engineering

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Though still in its rudimentary stages, human gene therapy prompts the
question at once scientific, ethical and theological: How far can scientists go
in altering the genetic makeup of individuals before they risk changing the very
nature of a person -- the basic characteristic of "humanness?"

   W. French Anderson, a pioneer in gene therapy, stood last week in the nave of
the Washington National Cathedral, stone arches vaulting high above him in
Gothic splendor, to answer that question. His hands folded, he told the audience
of 300 that he had recently attended a birthday party for one girl treated with
altered genes who had gone "from a sickly 4-year-old to being a healthy,
strapping 5-year-old in kindergarten, a tremendously heart-warming sight."

   So far, Anderson and his team at the National Institutes of Health have
treated six patients with genetically altered cells, four adult patients with
malignant melanoma and two little girls with a fatal immune deficiency disorder.

   Yesterday, NIH researcher Steven A.  Rosenberg received permission from an
NIH panel to treat cancer patients with genetically altered tumor cells in the
first human experiment of a genetically engineered cancer vaccine.

   "Hanging over all this is a very fundamental question," Anderson said. "If we
can put a gene in to correct a disease, the technique is there to put a gene
into a human being for any other purpose you want. Is there anything wrong with
that? Our concern is, could we alter something uniquely human and not know it
until it was too late?"

   Representing the religious community was James M. Gustafson, a medical
ethicist and ordained minister at Emory University.  "We have to avoid the twin
extremes," Gustafson said -- a frightening "apocalyptic" view of genetic
engineering and a "utopian" expectation that gene therapy can eliminate all of
life's pain and disappointments.

   Although gene therapy has been used in human patients for only a year, animal
experiments have shown what lies ahead in the coming century: the capability to
eradicate hereditary and incurable diseases, to improve physical
characteristics, to make those improvements permanent in future generations and
to mold the overall characteristics of the human species.

   If gene therapy can "correct" mistakes in the human body, then perceptions of
what is "normal" in a human being are likely to change. While doctors may define
"normal" life as absent disease and tragedy, Gustafson pointed out, disease and
dying are natural to life's cycle as God created it. In both current medical
practices and future therapies, he warned against "a kind of glorification of
health as virtually the chief end of human life and longevity as its most
significant byproduct. We are finite creatures, and we are born to die, and, by
God, we're going to die -- and we'd better accept that fact," he said.

   Gustafson described the existence of a soul in man as unknowable.  Anderson
countered if the human spirit is an undetectable entity, something beyond our
"physical hardware," then gene therapy cannot alter it.

   "It would be hard for me to imagine that something which comes under the
theological definition of a soul is something which would be encased in some
physical structure that's composed of proteins and nucleic acids and lipids,"
said Anderson. "If there is something unique about humans, which is a soul, or
characteristics in the image of God, which are distinct from our architecture,
they can't be influenced by our petty little insertions [of genes]. Whether [a
soul] exists or not I have no idea."

   The potential progression of genetic engineering uses can be divided into
four stages, each one posing its own set of moral questions.

   In the first stage, gene therapy is used to correct genetic defects in the
somatic, or nonreproductive, cells. There is general agreement, Gustafson said,
that somatic cell gene therapy, in which changes are not transmittable to
subsequent generations, poses only a straightforward and classic medical ethics
question: Do the potential benefits to the patient outweigh the potential risks?

   The second stage, germ-line therapy, which can affect progeny, prompts
different concerns. By inserting genes into reproductive cells or into an
embryo, the consequences, including any mistakes, would not end with the patient
but would be perpetuated in future generations. Thus the therapy carries greater
risks for the society as a whole. Still, if germ-line gene therapy were
performed only for the correction of a debilitating disease and under strict
safety guidelines, many ethicists believe the same risk/benefit criteria as
somatic cell therapy would apply.

   It is the third stage -- the use of gene therapy to enhance physical and
mental characteristics -- that sparks an explosion of controversial questions.
Who would decide which genes to use? What distinguishes a serious disease from a
minor disease, from an unwanted characteristic?

   For example, is it normal to be shorter than five feet? Should such a person
be given a gene to make him taller? What if a gene could be found that affects
memory? Should the gene be given to people who are already intelligent and could
therefore benefit society even more if their memories were improved, or should
the gene go to people of low intelligence to help them reach the statistical
region of "normal?"

   Widespread enhancement therapy carries an insidious danger, according to
Nelson Wivel, director of NIH's Office of Recombinant DNA Activities (RAC),
which must grant permission for all human gene therapy experiments funded by the
government.

   "Enhancement threatens to change the definition of normal and normal is a
floating target anyway," Wivel said. If all people considered short were given a
gene to make them taller, he explained, then over time the statistical norms
would shift. People once considered of average height would appear to be short.
The human race, he said, would lose a firm sense of its own characteristics.

   For now, the RAC committee has said it will not consider any protocols to
attempt germ-line gene therapy or enhancement.

   The final stage in gene therapy is the possibility of eugenics, the attempt
to make hereditary "improvements" in a whole population. Memories are still
fresh of Nazi Germany's efforts to create a master race through genocide and
controlled mating policies, as well as of state laws in the U.S. that earlier in
the century permitted the forced sterilization of people considered mentally
deficient or criminally prone.

   "Might we slide into a new age of eugenic thinking by starting with small
'improvements?' " Anderson said.  He is vehemently opposed to enhancement
therapy.

   "The goal of biomedical research is, and has always been, to alleviate human
suffering," Anderson said. "Gene therapy is a proper and logical part of that
effort." Anything beyond that goal "is asking for trouble."

   At the end of the session, National Cathedral Canon Michael Hamilton closed
the debate with a prayer: "By working, praying and thinking together, may God
give us the means to heal the sick, to discern the dangers and merits of
enhancing human nature, and by Thy grace to live joyfully upon this earth
through Jesus Christ our Lord."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GENE THERAPIST PIONEER W. FRENCH ANDERSON. GERALD MARTINEAU;
ILLUSTRATION


                             1591 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    October 3, 1991, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Glendale; Part J; Page 2; Column 1

LENGTH: 67 words

HEADLINE: COMMUNITY DIGEST:  GLENDALE;
HEMOPHILIA RESEARCH GRANT

BODY:

   Glendale physician Erlinda Maria Gordon, who works with hemophiliac children
at Childrens Hospital in Los Angeles, has received a $200,000 grant to continue
her research into a gene therapy for the disease.

   Current therapies for hemophilia aim only at controlling bleeding, but Gordon
is seeking a possible cure for the disease: the removal, treatment and
reintroduction of the patient's cells.


                             1592 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 3, 1991 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-7:4; II-1:2,3

LENGTH: 639 words

HEADLINE: Alzheimer's grant funding for UCSD result of years of effort

BYLINE: CHERYL CLARK, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The $18 million federal grant awarded UCSD this week to direct a national
study of Alzheimer's drugs is the culmination of an effort born of frustration
five years ago, said Dr. Leon Thal, the project's director. In 1986, a prominent
medical journal article indicated that a compound called THA caused "dramatic"
improvement in 16 out of 17 patients with the disease.

   Thal, a UCSD neurosciences professor, said he and his colleagues were
"besieged with emotional calls" from families who wanted the drug for their
loved ones. Unfortunately, he said, pharmaceutical companies weren't interested
in making the compound because THA, which stands for tetrahydroaminoacridine,
had been discovered early in this century and sales rights weren't exclusively
guaranteed.

   There was insufficient economic incentive for them to market it, Thal said.

   "And we didn't have any way to produce it." Thal and a colleague at Mt. Sinai
Medical Center in New York spent the next year writing grant proposals to study
such drugs.

   Until recently, Alzheimer's has received few federal research dollars
compared to other diseases. The two also appealed to drug companies to make
enough THA to test it on more patients.

   "But most of the drug companies I approached said, `No dice,' " Thal said. By
mid-1987, they were awarded a grant from the federal National Institute on Aging
in Bethesda, Md., to test THA in 1,632 patients.

   They also persuaded a large pharmaceutical company to make enough of the
substance and conduct toxicology tests. Thal, who also heads the neurology
department at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in La Jolla,
subsequently directed two other multicenter clinical trials of drugs for
Alzheimer's: physostigmina, a drug that appears to improve immediate recall and
short-term memory, and acetyl-L-carnitine, or Alcar, which prevents certain
nerve cells in the brain from dying. With this week's $18 million grant, Thal
and the directors of the 30 participating centers have yet to decide what drugs
they will test over the next five years.

   But one thing is clear: their studies will be designed to test drugs that
aren't being tested by pharmaceutical companies. "There have been many instances
where pharmaceutical companies have just been unwilling or unable to carry out
experiments with drugs, and little involvement from academia," Thal said. The
clinical trials will focus on three goals: Designing measurements of
improvement, preventing decline of memory, and managing negative behavior, such
as anxiety and depression, that many Alzheimer's patients experience when they
become confused. Thal said a leading candidate is a substance called nerve
growth factor. When given to aged rats with learning and memory difficulties,
the rats seemed to improve.

   "We could get quite a bit of the brain to regrow," Thal said. But without
such a federally funded study in an academic setting, nerve growth factor might
never get to market, Thal said.

   Pharmaceutical companies are reluctant to study the compound because it must
be administered directly into the brain rather than injected intravenously or
taken orally.

   It also is expensive and has a high-risk potential for complications, he
said. The centers also will consider testing several drugs now licensed to treat
symptoms of psychiatric disorders, such as Haldol and Xanax, to see if they also
might control anxiety and depression in people with Alzheimer's, Thal said.
Although physicians now prescribe such drugs for Alzheimer's patients who are
agitated or depressed, no one is studying how the drugs work, or whether certain
doses may be better than others. Meanwhile, the institute has awarded another
UCSD researcher, neurosciences professor Fred Gage, $3.3 million, one of six
additional Alzheimer's grants.

   The five-year award will enable Gage to develop genetic therapies.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1593 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    October 3, 1991, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: A hitch in therapy for cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Mike Snider; Tim Friend; Kim Painter

BODY:

    Gene therapy for cystic fibrosis may be more difficult to accomplish than
researchers realized, suggests a study in today's Nature.

   Hopes for gene therapy have been pinned on delivering a normal copy of the
cystic fibrosis gene to cells in the lining of patients' lungs. But the new
study, done in mice, shows the gene may need to be delivered to the underlying
tissues as well - which would be significantly more complicated, says researcher
Manuel Buchwald, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto.

   The good news is that the study also sheds light on why people with cystic
fibrosis often become infertile. Buchwald and co-researcher Anne Trezise found
the normal CF gene appears to be necessary for production of mature sperm. It
also may be necessary for fertilization to occur in the female, they say. The
finding means that over the next few years, researchers may be able to correct
infertility caused by an abnormal CF gene.

    Defective jaw implants under scrutiny

 Patients with certain jaw implants for temporomandibular joint syndrome, or
TMJ, should see an oral surgeon immediately to find out whether the implants are
breaking down or causing bone deterioration, the Food and Drug Administration
advised Wednesday.

   TMJ is a painful condition of the joint that connects the jaw and the skull.
Up to 26,000 of the implants, used to treat TMJ and repair some jaw injuries,
were made from 1973 to 1988 by the now-bankrupt Houston firm Vitek Inc., and
distributed to doctors and hospitals. They are reported to break apart, fragment
and function improperly, which may cause the bone to deteriorate.

   Symptoms of implant breakdown: pain radiating from the ear, joint noise,
limited lower jaw movement, a change in bite, difficulty chewing, headaches.

   The FDA announced a recall of unused implants in January, but patients who
already have them should be examined annually ''because bone degeneration can
sometimes occur without symptoms,'' FDA chief David A. Kessler says. For more
information, doctors and patients can call (800) 554-5297.

   Diagnosis and treatment for the 20 million people with symptoms of TMJ, first
recognized in the early '70s, are still in the embryonic stages.

    Report urges listing toxic chemicals

 The government doesn't pay enough attention to chemicals that might cause birth
defects, says a government report out Wednesday.

   The General Accounting Office report is based on a study of how the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Food and Drug Administration and the
Consumer Product Safety Commission regulate 30 major chemicals. No government
agency has made a list of chemicals known or suspected to be toxic to
reproduction and child development, it says.

   It suggests that Congress order such a list, even though the idea has been
opposed by the executive branch. Unnamed agency officials are
quoted as saying lists unduly alarm the public, and misrepresent the true hazard
because lists can't distinguish among degrees of exposure.

    Family planning clinics' financing slips

 Demands on family planning clinics are rising, even as financial support
declines, say two new studies.

   ''There's less and less money and more and more patients with more and more
serious problems,'' says Jeannie Rosoff, president of the Alan Guttmacher
Institute, which published both studies last week.

   State and federal support for clinics went from $ 350 million in 1980 to $
504 million in 1990; but adjusted for inflation, it dropped to $ 232 million,
says one report.

   A second report says at the same time, clinics faced dramatic increases in
sexually transmitted diseases among clients and rising rates of cervical
abnormalities and cancer in young women.  Also, prices are increasing for drugs
and tests.

   As a result, clinics must charge higher fees, keep longer waiting lists and
cut community education.  The clinics were designed to provide birth control,
not STD and cancer care.  But clients often can't afford or don't know about
alternatives for gynecological care.


                             1594 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

              October 2, 1991, Wednesday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 8; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 222 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO COUNTY DIGEST:  SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   The National Institute on Aging awarded $3.3 million to UC San Diego to
search for drugs to combat Alzheimer's disease.

   The grant represented the second one in the week for UCSD's Medical School
for Alzheimer's research. On Monday, officials announced an $18-million NIA
grant to set up a national consortium of 30 centers that will also test
Alzheimer's drugs.

   Fred Gage, professor of neurosciences, will lead the five-year, $3.3-million
study announced Tuesday, which will seek to develop genetic therapies that might
one day halt the progress of Alzheimer's.

   "We will be evaluating two treatment strategies -- preventing vulnerable
brain cells from dying and replenishing neuro-transmitters (chemicals that carry
signals in the brain), which are depleted in the brains of patients with
Alzheimer's disease," Gage said.

   The two NIA grants were made possible by a special congressional
appropriation last year. Congress increased Alzheimer's research funds from $148
million in 1990 to $229 million in 1991.

   "The NIA's goal, by the end of the decade, is to delay substantially the
onset of Alzheimer's disease," said Dr. Gene D. Cohen, acting director of NIA.
"If we delay the onset by just five years, we can alleviate a great deal of
suffering -- and we can cut health care costs significantly, by about $40
billion."


                             1595 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                    September 29, 1991, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: CITRUS TIMES; GUEST COLUMN; Pg. 2

DISTRIBUTION: CITRUS TIMES

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: Genetic experimentation raises questions for future

BYLINE: Dale Williams

BODY:


   Possibly the most significant undertaking in human history has begun. At this
very moment, hundreds of scientists are hunched over microscopes in laboratories
throughout the world, analyzing our DNA to determine why, if we all were truly
created equal, most of us never have been featured on Lifestyles of the Rich and
Famous.

    Geneticists have known for years, of course, that clever little carpenters
called genes were responsible somehow for building each of us uniquely. In 1983,
an incredibly powerful new microscope was introduced, and the ancient mystery of
what makes us human was solved.

    Scientists were able to see for the first time the elaborate molecular
blueprints that show genes how to sculpt ski noses and Dumbo ears, plant poorly
rooted foliage on male scalps, dump all their construction debris in our
posterior regions, then install just enough brain cells to make us feel special.


    The complete set of blueprints for constructing an individual human is
called the "genome." Hence the aptly named Human Genome Project, which aims to
decode the billions of genetic building specifications contained in each human
cell.

    As the genome's hieroglyphic language is translated and each gene's function
determined, splicing techniques can replace defective genes with better ones. A
deviant gene maliciously intent on building ingrown toenails can be intercepted
and replaced by one with a less perverse sense of humor.

    Understandably, progress on the Genome Project is tediously slow. We are
complicated creatures. Already, though, we are learning far more about ourselves
than we really wanted to know, and we have to start now making moral decisions
unlike any faced before:

     Is it fair to continue asking Michael Jordan to donate hair samples to
scientists seeking to isolate the first human flying gene?

     Should chimpanzees be upgraded genetically and put to work punching the
picture buttons on fast-food cash registers? Though molecular biologists have
confirmed that chimps are, indeed, our first cousins, deviating genetically from
us by only about 1 percent, it remains unlikely that even a chimp capable of
making correct change would stop to ponder the irony of free-market wages that
don't provide life's bare necessities, while slavery, in order to perpetuate
itself, must.

     Should Roger Clemens donate genetic samples so that every young boy (and
girl?) might be equipped with rotator cuffs worthy of wealth and adoration, less
redeeming qualities notwithstanding?

     Should Queen Elizabeth share her royal blood genes with commoners?

     Once we eliminate the myopia gene, what will become of the assembly-line
doctors who make millions each year slitting nearsighted corneas?

     Since a life expectancy of 150 years already is foreseeable, and
immortality is not out of the question, should an asterisk be placed by the
records that old Nolan Ryan achieved before gene-splicing?

     If we quit dying, should we keep producing more babies? Where will we all
sleep? Who will pay our Social Security when we all want to retire? Should
Floridians be forced to retire to New York to keep the population balanced?

     Should future political candidates be equipped genetically with
easier-to-read lips?

     Since it took Mother Nature more than 3-billion years to create our
species, do we have the right to correct her mistakes now that we've figured out
how she did it?

     If Cro-Magnons can be cloned from the blood cells found on their stone
tools, could we appoint them permanently to the state Legislature and forgo the
costly ritual of electing their latter-day peers?

     If we decide to mutate ourselves into a new, improved species, one
intelligent enough to avoid war, poverty, disease and Rush Limbaugh, what will
that superior breed do with the billions of us mortals necessarily left behind?
Would it be politically correct to use Rush for research?

     Will racism and homophobia remain politically fashionable once we are able
to genetically select our color and sexual preference?

     If we eradicate mental illness, by what standard will we declare ourselves
"normal"?

     Who should be the first treated for the horrible genetic maladies that
plague our species? Those who can best afford gene therapy?  Those deemed most
expendable for dangerous experimentation?  Dan Quayle?

     Should we exhume the founding fathers and appoint their clones to the
Supreme Court?

     Will we finally do something about the "ugly" problem? The dominant ugly
gene has so pervaded our society that covering those not yet afflicted has
become a moral prerequisite. It's probably a primeval problem. In the Babylonian
version of the creation story, Eve's first words were, "What'd you make him out
of dirt? Cover him up Okaaay?"

     Could gene splicing finally produce a Democrat noteworthy enough for
satirical comment?

     Once we understand what it means to be a human being, will we come to truly
love our neighbor, or will we cling to prejudices based on so shallow a facade
as the genetic lottery that currently determines which human traits we possess?

     Since reality is without precedent as a basis for conducting human affairs,
should scientists stick to designing war machinery and electronic gizmos and
quit disturbing our most cherished delusions?


   Dale Williams is a Seminole businessman.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992


                             1596 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   SEPTEMBER 27, 1991, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 296 words

HEADLINE: UCSF Genetic Researcher Wins Prestigious Award

BODY:

    Dr. Yuet Wai Kan, a pioneer genetics researcher who developed techniques for
detecting the signs of potentially killing diseases in unborn infants, was named
the winner of the annual Albert Lasker award for clinical medical research
yesterday.

   A professor of molecular medicine and hematology at the University of
California at San Francisco, Kan has specialized in the prenatal diagnosis of
such blood disorders as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia, which are widespread
in many parts of the world.

   Since his first discoveries more than 15 years ago that specific gene defects
could be identified as warning signals for the diseases, Kan has perfected new
methods of analyzing DNA -- the molecules that govern heredity -- and has seen
them applied to a host of other genetic illnesses.

   More recently he has begun developing new techniques for gene therapy by
introducing normal genes into defective chromosomes that carry abnormal ones.

   The $ 15,000 Lasker award he won is the most prestigious in American medical
research, and nearly 50 previous Lasker award winners have gone on to win Nobel
prizes.

   A Lasker award for basic medical research went yesterday to Edward P.  Lewis
of the California Institute of Technology and Christiane Nusslein-Volhard of the
Max- Planck Institute in Tubingen, Germany, for deciphering the genetic codes
that determine the development of body parts as embryos develop.

   Winners of the Lasker foundation's annual public service awards were Robin
Chandler Duke, a family planning advocate and director of the Population Crisis
Committee and the Alan Guttmacher Institute, and former Representative Thomas P.
(Tip) O'Neill, D-Mass., a leading supporter of health legislation and federal
appropriations for medical research.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,DR YUET WAI KAN , Recipient of Lasker honor


                             1597 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                  SEPTEMBER 25, 1991, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B3; PEOPLE IN BUSINESS

LENGTH: 695 words

HEADLINE: CEO Parade: Stepping Up -- And Down

BYLINE: Lloyd Watson

BODY:

    Plantronics, the privately owned Santa Cruz telephone-headset manufacturer,
is in the market for a new president/CEO. Neil Hynes, 56, who has headed the
company since 1980, plans to step down when a successor is found.

   ''It was my intention to spend 10 years at Plantronics,'' said Hynes. ''I
have gone a year beyond my target.''

   A major shareholder, Hynes was a management participant in the 1988 leveraged
buyout of the 30-year-old company, whose original product was aviation headsets.
Other LBO participants: Citicorp Venture Capital and GE Capital.

   Since going private, Plantronics has kept a very low financial profile.  In
its last year as a public company, it had 1,400 employees and sales of $ 121
million.

   Elsewhere on the Bay CEO front:

   Somatix Therapy Corp., the still-in-the-development-stage Alameda
gene-therapy firm that was formed in March through the merger of Hana Biologics
and Somatix Corp., has named as chief executive David Carter, 52.  Formerly
president and chief operating officer at North Field Laboratories in Chicago,
Carter has been serving as Somatix Therapy's board chairman, a position he'll
continue to fill.

   President Michael Bennett, 48, is the new CEO of Biomedical Monitoring
Systems, a Campbell telemetry-systems manufacturer that recently merged with
Great Britain's Neuroscience Ltd. London- born Bennett is a former Neuroscience
v.p.

   MOVING UP

   LEWis Galoob Toys has promoted Duane D'Agostino, 46, to senior v.p. of sales,
replacing Robby Kanoff, who is leaving the company . . . Charles Pool, 38, a
13-year McKesson employee, is the company's new director of investor relations .
. . SOH & Associates has promoted Maxine Young, 47, to v.p. of marketing and
administrative services for the S.F. seismic structural-design firm. Young also
becomes an SOH associate and member of the board of directors . . . AT&T Network
Systems has named Bob Clark, 49, v.p. of its Western marketing and sales teams
in San Ramon, St. Louis, Denver and Mexico City. Clark is based in San Ramon . .
. Thomas Walsh is now executive v.p. of Guy F. Atkinson Co.'s Walsh Construction
subsidiary in Trumbull, Conn.  Walsh, 40, was formerly construction mgr. of the
company's $ 200 million GSA building project in Oakland.

   MOVING ON

   URS Corp.'s consulting subsidiary has hired Keith Meyer as v.p. and manager
of California operations. Meyer, 40, comes from De Leuw, Cather & Co. in San
Jose . . . William Hasler, 50, dean of UC- Berkeley's Haas School of Business,
is a new director at Gap Inc.

   C-Cube Microsystems and Cricket Software co-founder and former CEO Jim
Rafferty, 35, is part of the management team at the Media Vision ''affordable
video'' startup in Fremont . . . Authorware Inc., a Redwood City
interactive-learning software firm, has recruited Dan McCammon, 42, from Claris
as c.f.o. and Steve Kusmer, 34, from Software Publishing Corp. as v.p. of
engineering . . . Ron Codd, 35, has left Mips Computer Systems to become c.f.o.
and v.p. of finance and administration at PeopleSoft, a human-resource software
firm in Walnut Creek.  After 43 years, lawyer/grape- grower Scott Conley, 67,
has retired as senior partner at Sedgwick, Detert, Moran and Arnold. He'll be
joining the Bates Edwards Group, the young S.F.  mediation firm . . .
Independent consultant James Fox, 44, has joined Corbett Canyon Vineyards, San
Luis Obispo, as director of marketing . . . Bill George, 37, formerly with
Northern California News Satellite, is communications director for the
California Manufacturers Assn. in Sacramento.

   MORE MOVES

   Dave Zacarias, v.p.-finance and c.f.o. at Santa Cruz Operation Inc., is
moving over to Fremont- based Everex Systems with the same job titles and
responsibilities. ''I'm looking forward to helping Everex turn the corner and
get back on a growth track,'' said the 41-year-old ex-Coopers & Lybrand CPA.

   Triad Systems, of Livermore, has recruited Stenograph Corp.'s California
manager, Richard Savage, 45, as national sales mgr. of its automotive division .
. . Former Pettit & Martin lawyers Brian Smith, 41, and Judith Miles, 31, are
now members of the property/finance practice at Heller Ehrman.



                             1598 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               September 24, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 256 words

HEADLINE: EXECUTIVE CHANGES

BODY:


   * Cognex Corp., Needham, Mass., which makes machine vision systems, named
Patrick Alias executive vice president of sales and marketing.

* Communications Satellite Corp., Washington, the telecommunications company
known as Comsat, named John V. Evans president of its Comsat Laboratories unit.


   * Datamarine International Inc., Pocasset, Mass., a maker of marine
instruments and industrial flow meters, appointed Peter D. Brown president and
chief executive.

* Eastland Financial Corp., Woonsocket, R.I., a bank holding company, announced
that Herbert L. Miller had resigned as chairman and chief executive and from all
other positions with the company's subsidiaries, effective Nov. 30.

* Engelhard Corp., Edison, N.J., a provider of specialty chemical products,
appointed Robert L. Guyett senior vice president and chief financial officer.

* Edward S. Gordon Co., New York, a real estate firm, appointed Martha Burton
managing director of its downtown Manhattan office.

* Inacom Corp., Omaha, a computer retailing concern, has been organized into
four operating groups, each headed by its own president and general manager.
They are: Al Montross for the direct operations group; Roger Richter for the
indirect operations group; Bob Ward for the distribution and operations group,
and Robert Schultz for the advanced systems and service group.

* Somatix Therapy Corp., Alameda, Calif., which conducts gene therapy research,
appointed David Carter chief executive. He also remains chairman.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1991


                             1599 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1991 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           September 24, 1991 Tuesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 285 words

HEADLINE: KATIE FROHNMAYER IN CRITICAL CONDITION

DATELINE: SALEM

BODY:

   Tuesday, September 24, 1991 KATIE FROHNMAYER IN CRITICAL CONDITION

   Summary: A spokeswoman for Attorney General Dave Frohnmayer says the  girl
may not live much longer

   The condition of Katie Frohnmayer has deteriorated, and the 12-year-old
daughter of Attorney General Dave Frohnmayer now is listed in critical
condition at Sacred Heart General Hospital in Eugene.

   Katie, who suffers from Fanconi's anemia, a rare and often fatal bone  marrow
disease, slipped into a coma Sunday at the hospital, where she has been since
Aug. 27.

   ``She's resting peacefully, but the situation is critical,'' said Marla  Rae,
a spokeswoman for the attorney general. ``She's not expected to live much
longer.''

   Katie suffered a stroke Aug. 3 in Salt Lake City, Utah, while in the city
with her parents. She was taken to the Primary Children's Medical Center  there,
then transferred to Eugene, her hometown, when her condition improved
sufficiently for travel.

   Doctors are continuing to evaluate the cause of the stroke and its
complications and the extent to which Katie's medical problems are related to
Fanconi's anemia.

   The disease inhibits the capacity of bone marrow to produce red and white
blood cells.

   Katie's older sister, Kirsten, 18, also has been diagnosed with the the
disease. The Frohnmayers' other three children are free of the congenital
condition.

   The only known cure for Fanconi's anemia is a bone marrow transplant, but
extensive searches for a compatible donor have been unsuccessful. The
Frohnmayers recently have turned their hopes to scientific advances in gene
therapy and have founded the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund to raise money for
further research.

   ILLUSTRATION: 1990 photo of KATIE FROHNMAYER

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1600 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    September 23, 1991, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 206 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF:  SCIENCE / MEDICINE;
MUTATION OF GENE LINKED TO GROUP OF SKIN DISEASES

BYLINE: From Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   A mutation in the gene that serves as the blueprint for the structural
protein keratin is the cause of a group of human diseases called epidermolysis
bullosa simplex (EBS), Illinois researchers reported last week in the journal
Cell. EBS, which strikes one in every 50,000 people, is characterized by skin
that blisters easily upon mild contact.

   Keratin is an abundant protein in skin and other cells on body surfaces.
Keratin molecules aggregate to form filaments that become interwoven to hold the
cells in shape. Researchers had not previously linked keratin with EBS.

   Molecular geneticist Elaine Fuchs and her colleagues at the University of
Chicago made the discovery by inserting a defective keratin gene into a strain
of healthy mice to determine what, if any, disorder it would cause. The
resulting transgenic mice developed symptoms of EBS. The researchers were
subsequently able to detect a defective keratin gene in two humans with EBS,
strong proof that defective keratin causes the disorder.

   The finding may not immediately lead to therapy for the disorder. The
researchers found that production of even a small amount of defective keratin
could produce the symptoms of EBS, so gene therapy would not work.
