
                             1601 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 23, 1991, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F33; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 1305 words

HEADLINE: More Americans Put Stock Investments in Mutual Funds

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   "I think you've got a public that is getting increasingly used to the
volatility of the marketplace," said James S. Riepe, a managing director of T.
Rowe Price Associates Inc., the Baltimore mutual fund company that manages a
total of $ 33 million.

   Riepe recalled that many investors fled from mutual funds after the October
1987 crash only to see the market climb back up within two years. Investors also
fled after the October 1989 mini-crash but today, almost two years later, the
market has climbed to all-time highs.  "Pretty soon, you start to get steeled
against some of the volatility and you're simply not going to bolt from it the
way you did before," Riepe said.

   Riepe's observation drew nods of approval from two of his colleagues from the
Baltimore financial district -- veteran broker James W. Brinkley, president of
Legg Mason Wood Walker Inc., and Mayo A. Shattuck III, who at the age of 36 was
recently named president of Alex. Brown & Sons Inc.

   The trio offered their views on the state of the securities industry and the
mood of investors during their annual press luncheon in Baltimore last week.

   Brinkley said he was "astonished" to find that Legg Mason customers were net
buyers of stocks on the first day of the attempted coup in the Soviet Union, a
day when the market initially plunged but later recovered.

   One reason for the calm, Brinkley suggested, may be that there is a shrinking
group of investors who own individual stocks -- and they may be just less prone
to panic.

   "Maybe they have become veterans," Brinkley said.

   Federal Reserve Board statistics show that Americans had 30 percent of their
household financial assets in individual stocks in 1971, but today they have
only 16 percent in stocks.

   The figures do not include mutual funds, which have attracted billions of
dollars to funds that invest in stocks.

   Clearly, Americans have become more comfortable investing in stocks through
mutual funds than by holding individual company shares.

   In almost every year for the past 20 years, the speakers noted, individual
investors have sold more stocks than they have bought.

   Brinkley also noted that the "circuit-breakers" adopted by the New York Stock
Exchange have helped restrict the free-fall effect of computerized program
trading, which shook the market for several years.

   At Alex. Brown, Shattuck said, "there is considerably less anxiety today
about those 50 to 100 point downswings" of the Dow Jones industrial average than
there used to be.

   Before the 1987 market crash, he said, traders and brokers looking at a
100-point drop would have thought "the world had ended."

   The three investment executives agreed that business has picked up
dramatically in 1991 -- especially when viewed from the perspective of last
October, when the world was waiting to see whether the United States and its
allies would fight in the Persian Gulf.

   Back then, Shattuck observed, Alex. Brown thought it would be lucky to do new
stock issues for 15 companies in 1991. But as it turned out, the firm has done
46 so far this year and thinks it might do 80 by the end of the year.

   Brinkley reported that Legg Mason's retail business is up by 18 percent so
far this year.

   Riepe, too, was happy. "This has been an incredible year in the mutual fund
business," he said.

   Riepe noted that the industry had moved up over the $ 1.2 trillion level,
thanks to stronger sales and the increased value of the stocks and bonds held by
the funds.

   Yet, with all the good news, the three speakers expressed apprehension that
the market was vulnerable to a sharp downturn. "The bear market is coming. It
always does," said Shattuck.

   Riepe, too, worries about a drop.  "Every time I look over the cliff, it
seems to go up higher," he said.

   Brinkley sees mixed signs for the economy and the market but he said he does
"think you'll experience some correction in the next couple of months --
especially if [third-quarter] earnings don't get better."

   What is it they say? "Bull markets climb a wall of worry." Whatever else
changes, that old rule still seems to be in force.

   The stock market surge in the first half of 1991 created an attractive market
for new issues and considerable interest in biotech stocks. One of the recent
additions to the list of Washington area biotech companies is Genetic Therapy
Inc. of Gaithersburg -- which is being traded in the Nasdaq stock market under
the symbol GTII.

   Genetic Theraphy recently sold 1.555 million shares at $ 9 a share to raise $
13.995 million before expenses. The company hoped to sell 2 million shares at
between $ 11 and $ 13 when their offering statement was first filed, but by the
time the sale took place in late August, the market apparently had cooled off.

   Since the offering, Genetic Theraphy shares have traded on the low end at $
7.67 1/2 and more recently at the high end at $ 13.75.

   The company's underwriters were the First Boston Corp., Montgomery Securities
and Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co.

   Genetic Theraphy, as its name implies, is in the business of developing
delivery systems for human gene theraphy, one of those medical-scientific
concepts that baffles folks who barely made it through high school science. The
idea behind gene theraphy is that it is possible to treat both genetic and
acquired diseases by inserting genes into cells to produce therapeutic proteins
in the body.

   The question is: How does one deliver those genes into the cells? And that's
where Genetic Theraphy and its crew of scientists come in.

   Not surprisingly, Genetic Theraphy calls itself a development-stage company.
It had an accumulated deficit of $ 10.6 million as of March 31, 1991. The money
raised in the offering will help keep the company at work, but the company
admitted it does not expect to commercialize any products in the near future.

   Often in such research companies, the payoff is far down the road, but it can
be a big one if things go right.

   Genetic Theraphy is headed by President M. James Barrett, 48, who joined the
company in 1987. Stock watchers may recall that Barrett was previously head of
Life Technologies Inc. of Gaithersburg and its predecessor, Bethesda Research
Laboratories Inc.

   The chairman of the board is James H. Cavanaugh, who was a former president
of SmithKline & French Laboratories-U.S. Inc. He also served in the Nixon and
Ford administrations.

   Security Storage Co. of Washington, a company that is 101 years old, has
offered to buy back some of its shares from stockholders who hold small amounts
of stock. The company did not set a price and asked the shareholders to suggest
their own price.

   Thus far, said President Conrad S. Posey, the company has received offers
from shareholders to sell about 1,000 shares, with price suggestions ranging
from $ 10 to $ 200.

   Posey said that once all the shareholder offers are in, they will be
considered by the company's directors, who will have to decide whether they want
to buy the shares and how much they are willing to pay.

   The company currently has less than 100 shareholders and there are only
83,000 shares outstanding. Consequently, there is little trading and the stock
rests quietly in the "pink sheets," the home to stocks not listed on major
exchanges.

   The pink sheets list $ 115 as the most current price.

   Washington Mutual Investors Fund, a Washington-based mutual fund, has climbed
over the $ 7 billion mark -- and is now one of the nation's largest. Stephen
Hartwell is the chairman of the fund, which has its business offices in
Washington and is part of the Johnston, Lemon Group. The investment manager is
Capital Research in Los Angeles. The fund recently got an infusion of about $ 3
million from United Masonry Inc. of Alexandria, which exchanged its entire
portfolio of common stocks for shares in Washington Mutual.


                             1602 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                    September 22, 1991, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 804 words

HEADLINE: Human gene therapy begins under ethicists' close watch

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    It has taken scientists some 20 years since the discovery of gene-splicing
techniques to overcome biological and regulatory hurdles so that the first
experiments in human gene therapy can begin.

    In the past year, government scientists transferred genes to two patients
suffering from a rare and potentially fatal immune deficiency disease. So far
the foreign genes seem to be functioning in the patients. And because the genes
will not be passed on to succeeding generations, the trials have had little
opposition.

   But on the horizon are more ambitious and potentially troubling notions.

   For example, what if scientists implanted genes tailored to be inherited by
the patients' offspring?  Might there be unforeseen risks of creating a
self-perpetuating genetic alteration?

   Another new form of gene manipulation allows couples to have a woman's eggs
fertilized in a test tube and, after tests to look for genetic defects, have
only healthy embryos implanted in the woman.

   But what if the couple wanted not just a healthy baby but one of a specific
gender? And what if scientists could add genes that govern intelligence, musical
ability, or athletic performance?

   Questions like this will dominate high-tech medicine in the 1990s, an ethical
specialist said last Friday at a Boston University symposium on gene therapy and
human reproduction. Others agreed that the general public will have to confront
these issues as applications of gene research expand - possibly even altering
society itself if genetic screening or therapy programs are implemented on a
wide scale.

   "The 1990s will be the age of genetics, just as the 1980s were the age of
organ transplant and the 1970s were preoccupied with questions of fetal
research," predicted George Annas, a medical ethicist at BU's School of Public
Health.

   Scientific advances in locating genes, deciphering the messages they contain
that determine human traits and substituting or adding genes in human cells
constitute "one of the most significant developments in the history of science,"
said Michael Baram of BU Law School, a cochairman of the conference.

   The implications of such developments are being discussed in government and
society today, all the more because of the massive international Human Genome
project recently begun to decipher the entire set of human genes that determine
how the body is built and how it functions.

   The symposium speakers said gene technology could become an agent of control
by the state if, for instance, lawmakers forbade defective embryos created
through in vitro fertilization from being implanted in a woman's uterus. In the
most pessimistic visions, gene selection could enable governments to carry out
eugenics programs like those perpetrated under the Nazi regime.

   The technology might induce parents to try to conceive "the perfect child,"
and it could even exacerbate social class distinctions if, for example, only the
affluent had access to powerful genetic medicine, they said.

   Many of the scenarios being weighed by ethicists seem far-fetched to
scientists.

   For example, Dr. Aubrey Milunsky, director of the human genetics center at
BU's School of Medicine, said that some 3 to 5 percent of newborns are afflicted
with one or more of the 4,000 known inherited diseases, and that the new
genetics faces immense biological problems in putting a dent in that burden of
suffering.

   "Genes operate in concert with other genes called enhancers, promoters, and
regulatory genes," he said.  "And we don't understand very much about how these
work." In addition, many of the inherited diseases damage the brain or other
organs that presently are inaccessible to gene implants.

   Given this situation, said Milunsky - and other scientists agree - moving
beyond treating disorders in which a single gene causes a single severe disease
to manipulating the vast and unknown numbers of genes involved in behavior is
almost unimaginable. That is because each behavioral trait like IQ or a
personality characteristic or a particular ability is believed to be determined
by an enormous number of genes acting in combination, with each one having a
small effect.

   However, some socially worrisome scenarios appear closer at hand. One that is
being intensively discussed by medical experts, consumer groups and ethicists is
the likelihood that insurers will use genetic tests to predict the future health
or illness of subscribers in order to raise premiums or even exclude
individuals.

   "The new genetics will be orgasmic for actuaries," commented Milunsky. "It
will allow insurers to extract a pool of candidates with genes that promote
longevity" and to exclude other people who would be more likely to incur illness
and claims against the company. "This is a real possibility way before gene
therapy," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1991


                             1603 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 20, 1991, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F3; MICHAEL SCHRAGE

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: Adventures in Parasites: A Down and Dirty -- And Kind of Disgusting --
Diet

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: MICHAEL SCHRAGE

BODY:

   Americans will do almost anything in the world to lose weight except eat less
and exercise more. That's why more than 100,000 of us submit our chubby thighs
and sagging tummies to the gentle gurglings of liposuction. That's why
McDonald's Corp., Procter & Gamble Co. and Monsanto Co. spend tens of millions
exploring "fat substitutes" that promise to taste even better than the real
thing. That's why the diet industry is now an obese $ 33-billion-a-year economic
juggernaut.

   But is technology designed to suck the fat from our food and out of our
bodies the best way to go? Or does it really miss the point? After all, we want
to eat whatever we want, whenever we want, while gaining nary an ounce. Instead
of focusing on food and flab, perhaps the real challenge is to redesign the way
we digest fatty foods. In other words, rejigger our digestive system in ways
that let us eat whatever we want while screening out those noxious lipids.

   In fact, we are rapidly acquiring the tools and the knowledge to do just
that. Is it crazy to speculate that we might soon be able to, say, genetically
re-engineer a tapeworm that could filter out the fat while benignly residing in
the intestinal tract? Don't call it "The Parasite Diet." Call it biotech that
turns parasites into symbionts.

   "It's kind of a joke among people who know tapeworms," says Dr. Scott
Halsted, a parasitologist who runs the Rockefeller Foundation's Health Sciences
Department, "but it's an interesting idea. There is this dazzling, eye-glazing
mania about genetic engineering and what it can do."

   Actually, it turns out that tapeworms are probably the wrong parasite for
weight management. "There's a lot of mythology surrounding tapeworms," says
Dickson Despommier, a Columbia University professor of public health and
microbiology. "They don't really induce weight loss; they don't eat enough to
compete with our digestive systems for food."

   However, Despommier points to giardia lamblia as a parasite with potential. A
protozoa that's responsible for creating particularly nasty cases of diarrhea,
giardia does have one fascinating property: It generates a chemical that
prevents the human digestive system from absorbing animal fat.

   The trick, says Despommier, would be to figure out giardia's active
ingredient and synthesize it. "That would be outstanding," he says. "If you
could find out from giardia what its molecular secret was to prevent the
absorption of animal fat ... it's a straightforward logical extension for the
biology of this organism."

   Theoretically, you could create "anti-fat" pills from this agent or even
cultivate specially bred bowel colonies of giardia that block the fat without
generating the runs. It's not clear if pharmaceutical companies have begun to
explore this parasite's potential -- but there's no question that such research
would be both technically feasible and possibly enormously profitable.

   Just as children with a tendency toward dwarfism are now being offered
genetically engineered human growth hormone to boost their height, we might see
dangerously obese children offered giardia-based therapies to help them manage
their weight. A fat-blocker might be a powerful weapon against arteriosclerosis
-- one of the most common and crippling heart diseases.

   "The idea is provocative," says Lillian Cheung, the director of the Harvard
School of Public Health's Nutrition and Fitness Project, "but you would have to
proceed with a lot of caution. I would worry that the genetically engineered
parasite might also want other things... . This would hypothetically be a good
idea for research, but it must be studied rigorously."

   On the other hand, notes Cheung unhappily, "I think this is the sort of thing
the public would go for because they look for an easy way out for such a
challenging problem." Cheung doesn't expect a Jenny Craig of parasite diets; if
the therapy works, she believes these will be parasites by prescription.

   There are already plenty of precedents for parasite-driven insights.
Understanding the molecular biology of hookworms and leeches has enabled
scientists to clone anticoagulants that are critical in treating heart disease.
Indeed, says Despommier, who authored "The Worm That Would Be Virus" for
Parasitology Today, parasites offer a perverse window into the workings of a
variety of human systems. Biotechnology will increasingly enable us to transform
the parasite's weapons into medical balms.

   Much as the re-engineering of viruses has become essential for gene therapy,
the re-engineering of parasites may become essential for therapies ranging from
weight-control to heart disease. "They've taken away from us long enough," says
Despommier. "It's time they gave back." Michael Schrage is a columnist for the
Los Angeles Times.


                             1604 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 19, 1991, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

HEADLINE: INNOVATION / MICHAEL SCHRAGE:  HIGH-TECH TAPEWORMS COULD BE THE DIET
FAD OF THE NEXT CENTURY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHRAGE

BODY:

   Americans will do almost anything in the world to lose weight except eat less
and exercise more. That's why more than 100,000 of us submit our chubby thighs
and sagging tummies to the gentle gurglings of liposuction. That's why
McDonald's, Procter & Gamble and Monsanto spend tens of millions exploring "fat
substitutes" that promise to taste even better than the real thing. That's why
the diet industry is now an obese $33-billion-a-year economic juggernaut.

   But is technology designed to suck the fat from our food and out of our
bodies the best way to go? Or does it really miss the point? After all, we want
to eat whatever we want, whenever we want while gaining nary an ounce. Instead
of focusing on food and flab, perhaps the real challenge is to redesign the way
we digest fatty foods. In other words, rejigger our digestive system in ways
that let us eat whatever we want while screening out those noxious lipids.

   In fact, we are rapidly acquiring the tools and the knowledge to do just
that. Is it crazy to speculate that we might soon be able to, say, genetically
re-engineer a tapeworm that could filter out the fat while benignly residing in
the intestinal tract? Don't call it "The Parasite Diet." Call it biotech that
turns parasites into symbionts.

   "It's kind of a joke among people who know tapeworms," says Dr. Scott
Halsted, a parasitologist who runs the Rockefeller Foundation's Health Sciences
Department, "but it's an interesting idea. There is this dazzling, eye-glazing
mania about genetic engineering and what it can do."

   Actually, it turns out that tapeworms are probably the wrong parasite for
weight management. "There's a lot of mythology surrounding tapeworms," says
Dickson Despommier, a Columbia University professor of public health and
microbiology. "They don't really induce weight loss; they don't eat enough to
compete with our digestive systems for food."

   However, Despommier points to giardia lamblia as a parasite with potential. A
protozoa (basically, a flagellate with an attitude) that's responsible for
creating particularly nasty cases of diarrhea, giardia does have one fascinating
property: It generates a chemical that prevents the human digestive system from
absorbing animal fat.

   The trick, says Despommier, would be to figure out giardia's active
ingredient and synthesize it. "That would be outstanding," he says. "If you
could find out from giardia what its molecular secret was to prevent the
absorption of animal fat . . . it's a straightforward logical extension for the
biology of this organism."

   Theoretically, you could create "anti-fat" pills from this agent or even
cultivate specially bred bowel colonies of giardia that block the fat without
generating the runs. It's not clear if pharmaceutical companies have begun to
explore this parasite's potential -- but there's no question that such research
would be both technically feasible and possibly enormously profitable.

   Just as children with a tendency toward dwarfism are now being offered
genetically engineered human growth hormone to boost their height, we might see
dangerously obese children offered giardia-based therapies to help them manage
their weight. A fat-blocker might be a powerful weapon against arteriosclerosis
-- one of the most common and crippling heart diseases.

   "The idea is provocative," says Lillian Cheung, the director of the Harvard
School of Public Health's Nutrition and Fitness Project, "but you would have to
proceed with a lot of caution. I would worry that the genetically engineered
parasite might also want other things. . . . This would hypothetically be a good
idea for research but it must be studied rigorously."

   On the other hand, notes Cheung unhappily, "I think this is the sort of thing
the public would go for because they look for an easy way out for such a
challenging problem." Cheung doesn't expect a Jenny Craig of parasite diets; if
the therapy works, she believes these will be parasites by prescription.

   There are already plenty of precedents for parasite-driven insights.
Understanding the molecular biology of hookworms and leeches has enabled
scientists to clone anticoagulants that are critical in treating heart disease.
Indeed, says Despommier, who authored "The Worm That Would Be Virus" for
Parasitology Today, parasites offer a perverse window into the workings of a
variety of human systems. Biotechnology will increasingly enable us to transform
the parasite's weapons into medical balms.

   Much as the re-engineering of viruses has become essential for gene therapy,
the re-engineering of parasites may become essential for therapies ranging from
weight-control to heart disease. "They've taken away from us long enough," says
Despommier. "It's time they gave back."


                             1605 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                    September 16, 1991, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: BRANDON TIMES; GUEST COLUMNS; Pg. 2

DISTRIBUTION: BRANDON TIMES; TAMPA

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: Genetic research produces multitude of questions

BYLINE: Dale Williams

BODY:


   Possibly the most significant undertaking in human history has begun. At this
very moment, hundreds of scientists are hunched over microscopes in laboratories
throughout the world, analyzing our DNA to determine why, if we all were truly
created equal, most of us never have been featured on Lifestyles of the Rich and
Famous.

    Geneticists have known for years, of course, that clever little carpenters
called genes were responsible somehow for building each of us uniquely. In 1983,
an incredibly powerful new microscope was introduced, and the ancient mystery of
what makes us human was solved.

    Scientists were able to see for the first time the elaborate molecular
blueprints that show genes how to sculpt ski noses and Dumbo ears, plant poorly
rooted foliage on male scalps, dump all their construction debris in our
posterior regions, then install just enough brain cells to make us feel special.


    The complete set of blueprints for constructing an individual human is
called the "genome." Hence the aptly named Human Genome Project, which aims to
decode the billions of genetic building specifications contained in each human
cell.

    As the genome's hieroglyphic language is translated and each gene's function
determined, splicing techniques can replace defective genes with better ones. A
deviant gene maliciously intent on building ingrown toenails can be intercepted
and replaced by one with a less perverse sense of humor.

    Understandably, progress on the Genome Project is tediously slow. We are
complicated creatures. Already, though, we are learning far more about ourselves
than we really wanted to know, and we have to start now making moral decisions
unlike any faced before:

     Is it fair to continue asking Michael Jordan to donate hair samples to
scientists seeking to isolate the first human flying gene?

     Should chimpanzees be upgraded genetically and put to work punching the
picture buttons on fast-food cash registers? Though molecular biologists have
confirmed that chimps are, indeed, our first cousins, deviating genetically from
us by only about 1 percent, it remains unlikely that even a chimp capable of
making correct change would stop to ponder the irony of free-market wages that
don't provide life's bare necessities, while slavery, in order to perpetuate
itself, must.

     Should Roger Clemens donate genetic samples so that every young boy (and
girl?) might be equipped with rotator cuffs worthy of wealth and adoration, less
redeeming qualities notwithstanding?

     Should Queen Elizabeth share her royal blood genes with commoners?

     Once we eliminate the myopia gene, what will become of the assembly-line
doctors who make millions each year slitting nearsighted corneas?

     Since a life expectancy of 150 years already is foreseeable, and
immortality is not out of the question, should an asterisk be placed by the
records that old Nolan Ryan achieved before gene-splicing?

     If we quit dying, should we keep producing more babies? Where will we all
sleep? Who will pay our Social Security when we all want to retire? Should
Floridians be forced to retire to New York to keep the population balanced?

     Should future political candidates be equipped genetically with
easier-to-read lips?

     Since it took Mother Nature more than 3-billion years to create our
species, do we have the right to correct her mistakes now that we've figured out
how she did it?

     If Cro-Magnons can be cloned from the blood cells found on their stone
tools, could we appoint them permanently to the state Legislature and forgo the
costly ritual of electing their latter-day peers?

     If we decide to mutate ourselves into a new, improved species, one
intelligent enough to avoid war, poverty, disease and Rush Limbaugh, what will
that superior breed do with the billions of us mortals necessarily left behind?
Would it be politically correct to use Rush for research?

     Will racism and homophobia remain politically fashionable once we are able
to genetically select our color and sexual preference?

     If we eradicate mental illness, by what standard will we declare ourselves
"normal"?

     Who should be the first treated for the horrible genetic maladies that
plague our species? Those who can best afford gene therapy?  Those deemed most
expendable for dangerous experimentation?  Dan Quayle?

     Should we exhume the founding fathers and appoint their clones to the
Supreme Court?

     Will we finally do something about the "ugly" problem? The dominant ugly
gene has so pervaded our society that covering those not yet afflicted has
become a moral prerequisite. It's probably a primeval problem. In the Babylonian
version of the creation story, Eve's first words were, "What'd you make him out
of dirt? Cover him up Okaaay?"

     Could gene splicing finally produce a Democrat noteworthy enough for
satirical comment?

     Once we understand what it means to be a human being, will we come to truly
love our neighbor, or will we cling to prejudices based on so shallow a facade
as the genetic lottery that currently determines which human traits we possess?

     Since reality is without precedent as a basis for conducting human affairs,
should scientists stick to designing war machinery and electronic gizmos and
quit disturbing our most cherished delusions?


   Dale Williams is a Seminole businessman.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992


                             1606 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                   September 14, 1991, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: PASCO TIMES; GUEST COLUMNS; Pg. 2

DISTRIBUTION: PASCO TIMES; HERNANDO TIMES

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: Genetic research produces multitude of questions

BYLINE: Dale Williams

BODY:


   Possibly the most significant undertaking in human history has begun. At this
very moment, hundreds of scientists are hunched over microscopes in laboratories
throughout the world, analyzing our DNA to determine why, if we all were truly
created equal, most of us never have been featured on Lifestyles of the Rich and
Famous.

    Geneticists have known for years, of course, that clever little carpenters
called genes were responsible somehow for building each of us uniquely. In 1983,
an incredibly powerful new microscope was introduced, and the ancient mystery of
what makes us human was solved.

    Scientists were able to see for the first time the elaborate molecular
blueprints that show genes how to sculpt ski noses and Dumbo ears, plant poorly
rooted foliage on male scalps, dump all their construction debris in our
posterior regions, then install just enough brain cells to make us feel special.


    The complete set of blueprints for constructing an individual human is
called the "genome." Hence the aptly named Human Genome Project, which aims to
decode the billions of genetic building specifications contained in each human
cell.

    As the genome's hieroglyphic language is translated and each gene's function
determined, splicing techniques can replace defective genes with better ones. A
deviant gene maliciously intent on building ingrown toenails can be intercepted
and replaced by one with a less perverse sense of humor.

    Understandably, progress on the Genome Project is tediously slow. We are
complicated creatures. Already, though, we are learning far more about ourselves
than we really wanted to know, and we have to start now making moral decisions
unlike any faced before:

     Is it fair to continue asking Michael Jordan to donate hair samples to
scientists seeking to isolate the first human flying gene?

     Should chimpanzees be upgraded genetically and put to work punching the
picture buttons on fast-food cash registers? Though molecular biologists have
confirmed that chimps are, indeed, our first cousins, deviating genetically from
us by only about 1 percent, it remains unlikely that even a chimp capable of
making correct change would stop to ponder the irony of free-market wages that
don't provide life's bare necessities, while slavery, in order to perpetuate
itself, must.

     Should Roger Clemens donate genetic samples so that every young boy (and
girl?) might be equipped with rotator cuffs worthy of wealth and adoration, less
redeeming qualities notwithstanding?

     Should Queen Elizabeth share her royal blood genes with commoners?

     Once we eliminate the myopia gene, what will become of the assembly-line
doctors who make millions each year slitting nearsighted corneas?

     Since a life expectancy of 150 years already is foreseeable, and
immortality is not out of the question, should an asterisk be placed by the
records that old Nolan Ryan achieved before gene-splicing?

     If we quit dying, should we keep producing more babies? Where will we all
sleep? Who will pay our Social Security when we all want to retire? Should
Floridians be forced to retire to New York to keep the population balanced?

     Should future political candidates be equipped genetically with
easier-to-read lips?

     Since it took Mother Nature more than 3-billion years to create our
species, do we have the right to correct her mistakes now that we've figured out
how she did it?

     If Cro-Magnons can be cloned from the blood cells found on their stone
tools, could we appoint them permanently to the state Legislature and forgo the
costly ritual of electing their latter-day peers?

     If we decide to mutate ourselves into a new, improved species, one
intelligent enough to avoid war, poverty, disease and Rush Limbaugh, what will
that superior breed do with the billions of us mortals necessarily left behind?
Would it be politically correct to use Rush for research?

     Will racism and homophobia remain politically fashionable once we are able
to genetically select our color and sexual preference?

     If we eradicate mental illness, by what standard will we declare ourselves
"normal"?

     Who should be the first treated for the horrible genetic maladies that
plague our species? Those who can best afford gene therapy?  Those deemed most
expendable for dangerous experimentation?  Dan Quayle?

     Should we exhume the founding fathers and appoint their clones to the
Supreme Court?

     Will we finally do something about the "ugly" problem? The dominant ugly
gene has so pervaded our society that covering those not yet afflicted has
become a moral prerequisite. It's probably a primeval problem. In the Babylonian
version of the creation story, Eve's first words were, "What'd you make him out
of dirt? Cover him up Okaaay?"

     Could gene splicing finally produce a Democrat noteworthy enough for
satirical comment?

     Once we understand what it means to be a human being, will we come to truly
love our neighbor, or will we cling to prejudices based on so shallow a facade
as the genetic lottery that currently determines which human traits we possess?

     Since reality is without precedent as a basis for conducting human affairs,
should scientists stick to designing war machinery and electronic gizmos and
quit disturbing our most cherished delusions?


   Dale Williams is a Seminole businessman.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992


                             1607 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                    September 6, 1991, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: LARGO-SEMINOLE TIMES; GUEST COLUMN; Pg. 2

DISTRIBUTION: LARGO-SEMINOLE TIMES; CLEARWATER TIMES

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: Genetic cleanup could get messy

BYLINE: DALE WILLIAMS

BODY:


   Possibly the most significant undertaking in human history has begun. At this
very moment, hundreds of scientists are hunched over microscopes in laboratories
throughout the world, analyzing our DNA to determine why, if we all were truly
created equal, most of us never have been featured on Lifestyles of the Rich and
Famous.

    Geneticists have known for years, of course, that clever little carpenters
called genes were responsible somehow for building each of us uniquely. In 1983,
an incredibly powerful new microscope was introduced, and the ancient mystery of
what makes us human was solved.

    Scientists were able to see for the first time the elaborate molecular
blueprints that show genes how to sculpt ski noses and Dumbo ears, plant poorly
rooted foliage on male scalps, dump all their construction debris in our
posterior regions, then install just enough brain cells to make us feel special.


    The complete set of blueprints for constructing an individual human is
called the "genome." Hence the aptly named Human Genome Project, which aims to
decode the billions of genetic building specifications contained in each human
cell.

    As the genome's hieroglyphic language is translated and each gene's function
determined, splicing techniques can replace defective genes with better ones. A
deviant gene maliciously intent on building ingrown toenails can be intercepted
and replaced by one with a less perverse sense of humor.

    Understandably, progress on the Genome Project is tediously slow. We are
complicated creatures. Already, though, we are learning far more about ourselves
than we really wanted to know, and we have to start now making moral decisions
unlike any faced before:

     Is it fair to continue asking Michael Jordan to donate hair samples to
scientists seeking to isolate the first human flying gene?

     Should chimpanzees be upgraded genetically and put to work punching the
picture buttons on fast-food cash registers? Though molecular biologists have
confirmed that chimps are, indeed, our first cousins, deviating genetically from
us by only about 1 percent, it remains unlikely that even a chimp capable of
making correct change would stop to ponder the irony of free-market wages that
don't provide life's bare necessities, while slavery, in order to perpetuate
itself, must.

     Should Roger Clemens donate genetic samples so that every young boy (and
girl?) might be equipped with rotator cuffs worthy of wealth and adoration, less
redeeming qualities notwithstanding?

     Should Queen Elizabeth share her royal blood genes with commoners?

     Once we eliminate the myopia gene, what will become of the assembly-line
doctors who make millions each year slitting nearsighted corneas?

     Since a life expectancy of 150 years already is foreseeable, and
immortality is not out of the question, should an asterisk be placed by the
records that old Nolan Ryan achieved before gene-splicing?

     If we quit dying, should we keep producing more babies? Where will we all
sleep? Who will pay our Social Security when we all want to retire? Should
Floridians be forced to retire to New York to keep the population balanced?

     Should future political candidates be equipped genetically with
easier-to-read lips?

     Since it took Mother Nature more than 3-billion years to create our
species, do we have the right to correct her mistakes now that we've figured out
how she did it?

     If Cro-Magnons can be cloned from the blood cells found on their stone
tools, could we appoint them permanently to the state Legislature and forgo the
costly ritual of electing their latter-day peers?

     If we decide to mutate ourselves into a new, improved species, one
intelligent enough to avoid war, poverty, disease and Rush Limbaugh, what will
that superior breed do with the billions of us mortals necessarily left behind?
Would it be politically correct to use Rush for research?

     Will racism and homophobia remain politically fashionable once we are able
to genetically select our color and sexual preference?

     If we eradicate mental illness, by what standard will we declare ourselves
"normal"?

     Who should be the first treated for the horrible genetic maladies that
plague our species? Those who can best afford gene therapy?  Those deemed most
expendable for dangerous experimentation?  Dan Quayle?      Should we exhume the
founding fathers and appoint their clones to the Supreme Court?

     Will we finally do something about the "ugly" problem? The dominant ugly
gene has so pervaded our society that covering those not yet afflicted has
become a moral prerequisite. It's probably a primeval problem. In the Babylonian
version of the creation story, Eve's first words were, "What'd you make him out
of dirt? Cover him up Okaaay?"

     Could gene splicing finally produce a Democrat noteworthy enough for
satirical comment?

     Once we understand what it means to be a human being, will we come to truly
love our neighbor, or will we cling to prejudices based on so shallow a facade
as the genetic lottery that currently determines which human traits we possess?

     Since reality is without precedent as a basis for conducting human affairs,
should scientists stick to designing war machinery and electronic gizmos and
quit disturbing our most cherished delusions?


   Dale Williams is a Seminole businessman.


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992


                             1608 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    September 2, 1991, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 4; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 182 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF:  GENE INJECTION HELPS MICE FIGHT MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

BYLINE: From Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   Researchers appear to have partially corrected muscular dystrophy in mice by
injecting corrective genes directly into the mice's muscles, according to a
report last week in the British journal Nature. The study points the way toward
the eventual use of gene therapy to arrest or reverse muscular dystrophy in
patients, but years of research will be required before then, according to
researchers from the University of Wisconsin and the John Radcliffe Hospital in
Oxford, England.

   The insertion of the genes led to the production of low levels -- about 1% of
the normal amount -- of the key protein that is missing in people with muscular
dystrophy. One particularly exciting aspect of the research was that the
critical protein, called dystrophin, was produced in the heart as well as the
skeletal muscles, said Leon I. Charash of the Muscular Dystrophy Assn.

   Researchers do not know whether the mice's muscles actually became stronger.
Experts said it was unlikely that having 1% of the normal amount of dystrophin
would alleviate symptoms in a person with muscular dystrophy.


                             1609 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 31, 1991 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D-1

LENGTH: 204 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Western Insurance Holdings Inc. registered an initial public offering of 4
million shares of stock, expected to sell for $12 to $14 per share.

   In San Diego since 1972, the company writes specialized commercial property
and casualty insurance in California and Arizona.

   Thermoscan Inc., a local manufacturer of tympanic thermometers, is seeking
dismissal of a patent infringement suit filed against it by Exergen Corp. of
Newton, Mass. Thermoscan, which is first to sell ear thermometers to the
non-professional market, denies infringement and has asked the court to
invalidate Exergen's patent.

   Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp. reported a net loss of $17.7 million on
revenues of $1.6 million for the fiscal year ended June 30. The results compared
with a net loss of $12.5 million on revenues of $1.7 million during the previous
fiscal year.

   Vical Inc.'s gene therapy treatment for muscular dystrophy has shown
encouraging results in tests on mice.

   A paper from the company published in the journal Nature yesterday described
the benefit from injection of a missing gene into animals' muscle tissue
although the company cautioned that it was not close to making a useful gene
drug. Compiled by Fred Reinsch from staff and wire reports

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1610 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                    August 29, 1991, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 584 words

HEADLINE: Breast milk found to be source of AIDS;
MEDICAL NOTEBOOK

BYLINE: By Dolores Kong, Globe Staff

BODY:

    To the annals of AIDS transmission, add three or four more published cases
of mothers passing the virus to their infants through breast milk.

   African researchers report today in The New England Journal of Medicine that
breast-feeding is "the most plausible explanation" for a few of the babies in
their study who became infected after birth. Most of the 212 babies in the study
who were infected with the AIDS virus got the infection through the mother's
uterus.

   In earlier published reports, such transmission has also been strongly
indicated in eight cases, including one in which an infected wet nurse passed
the virus along.

   Since at least the mid-1980s, AIDS specialists have warned that the AIDS
virus could be transmitted through breast milk as through other bodily fluids.
But they maintain that it is difficult for the virus to be transmitted this way.

   In an accompanying editorial, Dr. Philip A. Pizzo and Karina M. Butler of the
National Cancer Institute write that these new cases are "of concern but do not
provide a basis for changing the current recommendations of the World Health
Organization supporting breast-feeding in countries where the lack of safe water
supplies precludes the use of bottle formulas."

    In the United States and other developed countries, AIDS specialists
recommend that infected women refrain from breast-feeding their babies.

Gene injection fights muscular dystrophy

    Muscular dystrophy has been partially corrected in mice with the injection
of human genes that make a muscle protein missing in the disorder, scientists
report.

   The study, in today's issue of the journal Nature, found that the genes
restored the protein to 1 percent of diseased muscle fibers, a figure that would
have to be vastly improved before such gene therapy could be considered
successful.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association, which supported the research, called the
development "gratifying" and "another crucial step forward."

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy affects one out of every 3,500 baby boys born.

Drug for hair loss marketed for women

    Balding women can now have full access to the only clinically proven
treatment for baldness, Rogaine, which men had had since 1988.

   Upjohn Co. launched a campaign this week targeted toward women after
receiving approval from the Food and Drug Administration. The approval came
after studies showing the safety and effectiveness of the drug in women.

   The prescription medication, also known by its scientific name, minoxidil, is
used for the treatment of hereditary hair loss.

   The drug is most effective used just as hair begins to thin and use must be
continual, or the hairline recedes to where it would have been without any
treatment at all.

More teen-age boys report having sex

    Between 1979 and 1988, the percentage of teen-age boys who report having had
sex at least once increased, but the frequency of sex and the number of partners
decreased, a new study reports.

   About 60 percent of adolescent males aged 15 to 19 said in 1988 that they
have had sex at least once, according to the study in the current issue of
Family Planning Perspectives, a journal published by the Alan Guttmacher
Institute, which does research on family planning. That represented an increase
of about 5 percent over 1979.

   On average, the teen-agers said in 1988 they had two sex partners over the
previous year. They reported having sex three times in the previous month, about
a 25 percent decline from a 1979 survey.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1991


                             1611 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1991 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            August 29, 1991 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: YOUNG PATIENT RETURNS

BYLINE: GAIL KINSEY HILL, of the Oregonian Staff<

BODY:

   Thursday, August 29, 1991 YOUNG PATIENT RETURNS

   Katie Frohnmayer,  12-year-old-daughter of Attorney General Dave  Frohnmayer,
was listed in fair  condition Wednesday, the morning after her  arrival at
Sacred Heart General  Hospital in her hometown of Eugene.

   Katie, who has a rare bone marrow disease known as Fanconi's anemia,
suffered a stroke Aug. 3 while in Salt Lake City with her parents. She was
taken to the Primary Children's Medical Center there, where she was in
critical condition. Her father was attending a conference of attorneys general
in Utah and had taken his family along.

   Katie's condition had improved enough by Tuesday for transfer by air
ambulance to Eugene. She arrived at Sacred Heart at about 9:30 a.m., along
with her parents and an attending doctor and nurse. Her condition was upgraded
to serious upon admission to the hospital and then to fair Wednesday.

   ``We're thankful to be back in Oregon,'' said Dave Frohnmayer in a
statement. ``Katie is a strong little girl with a long way to go. We're deeply
touched and grateful beyond measure by the prayers and concerns expressed to
our family.''

   Marla Rae, a spokewoman for the attorney general, said Katie was conscious
and alert. Doctors are continuing to evaluate the cause of the stroke and its
effects. They have yet to determine whether the stroke was related to
Fanconi's anemia, a potentially fatal disease that inhibits the capacity of
bone marrow to produce red and white blood cells.

   Katie's sister Kirsten, 18, also has been diagnosed with the disease. The
Frohnmayers' other three children are free of the congenital condition.

   The only known cure for Fanconi's anemia is a bone marrow transplant, but
searches for a compatible donor have been unsuccessful. The Frohnmayers
recently have turned their hopes to scientific advances in gene therapy and
have founded the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund to raise money for further
research.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1612 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 August 27, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 6530 words

HEADLINE: Open Positions on Short Sales Up 4.2% on Nasdaq

BODY:

   The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that short
interest in actively traded over-the-counter stocks rose 4.2 percent in the four
weeks ended Aug. 15.

   A total of 299.5 million shares in these active issues were held short and
not yet covered in the period ended in mid-August, compared with 287.3 million
shares in the four weeks ended in mid-July.

    Short interest in less active securities traded in the N.A.S.D.'s automated
quotation system rose 19.8 percent in the period. Short interest in these
securities totaled 32.7 million shares, up from 27.3 million shares for the four
weeks ended in mid-July.

   In a short sale, investors, believing that a stock's price will fall, sell
borrowed stock in anticipation of buying back an equal number of shares later at
a lower price, thereby making a profit.

   The short-interest figures from Nasdaq are made public seven business days
after the 15th of each month.

   The following N.A.S.D. stocks show changes in open short interest positions
of 10,000 shares or more:

          Short Interest

Security Name                             8/15/91        7/15/91

0 Telefonos De Mexico*                  3,306,289       774,334
1st Natl Film Cp N                         13,550             0
3com Cp* T                                143,216       107,591
50 Off Stores Inc T                        54,938        97,386
A C T V Inc*                              100,332            84
A D A C Laboratories T                     22,710        11,469
A D C Telecommun Inc T                     36,862        56,970
A D M Tronics Unlim                        26,765         7,391
A D V A N T A Cp T                      1,149,935       931,588
A E G O N ADR Nv* T                        15,092         1,052
A E S Cp (The) T                           13,974        30,894
A P I Entrprises Inc                       19,550             0
A S A Intl Ltd                             17,826         1,236
A S E A Ab ADR Spons*                      17,390         1,546
A S K Computer Sys T                       60,463        77,704
A S T Research Inc T                    1,801,851      2,213,750
A T N N Inc                               188,197       133,879
A T R I X Labs Inc                              0        16,435
A W Brands Inc T                           92,576        81,290
Abatix Environmntl                              0        11,254
Acclaim Entertainmnt T                    752,691       858,949
Acme Steel Co T                             7,445        18,749
Acqua Group Wts 95                              0        18,000
Action Auto Rental T                        3,254        14,708
Action Staffing Inc*                       97,340         4,249
Action Staffing Wt A*                           0        52,103
Acxiom Cp T                                43,229        18,329
Adaptec Inc T                              56,204        27,409
Adelphia Commun Cp A                      276,072       263,216
Admar Gp Inc (The) S                       92,956           119
Adobe Systems Inc* T                    2,467,850     2,267,646
Advan Promotion Tech T                     35,900        10,600
Advanced Circuits T                         3,286        22,814
Advanced Enviro Wt A*                      10,600        40,165
Advanced Logic Res T                      136,444       184,130
Advanced Med Prods                         14,865         3,040
Advanced Nmr Sys Inc*                     291,985       216,660
Advanced Semiconduct T                      1,330        13,380
Aequitron Medical T                        12,155           535
Ag Svcs of Amer T N                       196,181             0
Agency Rent A Car* T                       76,746        91,973
Agnico Eagle Mines T                           13        22,060
Agouron Pharm Inc T                       112,293        99,847
Air Wis Services Inc T                    210,905       191,969
Airsensors Inc                                491        15,599
Airship Intl Wts A                         30,310         5,000
Ajay Sports Inc Wts*                          200        30,647
Alanco Resources Cp                           689        15,681
Alaska Apollo Gold                         34,304        13,804
Alcide Cp*                                 72,760        95,360
Alco Intl Group Inc                        37,150        16,575
Aldus Cp* T                               486,789       602,223
Alex Brown Inc T                          282,521       267,615
Alexander Baldwin T                        76,882        64,289
Alfa Intl Cp                               16,033             0
Alias Research Inc T                      779,309       572,852
Alliance Pharm Cp T                       486,252       371,523
Allwaste Inc* T                           886,370     1,133,980
Alpha 1 Biomed Wts B N                     15,400             0
Alpha 1 Biomedicals*                       81,862       226,159
Alpine Lace Brands* T                     182,316       207,267
Alta Gold Co T                              4,715        17,832
Altera Cp T                                93,083        78,007
Amcore Financial Inc T                      2,547        13,650
Amer Aircraft Cp                            3,047        29,354
Amer Bankers Ins Gp T                      39,528        27,224
Amer Biogenetic Wt A*                      44,190        20,290
Amer Dental Laser T                       214,984       147,051
Amer Educational Pdt                       12,601             0
Amer Film Tech Inc* T                     430,236       447,046
Amer Franchise Gp                          46,698           179
Amer Greetings Cp A* T                    105,592       139,121
Amer Health Svcs T                         64,091         81,796
Amer Intl Pet Cp                          273,325       145,297
Amer Management Sys T                      32,632        49,295
Amer Med Alert Cp                          11,800             0
Amer Med Elec Inc T                        57,015        43,884
Amer Med Tech Inc                          30,930        17,956
Amer Network Gp Inc*                       30,067           500
Amer Nuclear Cp T                           3,950        27,550
Amer Plastics Chem                         17,208         6,000
Amer Power Convers T                      971,250     1,118,130
Amer Software Inc A* T                     88,081       121,959
Amer Travellers Cp T                       17,339        81,651
Amer Tv Commun Cp A* T                     39,980        88,242
Amer West Airline* T                    1,327,940     2,014,979
Ameralia Inc                                5,298        25,298
Ameribanc Invest Sbi T                     75,041        59,507
Ameritrust Cp T                           142,409       271,564
Amgen* T                                1,388,143     1,010,399
Amtech Cp T                               223,560       283,273
An Con Genetics Inc                         6,000        27,700
Angeion Cp                                525,715       554,104
Anglo Amer Gold ADR*                       27,446        52,756
Apogee Entrpr Inc T                        61,152        78,425
Appian Technology T                        17,726         1,088
Apple Computer Inc* T                   2,309,764     1,348,473
Applied Biosystems* T                     103,630       120,813
Applied Extrusion T                        26,443        94,033
Applied Materials* T                      550,262       264,712
Applied Power Inc A T                     108,759       194,784
Aquanautics Cp*                            39,362         5,352
Aquasciences Intl                             100        33,817
Archer Commun Inc                         474,265       558,906
Archive Cp T                               24,469        42,676
Armeno Resources Inc                       34,061        15,613
Arnold Industries T                        72,581         5,256
Artel Commun Cp T                          72,845        11,219
Ashton Tate Cp* T                         146,670       578,489
Aspen Bancshares Inc T                      1,130       119,210
Aspen Wind Inc                             52,334           134
Atmel Cp T                                200,352       149,573
Au Bon Pain Cl A T                        796,771        61,503
Aura Systems Inc T                      1,064,668       749,962
Aurora Environmental                          330        12,316
Autodesk Inc* T                         1,179,604     1,100,648
Automated Sec ADR T                       584,245       463,600
Avantek Inc* T                              1,300        15,045
Avitar Inc Uts 96 N                       185,000             0
Aztar Cp T                                 36,349        22,434
B B T Finl Cp* T                          389,866       328,917
B L O C Dev Cp T                          936,665     1,113,055
B M C Software Inc T                      104,403       219,610
Baker Hughes Inc Wts* T                     1,731        47,751
Ballard Medical Prod TS                    53,544        63,648
Bancoklahoma Cp*                           19,476        38,131
Bank South Cp T                           689,642       611,921
Bankworcester Cp T                         82,902        95,194
Barringer Technology*                       2,801        52,769
Baybanks Inc* T                         1,539,307     1,509,875
BE Avionics Inc T                         199,952         1,436
Ben And Jerry S Cl A* T                    86,412       156,477
Bertucci's Inc T                           16,437       243,282
Betz Labs Inc* T                          128,812        72,856
Beverly Hills Fan Co                       79,189         1,550
Bindley Wstn Ind* T                       582,441       606,130
Bio Tech Gen Cp T                         416,476       401,807
Bio Vascular Inc*                          48,543        35,975
Biocontrol Tech Inc                        58,337           221
Biogen Inc* T                             316,341       825,771
Biomatrix Inc T N                         404,030             0
Biomedical Waste Sys                       31,205        12,300
Biomet Inc* T                           1,387,303     1,372,597
Bioplasty Inc T                           130,999        97,816
Blyvooruitzicht ADR*                       15,569         2,358
Bohemia Inc T                             304,499       347,718
Bonneville Pac* T                          15,158         3,943
Bonso Elect Intl Wts*                       3,600        23,720
Borland Intl Inc T                      2,003,496       379,833
Boston Five Bancorp T                     315,170       251,810
Boston Tech Inc T                         780,068       735,737
Brand Cos Inc The T                       173,665       137,047
Bristol Hldgs Inc                          20,565         1,373
Brooktree Cp T                             41,561        15,457
Brunos Inc T                            2,442,584     2,246,852
Buffets Inc T                           2,177,420     2,145,941
Builders Design Inc*                       77,822        44,043
Burmah Cast Plc ADR*                       29,070         7,481
Burnup And Sims Inc T                     844,145       832,863
Bytex Cp T                                 22,398        37,444
C A P Rx Ltd*                             168,272       149,997
C A P Rx Ltd Wts A*                        52,864        31,701
C C B Fin Cp* T                            15,954           606
C E M Cp T                                 15,410         2,174
C I S Tech Inc T                        1,075,528       982,605
C M Communications                         10,930             0
C O N M E D Cp T                           40,739       143,097
C T E C Cp Cl B                            72,242           153
Cabot Medical Cp T                        939,222       988,406
Cadbury Schweppe ADR* T                    50,687        75,286
Cadema Cp*                                331,647             0
Cal Biotech Wts 91*                         1,430        13,780
Cal Microwave Inc T                        31,287        13,425
Calgene Inc* T                            191,552       261,009
Calgene Inc Pfd* T                         17,027         3,404
California Bancshare T                     43,202        25,745
Calloway's Nursery T                        2,155        16,839
Cambex Cp T                                 2,078        15,001
Cambridge Biotech Cp T                    255,770       180,123
Cambridge Neurosci T                       69,775        92,275
Canon Inc ADR* T                          142,278       154,533
Canyon Res Cp Wts* T                       19,550         7,550
Canyon Resources Cp* T                     70,415       157,751
Capital Bancorp T N                        23,600             0
Cardiac Control Sys*                          600        24,526
Cardinal Distr* T                       1,152,183     1,020,802
Carrington Labs Inc T                     645,772       634,073
Cascade Intl Inc T                         73,581         9,904
Casey S Gen Stores* T                      27,485         9,861
Catherines Stores Cp T N                   10,510             0
Cato Cp The Cl A T                         34,415        21,292
Cel Sci Cp                                 80,293       128,142
Cell Comm Intl Inc N                       21,715             0
Cell Commun Pfd New T N                   148,859             0
Cellular Inc* T                           405,720       379,649
Cellular Telephone                              5        10,620
Centerbank T                              214,149       232,669
Centex Telemanagemnt T                  1,844,237     1,687,847
Centocor Inc* T                         2,951,885     2,024,214
Centocor Inc Wts 94 T                      30,099         2,271
Central Bncshs South T                     19,396        50,170
Central Jersey Bncp T                     273,115       286,439
Central Pac Mnls Adr*                      14,004        47,767
Century Medicorp* T                        38,480        21,232
Cephalon Inc T                            213,712       174,775
Cetus Cp* T                               616,247       911,681
Charming Shoppes Inc* T                   172,084       262,660
Chemex Pharm 89 1 Wt*                           0        10,000
Chemfix Tech* T                             6,038        17,792
Cherry Cp T                                   100        10,645
Chipcom Cp T                               12,308        71,977
Chips & Tech Inc* T                       837,566       863,756
Chiron Cp* T                              595,105       565,428
Chittenden Cp T                           162,467       198,838
Cimflex Teknowledge T                      61,482        24,920
Circon Cp T                               216,513        35,872
Circuit Research Lab                       38,416        26,000
Cirrus Logic Inc T                        729,402       917,649
Cisco Sys Inc T                         1,981,930     1,953,528
Citizens Utilities A T                     91,912       107,920
Citizens Utilities B T                     12,554           417
Clean Harbors Inc T                       498,730       455,127
Clearly Canadian Bev                      862,962       614,732
Clinical Tech Assoc*                      187,288       149,640
Clothestime Inc The T                      26,656         4,368
Cognos Inc T                                4,936        33,727
Coho Resources Inc T                       20,646           126
Collagen Cp* T                            844,286       745,022
Collective Bancorp T                       19,276          6,110
College Bound Inc T                       352,382       323,202
Colonial Gp The Cl A T                     22,725         1,509
Colorado Natl Bkshs T                      42,646        22,837
Colorocs Cp T                             566,943       522,879
Columbia Hospital Cp T                     23,753        43,473
Comcast Cp A* T                           751,356       954,711
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl* T                 3,444,044     3,544,245
Commerce Bncp Inc Nj* T                    34,377        53,543
Commerce Clearing A T                     107,066        23,216
Commun Entertainment                       36,379        23,605
Community Hlth Sys T                        1,138        22,777
Comparator Sys Cp                          24,000             0
Compression Lab Inc T                   2,495,869     1,572,161
Computer Commun Inc                         2,133        34,848
Computer Ntwk Tech                         34,017         8,172
Computer Tel Cp Cl 1                        2,303        22,858
Comverse Tech Inc                          36,388        58,350
Concurrent Computer                         1,040        14,675
Cons American Inds                              0        13,655
Cons Papers Inc T                         127,415       160,454
Consilium Inc T                           323,309       254,380
Constellation Bncp T                      422,593       468,179
Consumers Water Co T                       24,143         4,429
Contel Cellular A T                       111,534        85,859
Copytele Inc T                          2,307,018     2,257,347
Cordis Cp T                                29,653        48,579
Corporate Cap Res* T                           84        13,580
Corrections Cp Amer T                     564,458       608,027
Cortex Pharm Inc*                         102,956        16,617
Costco Wholesale Cp* T                    973,160       913,056
Covington Dev Gp T                         48,900        76,755
Cragin Finl Cp T                          120,415        29,116
Cray Comp Cp T                            456,836       506,863
Creative Tech Cp*                         112,494         3,000
Crestar Finl Cp* T                        834,417       804,313
Criticare Sys Inc T                        20,730        38,177
Cross And Trecker Cp T                     63,674       100,138
Crowley Finl Svcs                         101,474       212,492
Crown Resources Cp T                       39,537        10,986
Cryomedical Sci*                           92,296       146,631
Cryomedical Sci Wt B                       79,230       119,330
Crystal Oil Co Pfd A* T                   300,000       100,000
Cygnus Therapeutic T                       19,905         9,771
Cytogen Cp* T                           1,646,634     1,665,143
Cytrx Cp*                                  73,301        42,480
D B A Systems Inc T                       157,598       180,904
D E P Cp T                                149,402        50,716
D F Southeastern Inc T                     22,584         8,246
D H Technology Inc T                       21,578        35,891
D S Bancor Inc T                          585,831       556,902
D S C Commun Cp* T                        416,521       296,994
D V I Financial Cp T                      356,557       334,266
Dairy Mart Stores A T                      29,825         6,681
Danek Gp Inc T                             91,314        75,272
Data Switch Cp* T                         229,231       243,340
Datascope Cp T                            145,467       185,274
Delphi Info Sys Inc T                      14,097        58,625
Devry Inc T                                36,688       101,173
Diagnostic Sciences                        32,875         2,525
Diamond Entertain Cp*                     239,013           125
Digi Intl Inc T                            31,217         4,222
Digital Biometrics S                       25,611        11,958
Digital Microwave Cp T                    784,179      1,259,909
Digital Sound Cp T                         33,858        51,074
Digital Sys Intl Inc T                    171,593       189,140
Direct Connect Intl*                       56,303       201,300
Disease Detection                         242,816       139,714
Docucon Inc                                22,117         8,432
Dollar General Cp T                        73,263        62,885
Dominion Bkshs T                          552,403       692,905
Doskocil Cos Inc T                         27,421        44,292
Drug Emporium* T                          234,605       184,763
Durakon Inds Inc T                            136        19,233
Durr Fillauer Med* T                      155,415       123,614
Duty Free Intl Inc TS                   2,817,346     5,562,168
Dyansen Cp T                               29,125           462
Dynasty Classics Cp T                       5,485        18,117
E R C Inds Inc                             93,010        64,978
E X E C U T O N E* T                      164,544       183,233
Easel Cp T                                 69,993        90,853
Eastco Ind Safety Cp T                      1,895       298,031
Egghead Inc T                             833,314       810,461
El Paso Electric Co T                     121,081       101,565
Electric Gas Tech                          19,083         4,656
Electro Brain Intl                         12,418         1,312
Electronic Arts T                       1,377,887     1,185,328
Electronica Assembly                          977        69,563
Elron Electronics T                        15,091         1,403
Empi Inc T                                 33,621        12,795
Employee Benefit T                        147,666       117,536
Enclean Inc T                             353,043        28,862
Encore Computer Cp                         35,133        50,062
Environmntl Control T                         500        12,087
Envoy Cp T                                  4,391        14,642
Enzon Inc T                               193,667       183,628
Equitex Inc T                             112,892        52,519
Europa Cruises Cp                           2,217        39,337
Everex Systems Inc* T                     221,938       146,587
Excel Bancorp Inc T                       172,656       183,250
Excel Tech Inc                              5,751        27,965
Excel Tech Inc Wts                          5,498        37,373
Exploration Co The                         12,747             0
F H P Intl Cp T                            33,957       206,121
F I N D S V P Inc*                        179,385       152,820
F O R T I S Cp T                           32,683       109,670
Facelifters Home Uts N                    175,000             0
Fastenal Co T                           1,035,269     1,020,561
Fifth Third Bncp T                        173,112       154,870
Figgie Intl Cmn Cl B* T                    10,336        22,579
Filenet Cp T                               77,754        67,527
Fingermatrix Inc                          117,237        63,054
First Alabama Bcshs T                      62,754        18,264
First Amer Cp Tenn T                       90,945       122,347
First Commer Bncp T                       350,301       334,303
First Cons Fin Cp T                       123,014       140,766
First Contl R E Sbi                             2        22,861
First Eastern Cp T                        237,513       313,158
First Fed Sav Bk Ga                        12,848        31,965
First Fin Hldg T                          123,403       142,317
First Florida Banks T                      87,638       114,459
First Illinois Cp T                         4,043        30,323
First Peoples Fin Cp* T                   196,269       174,019
First Seismic Cp T                         16,597         4,540
First Team Sports T                       101,849        78,506
First Western Fin Cp T                    548,454       595,886
Firstmiss Gold Inc T                       36,642        47,107
Fleer Cp T                                518,503       506,938
Fonic Inc N                                18,000             0
Fonic Inc Wts A 92 N                       28,970             0
Food Lion Inc Cl A* T                     963,865       915,694
Forest Oil Cp* T                          245,547       219,889
Fountain Pharm*                           248,112       176,780
Frankford Cp The T                             68        17,500
Free St Cons Gld ADR*                         536        32,587
Frenchtex Inc                             110,147        11,625
Furon Co* T                                65,458        34,942
Future Med Prods                           25,846         8,193
G B Foods Cp                               25,033        12,130
G K Svcs Inc Cl A T                       131,903        94,598
G M I S Inc T N                           221,790             0
G V Medical Inc T                         157,887       174,549
Galagraph Ltd 92 Uts*                      24,950         49,350
Gandalf Technologies T                     30,285        56,287
Gantos Inc T                              641,470       613,762
Garnet Resources Cp T                      31,945        16,709
Gen Binding Cp T                          190,999       219,696
Gen Kinetics Inc T                         13,485         3,446
Generation 5 Tech                             720        13,536
Genesis Hlth Venture T                      1,675        25,850
Genetic Therapy Inc T N                    10,000             0
Genetics Instit Inc* T                    815,724       866,559
Gentex Cp T                                84,778       102,225
Genzyme Cp T                              154,471       229,617
Geonex Cp T                               160,224       118,266
Geraghty Miller Inc T                      77,856        91,691
Giant Bay Res Ltd T                        15,200         1,967
Gibson Greetings Inc T                      6,818        19,735
Giddings Lewis Inc T                      411,383       311,288
Gish Biomedical Inc T                      20,976         4,433
Glenex Inds Inc T                           1,988        14,299
Gold Reserve Cp                            19,071         1,514
Golden Triangle Oil                         4,655        18,015
Granite Construction T                     46,989        12,712
Grant Tensor Geophys T                    200,458        13,638
Graphic Inds Inc T                          2,193        15,430
Grt Amer Commun Co T                    1,700,667     1,720,081
Great Lakes Bncp* T                        86,804         24,752
Greater N Y Sav Bk T                      120,562        77,309
Greenwich Pharm Inc T                   2,652,133     2,556,459
Grudge Music Gp                                50        20,000
Gull Labs Inc T                             3,621        15,459
H B O Co* T                               119,961       101,152
H M O America Inc T                       912,657       665,103
H Q Office Intl Wt A*                           0        29,200
Handex Environmental T                    516,127       537,995
Health Club Tv Ntwk                             0       159,626
Health Images Inc* T                       89,775        67,826
Health Mgmt Assoc A T                      97,858       117,115
Health Risk Mgmt Inc T                     13,620        27,094
Healthcare Compare T                      262,687       227,230
Healthcare Svcs Gp T                    1,964,650     1,879,298
Healthcare Tech Ord                           496        17,447
Healthsource Inc T                         54,235         8,287
Healthwatch Inc T                          15,891         2,965
Hechinger Co Cl A* T                    1,714,094     1,529,711
Henley Gp Inc The T                       505,917       471,146
Henley Properties A T                       9,384        36,159
Highlander Intl Cp                         15,466         2,198
Hilb Rogal Hamilton T                       8,037        23,393
Hogan Systems Inc T                       177,225       157,270
Home Intensive Care* T                    489,739        68,426
Home Nutritional T                         77,141        58,075
Home Office Referenc T                     33,827        48,271
Homedco Gp Inc T                           45,446        33,239
Homestead Minerals                            304        25,248
Hon Inds Inc T                            166,730       185,201
Hornbeck Offshore T                        16,241         2,908
Horsehead Res Dev T                        73,044        96,480
Hospital Staffing T                        20,475         1,581
Howard Svgs Bank Nj T                   1,271,861     1,285,547
Hunter Enviromnt Svc T                      7,273        22,057
Hycor Biomedical T                         80,867        68,385
I C O S Cp T                              196,502       153,404
I Flow Cp*                                 20,349           874
I H O P Cp T N                            509,744             0
I M N E T Inc T                            71,052           154
I N C O M N E T Inc                        11,550           400
I N T E R S O L V T                        98,718        26,801
I P L Systems Inc A T                      28,189        58,066
I P S Health Care                          90,373        50,110
I P S Health Care Wt                        2,450        27,720
I V C I Cp Cl B                            13,922             0
Ilio Inc Wts 92* T                         15,707           276
Image Entertainment T                      16,757         2,641
Imatron Inc* T                            117,780        19,438
Immucell Cp                               155,047       177,105
Immucor Inc TS                             23,080        47,089
Immunex Cp T                            1,298,095     1,056,765
Immunogen Inc T                            34,541       101,993
Immunomedics Inc T                        446,179       776,404
Imperial Bancorp T                        495,559       420,360
In Focus Systems Inc T                    180,666       128,423
In Home Health Inc*                        49,839        76,774
Independent Enter Gp                       16,586         5,683
Ingles Markets Inc A T                     77,742       101,109
Integrated Devic Tec T                    731,123       672,882
Integrated Hlth Svcs T                     74,423         5,863
Integrated Waste Svc T                    476,037       172,486
Intel Cp* T                             1,054,153       507,800
Intelligent Elec T                      3,266,580     3,472,751
Interactive Media                          17,670        70,473
Interface Inc A T                         816,259       847,866
Intergraph Cp* T                          195,304       515,761
Intergroup Healthcar T N                   32,350             0
Interleaf Inc T                           247,481       257,619
Intermet Cp T                              41,213        54,337
Interneuron Pharm*                        129,602       140,712
Interstate Bakeries T N                    16,453             0
Intervoice Inc T                          617,846       669,322
Intl Cablecasting                          60,121        10,834
Intl Dairy Queen A T                       28,514         2,815
Intl Mobile Mach Cp* T                  2,339,897     2,243,493
Intrex Financial Svs T                    124,006       154,589
Invacare Cp T                             256,920       217,079
Invitron Cp T                              13,414         1,314
Iomega Cp* T                               30,370        15,010
Irvine Sensors Cp                             100        18,808
Isis Pharm Inc T                          190,207       169,459
J Baker Inc T                             578,759       475,554
J L G Industries Inc T                      5,483        30,951
J S B Financial Inc T                       6,129       101,025
Jacobson Stores* T                         25,610        42,171
Japan Airlines ADR*                       172,600       205,460
Johnson Worldwide A T                      11,744           660
Jones Intrcable A T                       644,121       624,641
Jones Medical Inds T                       24,699        38,467
Jones Spacelink Cl A T                     11,110           724
Journey S End Resort                          629        12,371
Judicate Inc                               33,298         8,574
Juniper Features Ltd                          500        11,600
Justin Industries T                         6,164        16,745
K L A Instruments T                       114,398        97,790
K Swiss Inc Cl A T                        202,851       182,428
Kasler Cp* T                               43,458        80,765
Keith Gp of Cos                            16,100         1,060
Kentucky Central A T                      696,096       395,987
Kentucky Med Ins A T                        2,716        14,741
Kinder Care Lrn Ctrs                        3,024        17,376
Kloof Gold Mine ADR*                       88,144        10,249
Knowledgeware Inc T                     2,001,238     1,931,571
Koll Mgmt Svcs Inc T N                    147,409             0
Kushner Locke Co T                        182,232         7,021
Kushner Locke Co Wts T                     29,500             0
L A Entertainment                          69,562        48,954
L D D S Comm Cl A T                       543,090       738,532
L D I Cp T                                 68,253        56,198
L M Ericsson Tel ADR* T                 2,197,951     2,008,839
L T X Cp* T                               135,478       123,381
L X E Inc T                                27,075         8,464
Lamonts Cp                                    200        15,050
Lance Inc T                                23,417        34,487
Landmark Graphic Cp* T                    434,787       378,819
Lasermaster Tech Inc T                    344,283       198,900
Laserscope T                              974,316     1,109,152
Lasertechnics Inc                          21,013        34,807
Latin Foods Intl Inc                            0        10,167
Lattice Semiconduct T                      52,353        34,564
Leak X Cp*                                  1,310        36,381
Lechters Inc T                            154,528       165,948
Legent Cp* T                              331,436       260,887
Leslie S Poolmart T                        67,166       263,351
Liberty Natl Bncp* T                      122,440       163,619
Library Bureau Inc                         25,273         8,000
Lifecore Biomedical T                     400,703       612,006
Lifeline Systems Inc TS                    75,707        53,046
Lifetime Hoan Cp T                         14,068         2,100
Lilly Ind Coating A T                       5,767        48,352
Linear Technology Cp T                     57,310        68,686
Little Switzerland T N                    141,534             0
Loewen Group Inc T                        975,762       987,105
Lomak Petroleum Inc                        95,381       164,133
Longwood Group Inc*                        54,351         3,000
Lotus Development Cp* T                 1,147,928     1,297,081
M C I Comm Cp* T                          848,967     1,190,049
M I P S Computer T                      2,196,831     2,438,731
Magic Restaurants Wt N                     15,000             0
Magma Power Co T                          120,000       140,341
Magna Intl Cl A Vtg T                     473,873       134,939
Manufactures Natl Cp T                     94,923         8,050
Marcam Cp T                               252,167       281,849
Margate Inds Inc                            9,753        33,847
Mark Twain Bcshs T                        115,425       161,391
Markel Cp T                                33,589         8,739
Markitstar Inc                                  0        28,477
Marrow Tech Inc Cl A* T                   616,018       486,503
Marsam Pharm Inc T                         55,622        69,022
Maryland Fed Bncp T                         1,640       111,754
Masco Inds* T                             142,172       116,961
Mascott Cp                                 53,876         6,625
Maxicare Hlth New                         101,424        12,884
Maxtor Cp* T                            1,063,264       966,806
McCaw Cellular A* T                     2,365,801     2,507,044
McCormick Co Nv* T                         49,973        34,647
Medarex Inc T                              21,630       352,750
Medco Containmnt* T                     1,500,945     1,199,660
Medical Care Intl* T                      577,886       551,063
Medical Imaging T                         423,114       312,287
Medical Innov*                            215,081       100,634
Medical Marketing Gp T                    167,892        92,892
Medical Tech Sys Inc*                     110,225        94,900
Medicine Shoppe Intl T                  1,489,069     1,456,549
Medicis Pharm Cl A*                       391,391       348,517
Medicis Pharm Wts A*                      740,805       529,385
Mediplex Gp Inc T N                        79,715             0
Mediware Info Sys N                       120,600             0
Medphone Cp*                               68,000        44,506
Mentor Cp The* T                        1,058,218     1,184,385
Mentor Graphics Cp* T                   1,112,872     1,032,393
Mercantile Bncpn Inc T                     19,568         3,708
Merchants Natl Cp T                        72,018       130,751
Merisel Inc T                                 438        11,716
Meritor Savings Bank T                    914,847     1,052,626
Merlin Mining Co                           25,862         4,200
Mesa Airlines Inc T                        29,908       389,982
Mesa Medical Inc                              459        11,484
Metalclad Cp                              191,098            10
Michael Foods Inc T                     2,322,931     2,398,572
Michigan Natl Cp T                        109,481        90,539
Micro Energy Inc                           72,932           847
Micro Healthsys Inc T                     293,724       255,895
Microage Inc T                            172,982       138,142
Microcom Inc T                            142,102       154,806
Microdyne Cp T                             65,341        84,274
Micrografx Inc T                          341,611       282,079
Micronics Computers T N                    75,025             0
Micropolis Cp* T                          279,379        44,294
Microsoft Cp* T                         2,369,899     1,714,385
Mid Atlantic Medical T                    806,485       521,198
Midconn Bank T                              1,733        42,744
Midlantic Cp* T                         4,719,245     4,082,048
Millicom Inc* T                           776,536       744,452
Mills Jennings Co                          66,675        36,050
Mobile Telecomm Tech T                    174,747        62,990
Modern Controls T                          10,718        20,930
Modine Mfg Co T                            12,030        27,341
Molex Inc Cl A* T                          32,994         3,333
Monro Muffler Brake T N                    22,549             0
Mr Coffee Inc T                           244,534       159,468
Multimedia Inc T                          130,432       161,981
N A C Re Cp* T                            422,559       409,230
N M R of Amer Inc* T                       22,499         1,534
N T N Canada Inc                           27,275        16,000
N Y C A L Cp T                             20,906        49,864
N Y M A G I C Inc T                         9,552        44,639
Natl Commerce Bncp T                        1,132        21,466
Natl Comp Sys Inc T                           963        18,267
Natl Data Cp T                            353,408       622,066
Natl Loan Bk In Liq T                      12,427             0
Natl Pizza Co Cl B 0 N                     80,278             0
Natl Pizza Co Cl-a T                      178,976       145,401
Nature S Sunshine T                        32,530        12,737
Nellcor Inc T                              54,482       163,174
Neolens Inc                               182,364       167,633
Neorx Cp* T                                   161        10,459
Network Systems Cp* T                     788,270       628,143
Neutrogena Cp T                           298,210       376,304
New York Bancorp Inc T                      8,668        25,544
New York Testing Lab                       30,039             0
Newport Pharm Intl* T                     510,313       594,235
Nichols Research Cp T                      18,440        30,826
Noble Drilling Cp T                       115,128       145,590
Noise Cancellation                        132,117       116,290
Nona Morelli S Ii                         466,312        58,519
Nordstrom Inc* T                        1,235,238      1,319,706
North Amer Biologicl T                      2,200        18,590
North Amer Ventures T                       2,382        16,026
North Star Universal T                    758,391       743,594
Northeast Bncp T                          222,535       238,939
Novacare T                                265,248       376,474
Novellus Systems Inc T                    311,863       192,183
Nu West Inds Inc* T                       814,351       857,905
Numerica Fin Cp                               762        16,288
NYCOR Inc* T                               43,489        54,066
NYCOR Inc Cl A T                           33,147        43,919
O C O M Cp T N                             22,548             0
O E S I Power Cp T                         12,500            560
O R E X A N A Cp*                          29,200        67,695
O W Office Warehouse T                     65,639       163,419
Occupational Urgent T                     786,263       843,509
Oceaneering Intl Inc T                     76,235       103,449
Octel Commun Cp* T                        192,107       232,545
Office Depot Inc* T                     1,103,047       992,259
Ohio Casualty Cp T                         88,069        98,656
Old Kent Fin Cp* T                        195,658       123,929
Omega Environ Wts A N                      14,500             0
Omega Environment N                        38,885             0
Omni Films Intl Inc T                      78,500         1,251
Onbancorp Inc T                            16,274         1,256
Oncor Inc*                                 41,990       113,479
Optical Radiation Cp T                     94,133       136,316
Opticorp Inc                               30,001         7,001
Oracle Systems Cp* T                    2,157,477     2,114,092
Orbit Intl Cp T                            19,267           305
Orbital Sciences Cp T                      38,784        18,990
Oregon Metallurgical T                     91,816        81,062
Orthopedic Svcs Inc T                      33,659        11,914
Oshkosh B Gosh Cl A* T                    251,268       310,637
Osteotech Inc T                           188,000             0
Otter Tail Power Co T                      28,415        11,500
Outback Steakhouse T                      152,197        94,785
Oxford Health Plans T N                    28,540             0
P A M Transport Svcs T                        783        11,213
P F Inds Inc Wts 92*                            0        14,531
Pac Rim Hldg Cp T                          72,891       115,230
Paccar Inc T                              175,236       320,018
Pacific Intl Svc Cp* T                     21,319         2,735
Pacificare Health T                       123,450       157,910
Pamet Systems Inc                          62,876        76,466
Pantheon Inds Inc                               0        11,736
Parametric Tech Cp T                    2,112,642     1,851,216
Park Commun Inc* T                        276,098       294,636
Paychex Inc T                             161,496       190,591
Payco American Cp T                        21,649         7,132
Peerless Productions*                      26,243           398
Penril Datacomm Ntwk T                     35,588        47,138
Pentair Inc Pfd 87* T                           0        12,500
Pentech Intl Inc T                         89,501        59,082
Penwest Ltd T                             336,789       405,175
Peoples Heri Fin Gp T                     513,141       528,562
Peoples Telephone T                        21,126         3,666
Pharmacy Mgmt Svc T                       479,982       491,077
Pharmakinetic Labs T                      378,709        463,602
Pharmchem Labs Inc T N                    362,871             0
Pharmetics Inc                              4,617        34,703
Phoenix Laser Sys*                         30,977        47,284
Picturetel Cp T                           166,099        69,302
Piedmont Fed Cp T                         112,160       143,291
Piedmont Mgmt Co Inc T                        811        12,752
Pinkerton S Inc T                         129,739       107,309
Pioneer Gp Inc The T                        2,276        21,916
Pioneer Std Elct* T                       113,089        86,698
Plants For Tom Wt Aa                        2,000        15,634
Polifly Finl Cp T                          40,060       109,350
Polymerix Inc*                            151,432       106,251
Ponce Fed Bk F S B T                        1,623        16,547
Ponder Inds Inc T                          46,610        31,245
Possis Cp T                               471,639       459,027
Powell Inds Inc T                         736,576       512,937
Precision Standard T                        4,048        92,831
Premier Bncp Inc T                        278,933       356,665
Presstek Inc T                            755,386       696,157
Preston Cp* T                              12,762        28,291
Price Co The* T                         1,905,436     1,951,106
Private Brands Inc*                        28,114        13,100
Pro-dex Inc                                30,752        13,362
Production Oper* T                        286,655       299,980
Pronet Inc T                                  956        13,622
Protective Life Cp T                       15,697         1,593
Proteon Inc T                              45,767         7,470
Provident Life Cl B T                      57,542        11,957
Public Svc Co of N C T                     11,946         1,631
Puget Sound Bncp TS                       639,478       670,081
Pulse Engineering T                         3,660        25,850
Puritan Bennett Cp T                      474,698       353,119
Pyramid Technology T                      139,385       346,006
Q V C Network Inc* T                      220,479       288,252
Quadrax Cp                                 55,350        16,902
Quadrex Cp T                               99,337        44,144
Qual Med Inc T                              1,700        11,810
Quality Food Centers T                          0       273,950
Quantum Cp* T                           1,202,206     1,382,637
Quantum Hlth Res Inc T                     65,692        15,626
Quarterdeck Office T                      231,716       102,330
Quiksilver Inc T                          796,081       806,168
R E N Cp Usa T                             25,476        10,684
R P M Inc* T                              616,799       662,895
R T I Inc                                   1,131        18,389
Radiation Sys Inc T                        56,285        69,577
Radius Inc T                               11,889        53,158
Randers Gp Inc (The)                          756        19,086
Random Access Inc*                         66,727        14,379
Random Access Wts*                         54,400        18,966
Rasterops T                               165,050       107,942
Rastra Bldg Sys Inc                        18,575        34,489
Ratners Gp Pref ADR T                      20,945       134,726
Regal Comm Cp*                                405        80,060
Rehabcare Cp T                              4,170       417,458
Rentrak Cp T                              183,223       101,971
Repap Enterprises Cp T                    229,114       356,110
Research Industries T                     466,365       504,450
Reuters Hldg Plc ADR* T                 2,215,911     2,337,538
Rexon Inc T                                32,802         9,341
Riddell Sports Inc T                       39,395        92,300
Riggs Natl Cp The T                       492,970       422,486
Right Mgmt Consul T                         2,323        12,751
Roadmaster Inds Inc                        22,867         7,974
Roadway Motor Plaza T                          95        15,811
Roadway Services Inc T                    254,594       342,960
Robern Apparel Inc                            500        25,658
Robern Apparel Wts B                       17,997           200
Roberts Pharm Cp T                         33,342        54,370
Rochester Comm Sav* T                      36,563        68,991
Rogers Cantel Mob B T N                    69,450             0
Ropak Labs                                 18,074         3,274
Ropak Labs Wts                             15,936         1,550
Ross Stores Inc T                          58,204        35,682
Rotech Medical Cp T                       269,661       256,060
Rouse Co* T                             4,008,806     3,905,789
Royal Appliance Mfg T N                    28,775             0
Royal Gold Inc                             23,770        36,618
Royce Laboratories*                       273,937       123,705
Royce Labs Inc Wts                         15,000             0
Ryan S Family Steak* T                     57,827        75,539
S A F E C O Cp* T                          77,771       104,748
S A N B O R N Inc N                       159,545             0
S A N B O R N Wts N                        15,945             0
S C I Systems Inc* T                      747,391       825,558
S E I Cp T                                 10,370        75,565
Salick Health Care T                       43,117        59,543
Savannah Foods Inds T                     802,653       745,138
Scientific Meas Sys*                        4,340        20,126
Scimed Life Sys Inc* T                  2,036,697     2,745,452
Scitex Cp* T                              418,491       277,462
Score Board Inc The T                     824,435       497,160
Scorpion Tech Inc A                        41,738       112,782
Seagate Tech* T                           861,449       140,617
Seahawk Deep Ocean                        169,296       122,536
Sector Assoc Ltd*                           4,500        22,062
Security Bancorp Mi T                      21,123        10,708
Security Investment T                     135,213       119,875
Selective Ins Gp Inc T                     21,435        52,847
Sentex Sensing Tech                       933,694     2,071,890
Sequent Computer Sys* T                 1,330,969     1,435,113
Serv Tech Inc T                             1,530        38,555
Sffed Cp T                                 15,839           902
Sheldahl Co T                              33,873        16,738
Shorewood Pkging Cp T                     202,471       226,813
Showscan Cp T                              58,403       182,978
Sierra On Line Inc T                      729,857       536,907
Sierra Semiconductor T                    153,295        95,022
Sierra Tucson Cos T                        53,311        25,294
Sigma Aldrich Cp T                        217,298       261,862
Sigma Designs Inc T                        29,460         9,113
Silicon Valley Bncsh T                    857,667       574,756
Silicon Valley Gp T                         3,934        17,883
Simetco Inc T                                   0        11,833
Simpson Inds Inc T                         13,061         1,564
Smith Intl Inc Wts A*                         544        43,127
Smithfield Foods Inc T                     69,808        57,468
Society Cp T                               20,700        10,064
Softkey Software Inc                       14,786         4,700
Software Publishing* T                    389,684       416,628
Software Toolwks Inc* T                 1,799,448     1,968,166
Solar Fin Svcs Inc                         16,658         2,769
Solectron Cp T                             23,623        37,267
Solv Ex Cp                                 76,299        91,782
Somanetics Cp                               7,985        20,347
Somanetics Cp Wts A                        17,852         7,120
Somatogen Inc T N                          18,869             0
Sonex Research Inc*                        46,988        59,506
Sonic Cp T                                117,695       145,076
Sonoco Products Co T                       71,273        97,546
Sound Advice Inc T                        138,846        91,475
South Carolina Natl T                     679,832       326,847
Southern Pac Pet ADR*                      31,498        88,222
Southtrust Cp T                            43,495        16,937
Sparta Surgical Cp                         11,575        24,120
Spartan Motors Inc T                       30,834       118,533
Special Devices Inc T N                    18,050             0
Spectran Cp T                              26,173        39,481
Spiegel Inc A Nv T                        105,777        85,085
St Jude Medical Inc* T                    387,802       432,438
Staodyn Inc Wts T                             800        12,350
Staples Inc* TS                         2,275,647     2,510,716
State Auto Finl Cp T                        5,150        27,905
State Street Boston T                     331,367       375,067
Statesman Gp Inc The T                      4,028        15,531
Stateswest Airlines                       679,103        36,950
Steel Tech Inc T                            4,054        43,459
Steve S Homemade A*                        21,824         8,086
Structural Dynamics T                     228,707       136,133
Stryker Cp* T                             396,440       495,009
Stuart Dept Stores T                        8,965        32,458
Sudbury Inc T                               8,515        25,939
Sulcus Comp Cp Wts A                       47,764        84,057
Sulcus Computer Cp                        246,970       160,119
Sulcus Computer Pf A N                     74,800             0
Sulcus Computer Wt B N                    234,900             0
Sumitomo Bank of Ca T                     105,045        17,800
Summagraphic Cp T                          29,406         8,963
Summit Bncp T                              44,867        83,608
Summit Tech Inc T                       2,025,286     1,995,431
Sun Microsystems Inc* T                 2,680,356     2,620,620
Sun Television & App T N                  112,878             0
Sungard Data Systems* T                   196,522       209,665
Sunrise Medical Inc T                       9,648        22,839
Sunrise Tech Inc T                        373,926       308,212
Suprema Specialties                        18,084         1,004
Surgical Care Affil T                     384,720       367,004
Surgical Laser Tech T                     498,153       530,730
Symantec Cp T                             134,024       163,572
Symbolics Inc T                             7,162        19,039
Synergen Inc T                            400,548       195,850
Synoptics Commun Inc T                    666,354       946,661
Syntellect Inc T                           96,828        84,298
Synthetech Inc                             52,924         7,089
System Software T                         978,292     1,045,601
Systemix Inc T N                           29,950             0
T B C Cp T                                 46,172         8,583
T Cell Sciences Inc* T                     56,348        45,304
T G X Cp                                  346,140       328,093
T J Intl Inc T                            352,327       384,864
T J Systems Cp                              4,505        20,992
T S I Cp* T                                38,316        25,992
T S S Ltd*                                 10,622           200
T W Holdings Inc T                      2,094,624      2,154,265
T*hq Inc N                                 42,753             0
T2 Medical Inc T                        1,498,161     1,484,589
Takecare Inc T                            125,919        60,779
Tanknology Environ T                       34,126        65,372
Tech Data Cp T                             43,358        11,474
Tele Commun Inc A* T                    7,215,896      7,278,175
Tele Video Sys Inc T                       14,185         1,754
Telemundo Gp Inc* T                         1,482        31,362
Teltronics Inc                              3,019        45,569
Telxon Cp* T                              407,609       381,252
Teradata Cp* T                            240,852       192,756
Thermodynetics Inc                        717,168        12,000
Thomson C S F ADR* T                          400        22,200
Thousand Trails Inc T                     238,759       331,487
Tokio Marine ADR* T                        47,369        62,160
Tokos Med Cp Del T                         93,608       176,486
Top Source Inc                             80,648        62,395
Topps Co Inc The* T                       775,158       806,018
Transmedia Ntwk Inc                        94,789        32,416
Triad Systems Cp T                         17,545           491
Trimble Navigation T                      512,228       257,465
Trion Inc T                                30,576       101,075
Tround Intl Inc                               629        98,050
Tuboscope Cp T                             60,013         6,007
Tyco Toys Inc* T                        1,153,171       775,820
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A* T                 2,170,915     2,353,252
U N I C O Inc                              72,799         3,000
U S Bancorp Oregon* T                     223,490       235,060
U S Facilities Cp T                       156,924        75,974
U S Gold Cp                                     6        28,590
U S Healthcare Inc* T                   1,299,991     1,285,413
U S Long Distance Cp T                     30,567            48
U S M X Inc T                               2,168        28,443
U S Pawn Inc*                              50,460        19,224
U S Pawn Inc Wts*                          17,100         2,500
U S T Cp T                                523,258       559,409
U S Tech Inc*                              68,371         1,004
Unicomp Inc                                     0        11,603
Unigene Labs Inc* T                        29,429        76,920
Unigene Labs Wts B                         82,514       103,264
Union Bk T                                232,376       175,139
United Artists Cl A* T                     63,014       142,556
United Artists Cl B* T                     59,124        21,211
United Fed Bncp T                           2,466        13,569
United Ins Cos Inc* T                      69,175        56,264
United Stationers T                       227,735       207,214
Unitrin Inc T                              66,271        79,424
Universal Intl Inc T                        6,402        54,404
Uranium Res Inc* T                              0        11,622
Utilitech Inc*                             12,165        25,352
V L S I Tech Inc T                         96,832        58,227
Valley Bncp Wis T                           2,326        12,534
Valley Capital Cp T                        84,930       197,851
Valley Forge Sci Cp*                       75,448        33,629
Valley National Cp T                    2,270,755     2,553,404
Value Health Inc T                        778,033       724,106
Valuevision Intl Uts                            0        95,000
Vanguard Cellular A T                     223,616       255,866
Varitronic Sys Inc T                       22,685         1,000
Vector Aeromotive                         262,156        46,622
Vector Aeromotive Wt                        9,712        23,955
Ventura Entertain*                        101,738        72,755
Verifone Inc T                            760,749       547,424
Versus Tech Wts A 94*                           0        36,625
Vertex Pharmaceutic T N                   298,368             0
Vicor Cp T                                 21,275        55,780
Vicorp Resta* T                           115,436        81,998
Video Lottery Tech T N                    364,801             0
Videocart Inc T                           949,863       879,356
Village Green Bookst                        2,460        49,138
Vimrx Pharm Inc*                           20,020         7,320
Viratek Inc T                             464,483       442,258
Virginia Bea Fed Fin T                     61,541        83,358
Vision Tech Intl                          101,554       187,054
Visual Equities Inc                        15,296             0
Vitafort Intl Cp*                           3,124        13,806
Volvo Ab Cl B ADR* T                       75,530        12,192
Vystar Group Inc                              528        49,580
W P P Gp Plc ADR* T                       134,441        64,430
Walbro Cp T                                11,670         1,067
Washington Mut Sv Bk* T                   301,502       239,368
Waste Technology Cp                         1,260        14,170
Watts Industries A T                      273,011       245,424
Wedding Info Ntwk*                         31,037        20,537
Weitek Cp T                               404,300       507,359
Wellfleet Commun Inc T N                   35,588             0
West One Bancorp T                         91,351        45,847
Western Micro Tech T                       11,346         1,248
Western Pac Res Cp                         20,000            49
Westmark Intl Inc T                       388,520       492,430
Wet Seal Inc Cl A T                       230,530       193,429
Wetterau Inc* T                           627,592       683,689
Willamette Inds Inc T                      50,042       130,743
William Sonoma Inc T                      378,745       282,074
Wolf Financial Gp T                       683,392       124,952
Wolverine Exploratio* T                   190,906       223,373
Wordstar Intl Inc T                           712        46,284
X L Datacomp Inc T                         60,926        15,826
X O M A Cp* T                           2,707,846     1,688,107
Xilinx Inc T                              100,859       153,096
Xsirius Supercon A*                         1,697        23,788
Yellow Freight Del* T                     247,181       130,231
York Research Cp T                      1,556,138     1,596,221
Yuba Westgold Inc                          12,685             0
Zenith Labs Inc T                          85,511        14,246
Zila Inc                                    7,071        19,379
Zilog Inc T                               141,310       107,874
Zycad Cp T                                 25,956         45,144


Short Interest

* Could be involved in arbitrage
S Stock split or dividend
N New
R Revised
T Nasdaq Natl Market System

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1991


                             1613 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

               August 23, 1991, Friday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

HEADLINE: SALK SCIENTISTS UNLOCK WORKINGS OF CELLS THAT CAUSE RARE LEUKEMIA;
HEALTH: FINDINGS MAY IMPROVE TREATMENT OF DISEASE AND AID RESEARCH INTO CURES
FOR OTHER CANCERS.

BYLINE: By NORA ZAMICHOW, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Salk Institute researchers have uncovered the molecular blueprint of renegade
cells that cause an unusual leukemia -- a discovery that could allow doctors to
detect the disease sooner and improve existing treatments, according to a report
released today.

   Doctors have long understood that a form of vitamin A is effective in
treating the disease, but uncovering the molecular culprit that causes this rare
leukemia enables them to learn why the remedy works, said the Salk researchers
who collaborated with scientists from New York's Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center.

   Scientists said he findings, published in today's issue of Cell journal,
could be applied to developing gene therapies to battle other more common
cancers.

   "These discoveries provide foundations upon which new directions, diagnosis
and treatment can be based," said Dr. Albert B. Deisseroth, chairman of the
department of hematology at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. "The
principle of elucidating a molecular change will serve as a model, which will
trigger developments in much more common diseases."

   Acute promyelocytic leukemia, or APL, is a rare form of adult leukemia,
striking 15% of the nation's 30,000 leukemia patients. In a normal healthy body,
white blood cells -- which fight infection -- mature and die. In a leukemia
patient, the cells keep dividing and do not mature and die. The wildly growing
cells push aside white cells, red oxygen-carrying cells and platelets that
control bleeding.

   Doctors also already knew that the leukemia caused two chromosomes to fuse
together inside the cells of most APL patients. Yet, they had figured out little
else about this puzzling development.

   But, in the findings published today, Dr. Ronald M. Evans, head of Salk's
Gene Expression Laboratory, and his colleagues isolated the blueprints of this
fusion and discovered that it produced a new protein molecule. Evans, an author
of the report, suggests that the new molecule blocks the ability of normal
molecules to promote maturing of the affected white blood cells, trapping them
in a state of constant dividing.

   Doctors had reported that retinoic acid, a form of vitamin A, causes the
wildly multiplying APL cancer cells to reverse themselves and change back into
normal white blood cells.

   What the new research shows them is why this works: When retinoic acid is
introduced it attaches to the new molecule, unblocking normal activity --
reversing the course of the disease.

   "The broader impact is, if we can find that other types of cancers have
similar origins, we may be able to develop tools or substances that work like
retinoic acid," said Kenneth Klivington, who is in charge of scientific
programming at Salk. "But we don't know yet how many types of cancer are due to
similar types of genetic affects."

   For those afflicted with the rare leukemia, the findings will allow doctors
to improve treatments because they now know exactly what molecule to target. The
existing treatment has side effects, including skin rashes and headaches, that
doctors say might now be eliminated.

   "We'll be able to make the therapy more effective and to make our therapy
more selective so it's specifically toxic to leukemia cells and non-toxic to
normal cells," Deisseroth said.

   The discovery of the new molecule will also serve as a red flag to doctors,
alerting them early to the presence of the leukemia.

   "With existing techniques, the fact that a person has APL might be
overlooked, but with the information now available, it's possible to detect the
broken genes at a very early stage of the cancer," said Klivington, adding that
a routine blood test could be used to show whether APL is present.

   At Salk, Akira Kakizuka and Kazuhiku Umesono joined Evans in studying the
disease. Wilson H. Miller Jr., Raymond P. Warrell Jr., Stanley R. Frankel,
Vundavali V.V.S. Murty and Ethan Dmitrovsky of Memorial-Sloan Kettering
co-authored the report.


                             1614 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1991 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            August 22, 1991 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: FROHNMAYER DAUGHTER HOSPITALIZED

BYLINE: GAIL KINSEY HILL, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Thursday, August 22, 1991 FROHNMAYER DAUGHTER HOSPITALIZED

   Summary: The girl, who has a rare disease, is in critical condition  after a
stroke

   Katie Frohnmayer, the 12-year-old daughter of Oregon Attorney General Dave
Frohnmayer, was in critical condition Wednesday in the Primary Children's
Medical Center in Salt Lake City.

   Katie was taken to the hospital Aug. 3 after she experienced difficulty
breathing. The Frohnmayers were in Utah for a conference of attorneys general
and had just left on a trip to California when the incident occurred.

   Doctors have determined that Katie suffered a stroke.

   Katie has Fanconi's anemia, a rare and potentially fatal bone marrow
disease. Doctors aren't certain how the stroke may be related to her disease,
but Katie has been in and out of the hospital many times in the last several
years for treatment of various complications.

   ``The experts, both national and international, are quite baffled by her
condition,'' Marla Rae, a Frohnmayer aide, said Wednesday.

   Frohnmayer and his wife, Lynn, have remained in Salt Lake City with their
daughter. The state attorney general there has given Frohnmayer an office to
use for business purposes during his stay.

   Katie will remain at the Salt Lake City hospital until her condition
improves sufficiently to allow a safe trip back to Oregon, Rae said.

   ``We're not certain at this time when we can bring her back,'' Rae said.
But, she added, ``Eugene is Katie's home, and that's where she wants to be.''

   Another daughter, Kirsten, 18, also has Fanconi's anemia. She is doing well
and plans to attend Stanford University in the fall as a freshman. The
Frohnmayers other three children, Mark, 17; Jonathan, 6; and Amy, 4, are free
of the congenital condition.

   Since Kirsten's diagnosis in 1983, the Frohnmayers have searched tirelessly
for a donor to provide a life-saving bone marrow transplant, the only known
cure for Fanconi's anemia.

   The Frohnmayers founded a national registry of potential bone marrow donors
to aid their search. But only identical twins provide perfect transplant
matches, and, so far, an acceptable donor for the two girls' unusual tissue
types, even among family members, hasn't been found.

   In 1986, Dave Frohnmayer dropped out of the race for governor so he could
continue the search. He began a new candidacy last year after drug therapies
stabilized the health of Katie and Kirsten.

   Most recently, the Frohnmayers have found hope in research into gene  therapy
, which is exploring the causes of cancer and birth defects. In 1989,  they set
up the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund to raise money for the research  and the
fight to save their daughters' lives.

   Just last month, the fund sponsored a symposium for families with members
afflicted by Fanconi's anemia. Katie, along with her parents, were at the
Crystal City, Va., meeting to share their experiences and listen to reports
about the latest scientific research.

   Katie told the gathering she had learned a lot from her illness. ``Positive
thinking is the best way to get through bad times,'' she said. ``Lead as  normal
a life as possible.''

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo of KATIE FROHNMAYER

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1615 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     August 6, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy May Be Used To Treat Heart Disease

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson

BODY:

   University of Michigan researchers received provisional approval from the
federal government last week to attempt to control a rare inherited form of
extremely high blood cholesterol through the use of gene therapy.

   If the experiment receives final approval from the National Institutes of
Health and the Food and Drug Administration, it would mark the first use of gene
therapy to treat heart disease.

   So far gene therapy, which involves the insertion of new genes into human
cells, has been tested in patients with cancer and a rare immune system
disorder.

   "In the next one to two years, there is going to be a tripling, even
quadrupling, not only of the numbers of applications [of gene therapy], but of
the kinds," said Gerard J. McGarrity, chairman of the NIH Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee (RAC), which reviews all gene treatments.

   The RAC gene therapy subcommittee gave James M. Wilson, chief of molecular
medicine and genetics at Michigan, permission to insert into liver cells a gene
that heightens the cell's ability to pull cholesterol out of the blood. Liver
cells normally destroy cholesterol.  Tests in patients could begin late this
year.

   If approved, the experimental treatment will be used on people with severe
familial hypercholesterolemia, an inherited disease that causes cholesterol
levels to exceed 1,000 milligrams of cholesterol for every 10 milliliters of
blood. Children born with the disease sometimes die of heart attacks in
adolescence.

   The gene therapy subcommittee also gave Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery
at the National Cancer Institute, preliminary approval to remove cells from
melanoma, a skin cancer, which will be grown in a laboratory. Researchers then
plan to insert a gene into cancer cells that causes white blood cells to attack
diseased tissue.

   After the cancer cells have been genetically altered, researchers plan to
inject them into a patient in the hope that they will kill the tumor. The
experiment would mark the first time doctors have knowingly injected cancer
cells into human subjects.  Studies in animals have shown that such treatment
heightens the ability of the immune system to attack tumors.

   NIH researchers used human gene therapy for the first time last September,
when they treated a 4-year-old girl with an inherited immune deficiency. Doctors
say that preliminary results of her treatment are promising.


                             1616 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 29, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 341 words

HEADLINE: Equity Issues This Week

BODY:

   The following equity offerings are expected this week:



 AG Services, a million common shares. Jesup, Josephthal.

 Allied Group, two million common shares. Bear, Stearns & Co.

 Amsouth Bancorporation, two million common shares. Salomon Brothers.

 Aydin Corporation, 500,000 common shares. Kidder, Peabody & Co.

 BMC West Corporation, about two million common shares. Salomon Brothers.

 Constitution Re Corp.,10.6 million common shares. Salomon Brothers.

 Continental Homes Holding Corp., 1.8 million common shares. Kidder, Peabody &
Co.

 Dastek International, 2.7 million common shares. Bear, Stearns & Co.

 Dianon Systems Inc., 1.8 million common shares. Hambrecht & Quist.

 Genetic Therapy Inc., two million common shares. First Boston Corp.

 HMO America Inc., 2.2 million common shares. Merrill Lynch & Co.

 IRT Property Inc., 2.5 million common shares. Alex. Brown & Sons.

 Knight-Ridder Inc., about 2.6 million common shares. Goldman, Sachs & Co.

 Laser-Pacific Media Corporation, about 1.7 miilion common shares. H. J. Meyers
& Co.

 Lifecore Biomedical Inc., 2.1 million common shares. Piper, Jaffray & Hopwood.

 Monro Muffler/Brake Inc., 1.65 million common shares. Lehman Brothers.

 North American Vaccine Inc., 2.5 miillion common shares. Tucker, Anthony & R.
L. Day.

 Progress Software Corp., a million common shares. Robertson, Stephens.

 Rogers Cantel, 16.3 million class B shares, with 7 million each in the United
States and Canada. Goldman, Sachs & Co.

 Sierra Pacific Resources, 1.7 million common shares. Kidder, Peabody & Co.

 Smart & Final Iris Corp., five million common shares. Lazard Freres & Co.

 Special Devices Inc., about two million common shares. Paine Webber Inc.

 Wellfleet Communications Inc., 3.5 million common shares. Goldman, Sachs & Co.

 Worldcorp Inc., 5.7 common shares, Kidder, Peabody & Co.

 Zenith Laboratories, 1.6 million common shares. Kidder, Peabody & Co.

(Source: MCM CorporateWatch)

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1991


                             1617 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1319 words

HEADLINE: Doctors Have Success Treating a Blood Disease by Altering Genes

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   The first child to be treated for a hereditary disease by the insertion of
new genes into her blood cells completed the initial phase of the trial last
week, and scientists have described her progress in enthusiastic terms.

   "She's done beautifully," said Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., who runs the project.  "She's
healthy, she's happy, she's growing like a weed."

    Scientists caution that more data are needed to prove the effectiveness of
the new technique. But the researchers said that by every clinical measure, the
child was far better off after 10 months of human gene therapy than she had been
before it. To celebrate what they count as an early victory in the radical new
approach to treating disease, the scientists held a party after the young
patient had been given her 20-minute infusion of genetically altered blood
cells.

   "We've made substantial headway early on, and we thought this was a good time
for a celebration," said Dr. Kenneth Culver of the National Cancer Institute,
who works in the laboratory of Dr. Anderson's collaborator, Dr. R. Michael
Blaese.

   The girl will now be taken off gene therapy for three to six months while the
scientists determine how strong the staying power of the novel technique may be.
After they determine her status, researchers will resume the therapy, adjusting
it accordingly.

   The patient, a 4-year-old with dark hair, nut-brown skin and a calm strength
surprising in someone her age, suffers from adenosine deaminase deficiency, a
severe immune disorder.

Some Are Skeptical

    The disease results from a genetic defect that destroys the white blood
cells of the immune system, leaving the victim prey to potentially lethal
opportunistic infections. The inherited disorder is extremely rare, affecting
only about 25 children worldwide, but researchers hope that whatever experience
they gain in the first gene therapy experiment will prove useful for the
treatment of a broad spectrum of ailments, including cystic fibrosis, enzyme
deficiences, blood disorders and cancer.

   The girl's parents have requested anonymity until they are certain the
experimental method is working.

   Since the trial began last September, a 9-year-old girl with immune
deficiency has also begun gene therapy, and she, too, is said to be making
progress.

   But some scientists are skeptical that the elaborate and expensive new
technique has proved its mettle, and they await the publication of results to
bolster the recent claims that Dr. Anderson and his colleagues have made at
various meetings.

   "I think that if gene therapy works, it will be a tremendous achievement, and
it would be great for the kids if there was a significant, permanent improvement
in their health," said Dr. Ricardo U. Sorensen, chief of the allergy and
immunology division at the Louisiana State University Medical Center in New
Orleans. "But I don't think I have seen enough data to be convinced. It's too
early to say if it's working or not."

   Before moving to Louisiana, Dr. Sorensen was the pediatrician who treated
both girls now receiving gene therapy, and he since has kept track of their
progress.

Copies of a Vital Gene

    In the gene therapy experiment, Dr. Anderson and his co-workers provide the
patients with copies of a vital gene that the children lack. The gene allows the
body to synthesize adenosine deaminase, an enzyme needed to break down toxic
byproducts of normal metabolism that can be particularly harmful to the immune
system if not rapidly degraded.

   To get the gene into the body, the researchers isolated from the patients a
class of white blood cells, the T cells, and grew the cells into large
quantitites in the laboratory. Using a harmless virus as a molecular delivery
van, they introduced into the T cells copies of the adenosine deaminase gene.

   The genetically altered T cells were then re-infused into the patients in
higher and higher doses.

   For her eighth and final infusion in the initial stage of the experiment, the
4-year-old girl received about 15 billion T cells. The scientists estimate that
only a quarter of those cells manage to generate adenosine deaminase as they
circulate through the body, but that the production rate is more than
sufficient.

   "A person only needs about 10 percent of normal levels of the enzyme to live
a perfectly healthy life," said Dr. Anderson.

   Dr. Culver said all preliminary tests indicated that the girl's immune system
was growing ever more vigorous.

   "We just gave her a skin test for tetanus, and for the first time we've
gotten a positive result," he said. "In the past, there was absolutely no
indication that her body could raise an immune response to the skin test, but
now we've gotten a beautiful positive."

   The "beautiful positive" was in fact an angry red swelling on the girl's arm,
indicating that her immune system was able to spot and attack the tiny,
innocuous bit of tetanus microbe contained in the patch test.

   "This is a really significant measure," said Dr. Culver. "It can only happen
if you've got an immune system that can recognize an antigen and respond
appropriately, and she didn't have that before."

   But some doctors doubt that gene therapy offered enough benefits to make it
worthwhile for those with adenosine deaminase deficiency. They argue that there
is already a reasonably good drug for the disorder, a synthetic version of the
adenosine deaminase enzyme called PEG-ADA. With weekly injections of the
synthetic enzyme, said the doctors, children who otherwise would perish from
their immune deficiency are able to live nearly normal lives.

   "In reports that I've had from physicians taking care of these kids, in the
period before gene therapy, they were doing quite well on PEG-ADA," said Dr.
Michael Hershfield, a professor of medicine at Duke University Medical Center in
Durham, N.C., who helped develop the synthetic hormone. "They had recovered
significant immune function, and their clinical status was very good."

   Dr. Hershfield pointed out that PEG-ADA is now standard treatment for the
immune disorder, and that the two girls on gene therapy have been receiving
weekly injections of PEG-ADA for several years. Their gene therapy is now being
given in addition to the enzyme replacement medication, he said, and he wondered
whether the children are that much better off with the extra contributions of
gene-altered blood cells.

   If any profound benefits are accruing with gene therapy, said Dr. Hershfield,
they have yet to be shown.

   "The acid test for gene therapy is going to come when PEG-ADA is stopped in
these kids, and nobody is saying yet when that will happen," he said. "Can you
imagine trying to evaluate a new antibiotic for pneumonia when you're already
treating the patient with penicillin?"

   But Dr. Anderson and his colleagues contend that for a host of reasons, it is
far preferable to treat an extreme immune disorder by allowing cells in the body
to make their own enzyme, rather than providing a synthetic enzyme from the
outside. They hope they will soon have the data to persuade the Food and Drug
Administration that gene therapy is so potent on its own that the girls can be
taken off the enzyme replacement treatment.

   And the father of the 4-year-old girl said that he and his family had noticed
vast improvements in their daughter's health since she began receiving gene
therapy, benefits that went beyond those stemming from the synthetic enzyme
alone.

   "We're a lot more confident with the way things are going now," he said.
"She's had less infections in the last four months than she ever did before.
She's much freer, she goes swimming every day and we take her to malls, wherever
she wants to go. We're never afraid she's going to catch something. The last
time the whole family came down with a cold, she shook hers off quicker than
anybody else."

GRAPHIC: Photo: "She's done beautifully," said Dr. W. French Anderson of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., on the progress of
the first child to receive gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991


                             1618 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International 3-13

   New steps to topple Saddam Hussein are the aim of consultations between the
United States and its allies. But holding together the international alliance
that defeated Iraq is proving to be a formidable task. Page 1

    Baghdad is becoming normal again, almost six months after the end of the
war. Traffic lights are working and air-conditioners hum in the heat. With the
recovery, Saddam Hussein's Government digging in as well.  12

   Britain exported radioactive material to Baghdad 13

   A major issue in U.S.-Soviet relations is how the Bush Administration will
answer a basic question: Are American interests best served by a united Soviet
Union or a group of smaller states built from its republics? 1

   Economy sulks as Gorbachev enjoys his encore 10

   Americans share Soviet economic pessimism 10

   Europeans try again to calm Yugoslavs 3

   Eastern Europeans are seeing Paris this summer, most for the first time. It
doesn't matter that they don't have much money to spend. For tens of thousands,
what really counts is that they are no longer so different. 1

   Swiss protester fighting for world's forests 6

   The mood of West Bank Palestinians is one of bitterness, dejection and
frustration about the American-led peace process. Many fear they will be
isolated again in trying to gain an independent state.  8

   Price rises rule postwar Cairo's scuttlebutt 8

   Support for Japan's Finance Minister came from an unusual source: Treasury
Secretary Nicholas Brady, who backed the minister in comments about the rising
furor over the Japanese stock market scandal. 3

   Beijing cracks down on Mongol dissidents 11

 National 14-22

   Job seekers in three American cities, New Bedford, Mass., Iowa City and
Tyler, Tex., are encountering trends that are more unsettling than the usual lag
between economic recovery and unemployment rates. 1

   Court papers on a huge seized bank, the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International, allege that the bank was involved in various shady deals,
including smuggling coffee, hushing witnesses and selling helicopters. 1

   The servicemen missing in Vietnam are receiving renewed attention because of
a photograph said to show three men lost in the war. For the families, any bit
of news stirs old pains and fresh disappointments. 1

   Black elected officials in Milwaukee plan to call for an investigation of the
police department, which has been embarrassed by the way it handled complaints
in May about a man now accused of mass murder. 14

   Rights group says Bush's approach to rights bill is lacking 14

   Black journalists fear setback from recession 15

    Two major decisions by the F.D.A. seem to show that it is willing to relax
its strict requirement that drugs be proved effective before being sold. The new
position has dismayed some and delighted others.  22

   A request to remove the feeding tube of a woman who had been unconscious
since 1987 will be heard in Indiana, even though the woman has died. The trial
could provide legal guidance in an especially thorny issue. 14

   First child treated with gene therapy said to be thriving 20

 Regional 23-31

   Political memo: The redistricting of the New York City Council opened wounds
between black and Hispanic politicians. In the struggle to share power with
whites, minority groups frequently fought each other. 1

   Redrawing of districts results in dissent among candidates 27

   Political Talk: Alarums about Athens and Troy 28

   A real-estate office was firebombed in Canarsie for the second time in less
than two weeks. Before the first incident, a caller told an employee that the
agency would be punished for selling to blacks. 25

   The police presence in Central Park has been increased because of the related
shootings there. But they have few leads -- and the gay men who are believed to
be the suspect's targets are staying away. 25

   Correction captain accuses supervisor of harassing her 23

   Reporter's notebook: The trial of the man accused of starting the fire that
killed 87 people at a Bronx social club is unfolding slowly and eerily. The
trial's six days so far have been a long roll call for the dead. 26

   Owner of Happy Land building faces foreclosures 26

   Man kills wife with hammer and slits his wrists, police say 24

   Informer insists bid-rigging testimony was truth 29

   Some people call them Jet Skis, the jet-pump propelled craft that make noise
and dart through waters everywhere. But at Lake George, people are divided on
whether to call them the new scourge of summer.  24

   No car flips this summer for child in Fresh Air Fund 28

   Hospitals flooded with calls on HIV-infected doctor 27

   92d Street Y tries to raise $40 million 23

 Obituaries 30

   Earl Attlee, a founder of Britain's Social Demoratic Party

 Arts/Reviews 45

 Campus Life 35

 Fashion 38-39

 Life Style 36

 Pastimes 46-47

 Weddings 42-44

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991


                             1619 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   July 27, 1991, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 785 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NOTES COLUMN

BODY:


   Americans reduce driving risks but not weight: An annual survey of risky
things that Americans do indicates fewer are failing to buckle seat belts before
driving, but most still aren't exercising enough to lose weight, researchers
say.  In 1989, the national Centers for Disease Control took a ''behavior risk
factor'' survey of 66,867 people in 39 states, plus Washington, D.C. It showed a
trend toward more use of seat belts and less drinking and driving, but not
toward weight loss or more exercise.  The state-by-state results, reported last
week, show some states with healthier habits and others with a lot of room for
improvement.  Twenty-eight states showed a decrease in the percentage of people
ignoring their seat belts, compared with the previous year's study. And
residents of 21 states reported less drinking and driving.  But just 13 states
reported improvements in exercise habits. And while 24 states reported a drop in
the prevalence of overweight people, in 14 of those states the decreases were
less than 1 percent.  The percentages of respondents who were overweight -
calculated according to a complex height-weight-gender formula - ranged from 16
percent in New Mexico to 27 percent in Pennsylvania. Only three states,
California, Missouri and Wisconsin, reported decreases that were statistically
significant; the other decreases were too small to matter, CDC statisticians
said.  The percentages of people with ''sedentary lifestyles'' - fewer than
three 20-minute sessions of exercise each week - ranged from 45 percent in New
Hampshire to 75 percent in Washington, D.C. The percentage of people not using
seat belts ranged from 6 percent in Hawaii to 62 percent in South Dakota. -
Associated Press .  Cancer patients unharmed by gene therapy: The first attempt
to treat cancer patients by inserting potent anti-tumor genes into their blood
cells has not proved dangerous, as some had feared, a scientist says.  But
whether the treatment is working remains to be seen.  In his first comprehensive
report on the status of the effort to use human gene therapy against terminal
cancer, the scientist, Dr. Steven A.  Rosenberg of the National Cancer
Institute, said last week that the first two patients to take part in the pilot
project were still alive.  They have such severe malignant melanoma that they
had not been expected to live more than a few months when the trial began on
Jan. 29. Two other patients with advanced melanoma have since been added to the
program, and Rosenberg plans to include six more very soon.  None of the four
has shown ill effects from the gene therapy, but Rosenberg said that it was too
early to tell whether any were benefiting from their twice-weekly infusions of
genetically altered white blood cells.  The cells have been designed to deliver
a powerful cancer-fighting compound, tumor necrosis factor, to the many pockets
of malignant tissue in the patients' bodies. But Rosenberg admitted that the
project remains plagued by technical difficulties.  Rosenberg says that the
cautious approach demanded by the Food and Drug Administration before it
approved the therapy had forced him in the initial stages to administer the
altered white blood cells in doses too small to have any immediate effect. Only
now, he said, is he able to give doses large enough to make a difference.  But
he said he hoped that the treatment would prove to be the first effective
therapy for advanced melanoma, which conventional methods like radiation and
chemotherapy fail to cure.  - New York Times News Service .  ''Two drop'' blood
test at bedside: A new technique limits the loss of blood in patients who can
afford blood loss the least - those in a hospital's intensive-care unit,
researchers say.  Bedside blood preservation - developed by Dr. Bart Chernow,
physician-in-chief at Sinai Hospital in Baltimore - involves use of portable
microchemistry instruments, permitting evaluation of urgent blood-test results
rapidly and reliably using only two drops of blood.  ''The technique may
markedly decrease doctor-caused blood loss and, in turn, the fear of possible
transfusion-induced viral infections, including AIDS and hepatitis,'' Chernow
said.  A report on the study, conducted at Sinai Hospital and Massachusetts
General Hospital in Boston and involving 848 patients over a one-year period,
was published in a recent issue of the Journal of the American Medical
Association.  The new analytic methods and instruments have been commercially
available for about five years but have not been evaluated sufficiently in
acute-care settings to determine the accuracy and utility of the ''bedside
laboratory,'' Chernow said.  - The Baltimore Evening Sun

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1620 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 July 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

HEADLINE: New Gene Therapy to Fight Cancer Passes First Human Test

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER,  Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., July 17

BODY:

   The first attempt to treat cancer patients by inserting potent antitumor
genes into their blood cells has not proved dangerous, as some had feared, a
scientist said today, but whether it is working remains to be seen.

   In his first comprehensive report on the status of the effort to use human
gene therapy against terminal cancer, the scientist, Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg of
the National Cancer Institute, said that the first two patients to take part in
the pilot project were still alive. They suffer from malignant melanoma so
severe that they had not been expected to survive more than a few months when
the trial began on Jan. 29.

    Two other patients with advanced melanoma have since been added to the
program, he said, and he plans to include another six very soon. None of the
four has shown ill effects from the gene therapy, but Dr. Rosenberg said that it
was too early to tell whether any were benefiting from their twice-weekly
infusions of genetically altered white blood cells.

   The cells have been designed to deliver a powerful cancer-fighting compound,
tumor necrosis factor, to the many pockets of malignant tissue in the patients'
bodies. But Dr. Rosenberg admitted that the project remains plagued by technical
difficulties.

   "We're working at the limits of scientific technology," he told an audience
of scientists and surgical residents at the National Institutes of Health here.
"It will take some time to see if we can improve the therapy."

For the Cautious Approach

    In an interview afterwards, Dr. Rosenberg contended that the cautious
approach demanded by the Food and Drug Administration before it approved the
therapy had forced him in the initial stages to administer the altered white
blood cells in doses too small to have any immediate effect. Only now, he said,
is he able to give doses large enough to make a difference.

   But he said he hoped that the treatment would prove to be the first effective
therapy for advanced melanoma, which conventional methods like radiation and
chemotherapy fail to cure. "I'm desperate and I'm optimistic," Dr. Rosenberg
said. "I just wish it happened faster."

   Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, said:
"I'm very excited by what I saw today. You don't just do one experimental
therapy and wait until it ends before you do another. You have to get a lot of
things going at once, and I'm confident at least one or two of the ideas he has
will have spectacular effects."

   Dr. Anderson heads a project to treat an inherited immune disease with gene
therapy, an experiment he says is "going beautifully."

   Doctors concur that the need for new ammunition against malignant melanoma is
dire. The incidence of the cancer worldwide is rising faster than that for any
other tumor. This year about 10,000 people in the United States will contract
advanced melanoma and most will die in less than 12 months.

New Projects

    Dr. Rosenberg is so convinced that gene therapy offers the best prospect for
a novel generation of cancer treatments that he also presented several other new
projects that are at various stages of gestation.

   One proposal was approved this month by two of the eight Government agencies
that monitor human gene therapy experiments. It is an effort to treat advanced
breast and colon cancer by adding genes to tumor cells that would make the
malignant tissue easier for the body's immune system to attack, If it clears the
remaining regulatory hurdles, the experiment could begin next year.

   In the gene therapy experiment, Dr. Rosenberg focused on tumor necrosis
factor, which has been shown to be an extremely effective anticancer agent. When
high doses of the factor are injected into mice with multiple tumors, even the
bulkiest malignancies vanish in hours or days. But in humans, the raw compound
is so toxic that if given in shots strong enough to dissolve the cancer, it
would kill the patient.

   Dr. Rosenberg reasoned that if the factor could be delivered to the tumor
sites exclusively, it would have a chance to destroy malignant outposts while
leaving the rest of the body unharmed. To manage the feat, he isolated from
patients a class of white blood cell, called tumor infiltrating lymphocytes,
known to home in specifically on cancerous tissue.

   With genetic altering techniques, he installed in the lymphocytes the gene
that dictates the production of tumor necrosis factor. Those doctored cells were
then grown in the laboratory and reinfused into the patients in gradually
increasing doses.

   Dr. Rosenberg and his colleagues have had difficulty keeping the inserted
gene active once it is inside the blood cells. As a result, the scientists do
not know if the lymphocytes that they are injecting into the melanoma patients
are producing enough tumor necrosis factor to battle the cancer.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1991


                             1621 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 July 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A3-12

   Agreement on a strategic arms pact was reached between the United States and
the Soviet Union. President Bush agreed to meet President Gorbachev in Moscow
late this month. And Mr. Gorbachev begged the leaders of seven economic powers
for help in reforming his nation's economy. Page A1

    The agreement on arms control, which will be the first to lead to an actual
reduction in long-range nuclear weapons, is a watershed point in United
States-Soviet relations. A12

   Aid for the Soviet Union was pledged by the Group of Seven industrialized
democracies to help its transition to a market economy. They promised
large-scale technical expertise, but no substantial financial aid. A1

   News analysis: The dialogue between the leaders of the seven powerful
democracies and President Gorbachev was about what the world would be like if
the Soviet Union became one of them.  A1

   News analysis: Gorbachev hasn't clinced his sale yet A11

   Reporter's Notebook: George, or just plain "Geoffrey"?  A11

   Iraq's uranium enrichment sites were probably destroyed by allied bombing
raids during the gulf war before they had produced material suitable for atomic
weapons, U.N. inspectors have concluded. A3

   A new lease on U.S. military bases in the Philippines was agreed to under
which American forces will withdraw from Clark Air Base but will remain at the
giant naval base at Subic Bay for at least another 10 years. A8

   Severe flooding in central China has reportedly affected some 200 million
people, killing at least 1,729. Thousands have been mobilized along the swollen
Yangtze River system to prevent the dikes from collapsing. A6

   Cambodian factions agree to share seat at U.N.  A7

   U.S. trying to verify photograph of missing flyers A3

   Upington Journal: Happy ending to death row story A4

   Greek chief hopes Bush will help on Cyprus A9

   All eyes on Cuba at Ibero-American summit A5

National A13-22, B7

   Representative Richard Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, announced that he
would not seek the 1992 Democratic nomination for President, citing the press of
duties as House majority leader. A14

   The identity of a top C.I.A. agent was made very public by the chairman of
the Senate Intelligence Committee in an apparently inadvertent remark to
reporters. A13

   The rule prohibiting abortion advice in federally financed family planning
clinics was overturned by the Senate. But the vote was an inconclusive indicator
of whether the measure would survive a Presidential veto. A22

   Senators voted themselves a raise of $23,200, along with approving a ban on
the acceptance of speaking fees. The changes bring their pay in line with that
of members of the House. A15

   House votes to ban replacement of workers during a strike A22

   Senators support "Star Wars" base A13

   U.S. threatens to end aid at 225 schools A18 A job discrimination settlement
was reached between A.T.&T. and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in
which the company will pay $66 million for 13,000 employees who suffered
discrimination during pregnancy. A16

   Corporations paying for the cleanup of municipal landfills in which they had
dumped toxic wastes are beginning to sue towns and small businesses that had
also dumped garbage at these sites.  A14

   California closed a budget gap with an unwieldy package of new taxes and cuts
in services in a reversal of fortune for a state that just three years ago was
prospering.  A19

   Maine's employees back on job A19

   Quayle says Thomas critics are making unfair attacks B7

   New gene therapy to fight cancer passes first human test B7

   U.S. agency urges ban on workplace smoking B7

   Lower diabetes risk found in men who exercise B7

   Breast-implant maker releasing data to back safety claim A16

Regional B1-6

   The debate on distributing condoms to students was reopened by the New York
City Board of Education, which voted to consider whether parents should be
allowed to bar their children from getting them. A1

   New York's new City Council map might not adequately protect the voting
rights of the city's Hispanic residents, a Justice Department official said. A1

   As population grows, Hispanic power lags B4

   New York Comptroller threatens to block Thruway revenue plan B6

   City threatens to sue state to take prisoners more quickly B6

   Governor Weicker's televised plea for support for his income tax plan was a
hit in terms of ratings, but the message itself appears to have struck an
ambivalent chord, at best. B1 The Staten Island Ferry will have full service
restored -- at least for 30 days -- beginning next Tuesday, New York City
officials announced, facing a lawsuit and the wrath of harried commuters. B1

   New York takes big step toward subway fare cards B3

   A man was shot and killed by a plainclothes police officer after a dispute
that began with a summons for illegally fixing a car on a street and escalated
into an attack on the officer and his partner. B1

   A successful teen center run by teens B2

   The battle against prostitution in Wyandanch, a poor Long Island hamlet,
became controversial this winter when the town's civic association sent letters
of complaint to men arrested for soliciting prostitutes. B1

Business Digest D1

Sports B10-17

   Baseball: Mets rally to top Giants B11

   A day to forget for RighettiB13

   Hawkins finds new life in Oakland B13

   Dodgers lose seventh straight B12

   Basketball: 76ers look to Shackleford B17

   Bittersweet time for Petrovic B17

   Column: Anderson on Heather Farr B11

   Cycling: Heading for the mountains B11

   Football: Giant quarterback battle begins B14

   A look back for Jets' Thomas B14

   Ismail set for Canadian debutB14

   Golf: Stewart looks for big things at British Open B16

   Bright future looms for Burton B16

   Tennis: Media horde awaits Seles B13

   Track and Field: Plumer tired of taking pounding B15

The Home Section

   3,813 pounds down, 6,187 or so to go C1

   Producing illusions in an Edith Wharton show house C1

   Keys the Jets and Sharks would fight for C1

   Parent & Child C2

   Currents C3

   Smooth, natural cane gives old chairs new look C5

   Flowers that arrive before their time C6

   Wedding cakes that do not march down aisle of tradition C7

Obituaries

   Robert Motherwell died at 76. He was a major presence on the American art
scene for nearly 50 years and one of the last giants of the Abstract
Expressionist movement. A1

   William Wesley Peters, architect B8

   Wendell Cherry, hospital leader B8

Arts/Entertainment

   Humanities council nominee rejected by Senate panel C15

   Irek Mukhamedov, from the Bolshoi to the Royal C18

   Music: Ice Cube at the Apollo C15

   Dance: Ballet Chicago C15

   Royal Ballet with "Swan Lake" C16

   Word and Image: The press and next TV season C15

   Essays by Leslie Fiedler C20

   "Off Center" and more C22

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

   Editorials A20

   Bombast at the summit

   Bigger banks can be better

   Experimental school pool

   Hope for the Everglades

   Letters A20

   Tom Wicker: Bush's faint worries A21

   William Safire: Before embracing Assad . . .  A21

   David J. Scheffer: Get tough with Iraq (again) A21

   Peter Skerry: Sense on the census A21

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1991


                             1622 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    July 17, 1991, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: A wide range of ills

BODY:

    The young guests of the Children's Inn are receiving all sorts of treatments
for all sorts of diseases.

   For example:

   - Some are trying new combinations of old cancer drugs that may cause fewer
side effects than existing regimens.

   - Others who've failed on traditional cancer treatments are trying new,
experimental drugs.

   - Children with AIDS are trying the same experimental drugs being tested in
adults.

   - Children with rare, congenital conditions are getting treatments that often
aren't available anywhere else in the country - or the world. For example, the
world's first gene therapy patient, a little girl with an inherited immune
deficiency, stays at the inn when she comes to NIH.

   About two-thirds are treated at the National Cancer Institute; others are
treated at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development or at
eight other institutes at NIH.

   The children are receiving treatments that may extend or save their own
lives, but also are contributing to research that will touch many lives in the
USA and other countries.

   That's why costs for treatment and transportation are covered by NIH.


                             1623 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 15, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Equity Issues This Week

BODY:

   The following equity offerings are expected this week:

* Alkermes Inc., 1.5 million common shares. Robertson, Stephens & Co.

* Alliance Imaging Inc., 2.75 million common shares. Donaldson, Lufkin &
Jenrette Inc.



   * American Adjustable Rate Term Trust Inc. 1997, six million common shares.
Piper, Jaffray & Hopwood Inc.

* Catherine's Stores Corp., three million common shares. Paine Webber.

* Carnival Cruise Lines Inc., global offering of 7.85 million common shares,
with 6.28 million to be sold in the U.S. Goldman, Sachs & Co.

* Clear Channel Communications Inc., 1.75 million common shares. Paine Webber.

* Dastek International, 2.7 million common shares. Bear, Stearns & Co.

* Enquirer/Star Inc., global offering of 20.5 million common shares. The First
Boston Corp.

* Exel Ltd., 10.1 million common shares, with 8.1 million to be sold in the U.S.
Goldman, Sachs.

* Genetic Therapy Inc., two million common shares. First Boston.

* Hartmarx Corp., global offering of four million common shares, with 3.2
million to be sold in the U.S. First Boston.

* Marvel Entertainment Group Inc., 4.2 million common shares. Merrill Lynch &
Co. and First Boston.

* Medchem Products Inc., 2.25 million common shares. Furman Selz Mager Dietz &
Birney.

* Meris Laboratories Inc., 2.125 million common shares. Robertson, Stephens.

* Missimer & Associates, one million common shares. Rauscher Pierce Refsnes Inc.


* Neurogen Corp., two million common shares. Allen & Co.

* Osteotech Inc., 1.25 million common shares. Bear, Stearns & Co.

* Ramsay Health Care Inc., 4.7 million common shares. Smith Barney, Harris
Upham.

* Rotech Medical Corp., 2.1 million common shares. Wheat, First Securities Inc.

* Smith's Food and Drug Centers Inc., global offering of 4.1 million common
shares, with 3.3 million to be sold in the U.S. Goldman, Sachs.

* Sun Television and Appliances Inc., two million common shares. Montgomery
Securities Inc.

* Teknekron Communications Systems Inc., global offering of five million common
shares. Paine Webber.

* Unifax Inc., four million common shares. Smith Barney.

* U.S. Filter Corp., 1.2 million common shares. Sutro & Co.

Source: MCM CorporateWatch

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1991


                             1624 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 15, 1991 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C-10

LENGTH: 1431 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis yields its secrets;
Stunning advances in molecular genetics bring cure for fatal childhood disease
within sight

SERIES: Quest;  Cystic fibrosis. First of two parts.

BYLINE: Leigh Fenly, Staff Writer

BODY:

   For two decades, Dr. Ivan Harwood has treated children with a fatal, poorly
understood disease.

   Cystic fibrosis youngsters are normal in every way except that certain of
their organs, primarily their lungs, clog with a viscous, sticky mucus that
eventually destroys their fragile respiratory tissues.

   Only 10 percent of patients survive into their 30s. Over the years as
scientists sought genetic clues to the disease, Harwood struggled to eke out a
few more days, a few more weeks for his dying patients.

   Antibiotics work to prolong life, but, in the end, CF patients become
resistant to the drugs and their lungs fail. "After a while when researchers
would announce a new breakthrough, well, most of us became jaded.

   We just didn't believe anymore," Harwood, a pediatrician and director of
UCSD's Cystic Fibrosis Center, remembers. "So we went along trying to do the
best we could to get as much quality of life for CF patients.

   But everyone knew we were dealing with a progressive illness -- and certainly
we hoped for a cure, but surely none was in sight." Then in 1989, in one of the
triumphs of molecular genetics, research teams in Michigan and Toronto
discovered the errant gene that is responsible for the disease.

   They went further: They identified the specific mutation on the gene -- the
missing snippet of DNA -- involved in most CF cases. Identifying the gene meant
the first real promise for treatment and cure. Since the discovery,
investigators have been picking the gene apart in an effort to understand how
the mutations cause CF. Their findings have already resulted in surprising
laboratory successes that promise a new future for CF patients. Last September,
two teams of researchers announced that they had actually corrected the CF
defect -- in a laboratory dish -- by inserting normal genes into cells from CF
patients. New approaches New pharmacological approaches are also being
developed.

   A handful of new drugs that hold promise for correcting the CF defect or
managing the disease better are now entering clinical trials at UCSD and other
centers. In the last few years, double-lung transplants have become another
option for end-stage patients -- and the only cure.

   Since January, three young San Diegans with CF have successfully undergone
lung transplants at UCSD Medical Center; another 35 such transplants have been
done for CF patients throughout the world.

   More than 100 other CF sufferers have received heart-lung transplants. In the
midst of such dramatic change, the jaded Harwood has become sanguine.

   "The whole mood here has changed, not only for patients, but for care-givers.

   For the first time I can look my patients in the eye, and say, `Hang in
there.

   It's going to happen, and it will probably happen soon enough to help you.' "
The genetic error that causes cystic fibrosis is Lilliputian.

   It's in a spot called Delta-F508, located on the long arm of chromosome 7. In
the majority of patients, only three of the gene's 250,000 base pairs, or
subunits of DNA, are missing.

   This deletion leads to a loss of a single amino acid -- one of the 1,480
amino acids that make up the CF protein. "A single amino acid...."

   Harwood muses.

   "It's as if you pulled the distributor wire on your car.

   Nothing works without that 10-cent piece of wire." The first step As many as
one in 25 Americans of northern European descent -- some 10 million people --
carry a gene with a CF-causing defect.

   CF is a recessive disorder, which means that a child must inherit a defective
gene from both parents in order to develop the disease. For many years,
researchers tried to find the gene responsible for CF. But until 1978, the only
way to identify which of the roughly 100,000 human genes caused a disease was to
find a physical clue: an abnormal chromosome that could be seen under the
microscope, or a protein (the product of a gene) that was defective or missing
in blood or urine. Cystic fibrosis offered no such clues.

   But beginning in the early '80s, researchers began looking for "genetic
markers" of the disease by comparing the DNA of CF children to that of their
parents, relatives and people in other families.

   In this way, the errant gene was narrowed to somewhere on the huge chromosome
7 -- a location so vague it's like trying to locate a house when you don't know
what continent it's on. But the process was propelled forward with a technique
called "jumping along chromosomes" that allows researchers to cover up to
100,000 base pairs at a time.

   In 1989, Dr. Francis Collins of the University of Michigan and Dr. Lap Chee
Tsui of Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children finally found it, reporting the
discovery of the CF gene in the journal Science that September. Having the gene
in hand made it possible to diagnose CF in the unborn, even in families that
have no affected members.

   It also allows prospective parents to be tested to see if they are carriers
of the disease. But discovering the gene was only the first step toward
treatment.

   Next, researchers studied the genetic code to determine how the normal gene
functions in human cells, what kind of protein it instructs the cells to make,
and what the protein actually does. At Oxford University in England, Dr.
Christopher Higgins produced a computer model of the protein -- called CFTR for
cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator -- made by the malfunctioning CF gene.

   His results suggest that the protein holds the key to understanding CF. In
normal cells it functions as a gateway to let chloride leave the cell. In CF,
the protein is present, but it is defective and causes the gateway to
malfunction.

   This alters the cell's electrical activity so that water is pulled inside the
cell.

   Mucus outside the cell becomes dehydrated and sticky, clogging lungs in CF
victims. "I think most of us realized that once we understood the real mechanism
of the disease, that things were going to be different," explains Harwood. "Once
you have this information in hand, you can think further.

   You can say, OK, we know what this protein does.

   The most direct therapy would be gene therapy where somehow you could supply
the missing piece, then correct the defect.

   That has appeal because of its simplicity.

   But it is also very complex. "For instance, how do you get the normal gene
into the living cell?

   Well, viruses do this all the time.

   They go inside a living cell and replicate. And this has been the way it has
actually been done." A cure for CF Scientists at the National Institutes of
Health, the University of Iowa and the University of Michigan have used
inactivated viruses of the common cold as shuttles to carry normal human CFTR
genes into diseased CF cells growing in culture. In the test tube, a normal gene
is inserted into a virus, which carries the gene into the cell.

   Once inside, the gene produces a normal protein. Channels stay open and
electrical activity is normal. At the NIH, Dr. Ronald Crystal also used the
process to deliver the human gene into the lungs of laboratory animals.

   In all the studies, the defective cells began to manufacture the normal CFTR
protein, and the chloride channel opened up. The experiments suggest that
supplying patients with new CFTR genes might reverse many, if not all, symptoms
of the illness, explains Dr. Robert Beall, research director of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation.

   "CF is clearly a disease where gene therapy will be used.

   And this is the cure for CF, the treatment of the main, primary defect." But
many technical hurdles remain before scientists will be able to get the gene
into the airways of a living, breathing person -- and do it safely. For
instance, nobody knows whether the heavy mucus in the lungs of CF patients would
get in the way of treatment.

   How many cells would need to be treated for the patients' airways to behave
more normally?

   How long would the inserted genes go on producing the CFTR protein?

   How often would the treatment need to be repeated? In humans, researchers
might not use viruses to transport the normal gene, Beall says.

   Another approach might be to use liposomes -- microscopic, fat-coated bubbles
-- that pass through cell membranes and could be sprayed into the lungs via
aerosols. Although some researchers believe that gene therapy for CF is far in
the future, Beall is more optimistic.

   "I believe that this could be available in three to four years.

   And, already this knowledge has had a profound impact.

   Now I can tell parents in despair that we have wonderful things happening.
"And we can look at these kids and say, `The future is going to be very
different for you.' " Next week: Lung transplants for cystic fibrosis patients.

GRAPHIC: 2 DIAGRAMS; CAPTIONS: 1,2. Closer to correcting a deadly flaw | In
cystic fibrosis, defective genes produce faulty proteins. Channels that normally
let chloride ions leave a cell are blocked. This alters the cell's electrical
activity, so that water is pulled inside. Mucus outside the cell becomes
dehydrated and sticky, clogging lungs in victims of the disease. | In the test
tube, a normal gene is inserted into a virus, which carries the gene into the
cell. Once inside, the gene produces a normal protein. Channels stay open and
electrical activity is normal. This should result in normal, non-sticky mucus
that would leave lungs clear.; PHOTOBY: 1,2. SOURCE: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1625 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                             July 9, 1991, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE AND MEDICINE; SECTION E; PAGE 04

LENGTH: 818 words

HEADLINE: A life preserver for babies Genetic testing of newborns saves infants;
from death, disability Protein imbalance, seven other illnesses screened;
Protein imbalance, seven other inherited illnesses screened

BYLINE: By Alexa Boer Staff writerchildren; families; diseases; health; deaths;
organizations

BODY:

   Two weeks after the birth of her twins, Michael and David, Lynn Fischler got
a call from her doctor, telling her to rush David immediately to the hospital.

   He told her David might die on the way. A blood sample taken from the heel of
his foot a few days after birth flagged doctors that David had a rare, often
lethal, genetic disorder that allows elevated protein levels to poison all the
body's cells.

   If the condition is diagnosed in time, it is easily treated. If not, most
infants slip into a coma within a few weeks of birth. At best they end up
severely retarded. At worst, they die.

   David, now 2 1/2, is a living - and healthy - example of Georgia's aggressive
approach to screening all the state's newborns for genetic diseases - even rare
ones such as maple syrup urine disease (MSUD), the protein imbalance that is
named for the sickly sweet-smelling urine it produces.

   Georgia is one of 22 states that test all newborns for MSUD. The state also
tests for seven other genetic conditions that can cause death or severe
retardation. Blood for most of the tests is obtained by nurses who prick the
infant's heel within days of birth, blot the blood onto special paper, and send
the sample to a state laboratory in Atlanta. Abnormal findings are usually
reported within three days. However, with more than 165,000 tests performed
annually, sometimes things go wrong. That almost happened in David's case.

   Fortunately, a nurse noticed that David's abnormal lab results were written
on the wrong line. The results of a second set of blood tests brought the
Fischlers, who live in suburban Atlanta, to Egleston Children's Hospital. Dr.
Paul Fernhoff, director of clinical genetics, pulled David out of immediate
danger.

   Emory University, which has been an important center for MSUD research since
the disorder was first described, is the only place in the world that offers
prenatal testing for MSUD. Because the condition is so rare, this option is used
primarily by parents who have already had one child with the disease.; Maple
syrup smell

   The university's experience with this rare genetic disorder began in 1960,
when pediatrician Louis Elsas first identified the problem - children with maple
syrup urine disease cannot break down specific amino acids, the basic components
of protein.

   If the levels of these amino acids become too high, they are toxic. When
David was brought back to the hospital, his levels were 300 times normal. These
amino acids are also the source of the strange smell reminiscent of maple syrup.

   In 1978, Dr. Elsas led an effort to implement statewide screening for several
genetic diseases. Now, every newborn in Georgia is tested for eight genetic
conditions.

   In addition to saving lives, the screening saves money. Dr. Fernhoff
estimates that for every dollar spent on testing, $ 10 to $ 12 is saved in
treatment and care later in life.

   Last year the state began screening newborns for congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, a genetic disorder caused by poorly functioning adrenal glands that
severely affects sexual development. So far, seven cases have been identified
through the screening program, almost exactly what Emory had predicted.

   As technology improves, tests for other diseases, such as cystic fibrosis,
which affects one out of 2,500 Caucasian births, will be added, state officials
say.

   Meanwhile, the state is considering dropping tests now given for tyrosinemia,
which causes kidney and liver failure, and homocystinuria, which causes mental
retardation and growth problems. Both diseases have been detected in just nine
children born in the state in the past 13 years.; It could be worse'

   Like many of the diseases in the screening program, maple syrup urine disease
is a rare recessive genetic disorder. Both parents of affected children must
carry the gene and both must have passed it on to their newborn. Usually the
disease affects one in 100,000 births, but it occurs in one out of 176 births in
the Amish population in Pennsylvania.

   The Emory team is working to isolate the defective gene, hoping eventually to
use it to cure the disease. "What everyone's hope for treatment for this and for
many other genetic diseases is gene therapy," Dr. Fernhoff says,

   Until then, David will never be able to go off a strict low protein diet;
every Oreo and bagel he eats must be counted and measured. "MSUD children go off
diets a little while and in about a day or two, they're going to wind up in
coma. There's reinforcement right away," Dr. Fernhoff says.

   For the same reasons, Mrs. Fischler has to watch David carefully.  You never
know with a child that's 2 1/2 that he's not going to grab something."

   But she remains optimistic. "He's just going to get easier to take care of,"
she says. "It's hard, but like Dr. Fernhoff always keeps telling me, it could be
worse."

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992


                             1626 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1991 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             June 27, 1991 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. C12

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: DOERNBECHER TO OPEN PEDIATRIC BONE MARROW UNIT

BYLINE: PATRICK O'NEILL, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Thursday, June 27, 1991 DOERNBECHER TO OPEN PEDIATRIC BONE MARROW UNIT

   Summary:  Officials says the costs to patients will be significantly  lower
than at Seattle's Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center.

   Oregon's first pediatric bone marrow transplantation unit will open within
two weeks at Doernbecher Children's Hospital, an arm of Oregon Health Sciences
University.

   The four-bed unit is expected to treat 12 to 14 children a year for
potentially fatal diseases that include leukemia and inherited immune
deficiencies.

   Hospital officials predict the costs to patients will be substantially  lower
at Doernbecher in Portland than at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research  Center in
Seattle, the only other such program in the Northwest.

   State Office of Health Policy documents show that Doernbecher officials
predict an average cost per patient of $126,424 during the first year compared
with $175,000 at Fred Hutchinson.

   The program would benefit Portland-area patients who faced travel and
lodging costs of about $11,000 in Seattle, according to the documents. An
estimated 40 percent of the unit's patients would come from the Portland  area.

   Although the price is expected to be lower, most patients will have to have
insurance to be admitted. A deposit of $100,000 will be required for each
patient, according to a hospital brochure on the program.

   The brochure states that because the hospital has limited resources, the
program must be self-sustaining.

   The Office of Health Policy, in its order approving the program, predicts
that some children will die because of that policy.

   ``The hospital argues in its application that `some children die  needlessly'
because the program is not now in place,'' according to the order  written by
Chad Cheriel, assistant director of the Oregon Department of Human  Resources.
``It appears, however, that this may still be the case for  uninsured
patients.''

   Costs for renovation and equipment will be $728,000, according to the
hospital's application for state permission to establish the unit. Hospital
officials anticipate that 200,000 will come from Kiwanis International of
Oregon and Southwest Washington and $528,000 will be supplied by the
Doernbecher Children's Hospital Foundation.

   Hospital officials expect 12 to 14 children will receive transplants in the
first 12 months of operation. Those transplants will include marrow either  from
other donors or from the children themselves.

   Bone marrow transplants are used to treat some forms of cancer that require
extremely high doses of cancer-fighting drugs or radiation. One side effect of
those therapies is that they kill the patient's bone marrow, which produces
blood cells. The patients would die unless they receive new bone marrow --
either their own or from a compatible donor.

   Depending on the disease, physicians can remove a small amount of a
patient's bone marrow before the therapy, freeze it and give it back again
after the treatment is over. The marrow, which is transfused into a blood
vessel, finds its way back to the bones where physicians hope it will  reproduce
more marrow cells.

   Because the therapy leaves the patients without an immune system, they must
be kept in protective isolation to prevent infection for six to eight weeks
until the marrow begins working again.

   Bone marrow transplants usually are a last-ditch effort. Patients have a 30
percent to 80 percent chance of long-term, disease-free survival. Mortality
rates range from 15 percent to 30 percent in the first eight weeks.

   Tim Goldfarb, director of University Hospital, said bone marrow
transplantation is useful not only for treating cancer and immune disorders  but
in the future also might serve as a vehicle to deliver genetic therapies.

   He said the hospital is gearing up its genetic research efforts and that  the
bone marrow unit will one day be used in that area.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1627 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                             June 25, 1991, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE AND MEDICINE; SECTION E; PAGE 04

LENGTH: 262 words

HEADLINE: Closing down the HIV factory; Doctors try to turn virus against itself

BYLINE: By Steve Sternberg Staff writerdisease; research; medicine; reports;
technology

BODY:

   FLORENCE, Italy - Doctors are planning to transform the AIDS virus into a
weapon that they can turn against itself.

   Doctors are attempting to alter the AIDS virus genetically as a way of
preventing the disease. Two research teams plan to create a strand of genetic
material that will interfere with the ability of the virus to produce the
proteins necessary for it to reproduce.

   Researchers cautioned that the strategy is complex and the first human
experiments are years in the future.

   "The technology is here, and, at least in the laboratory, is a reality," said
Dr. William Haseltine, chief of virology at the Dana- Farber Cancer Institute in
Boston.

   His team is one of two working on genetic therapy to interrupt the deadly
multiplication of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that leads to AIDS. Dr.
Robert Gallo, a co-discoverer of the AIDS virus, has adopted a similar approach.

   The altered AIDS virus would be injected into the bloodstream where it would
do what comes naturally, insert itself into a type of white blood cell. Once
inside, HIV would replace the blood cell's genetic core with its own.

   "It will significantly slow down the spread of the virus," Dr. Haseltine
said.

   Unaltered virus would turn the cell into an HIV factory. The altered version
would make the white blood cell resistant to HIV infection.

   Dr. Joseph Sodroski, one of Dr. Haseltine's team, has reported trying this
approach, and then mixing the cells with AIDS virus to see if HIV could take
them over. The virus failed, the researchers reported.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992


                             1628 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                      June 21, 1991, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 936 words

HEADLINE: Scientists explore AIDS gene therapy

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

DATELINE: FLORENCE, Italy

BODY:

    Boston AIDS researchers announced the development yesterday of a promising,
though preliminary, type of gene therapy that has the potential of stopping AIDS
virus reproduction in already infected people.

   Other researchers presented findings on an unusual type of protection against
AIDS called passive immunization as well as developments on new types of AIDS
detection tests.

   The new gene therapy technique, presented yesterday by William Haseltine,
chief of retrovirology at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, is one of several
similar ideas discussed this week at the 7th International Conference on AIDS.

   In Haseltine's approach, which he said "offers an exciting new prospect for
therapy of AIDS," researchers make an altered version of the AIDS virus that it
is essentially an empty shell. Though this form of the virus cannot reproduce,
it can still do what the AIDS virus does best: find and get inside immune cells
called CD4 cells.

   Haseltine's group has engineered the empty virus to carry in an anti-viral
gene that will bind to and block key regions of the AIDS virus. Thus, when a
live AIDS virus particle comes into a treated cell, the cell is already primed
to block or at least reduce infection.

   One of Haseltine's Dana Farber colleagues, Mark Poznansky, has shown that
this method works in the lab to protect CD4 cells from AIDS infection. In
humans, white blood cells would be removed from an infected person, injected
with the altered AIDS virus and then returned to the patient. The technique has
not been been tested in animals or humans.

   Among the other new findings are these:

    Researchers reported they had successfully protected a chimpanzee against
infection with the AIDS virus for 36 weeks using an unusual technique they
believe holds promise for humans.

   Instead of a typical vaccine, which causes the body to make antibodies, the
techique used in the chimp involves passive immunization, or the injection of
already formed antibodies.

   The chimpanzee was first injected with antibodies against a key region of the
AIDS virus called the V3 loop, according to researchers from Merck, Sharp and
Dohme Research Labs, workting with scientists from Cambridge-based Repligen
Corp. A day later, the animal was injected with live AIDS virus; 36 weeks later,
it is still free of AIDS infection.

    The National Cancer Institute has developed a new blood test that has the
potential to detect exposure to AIDS months before the two currently available
tests that detect either antibodies to the AIDS virus or tiny fragments of the
virus.

   The NCI test measures activation of a specific subgroup of a major kind of
immune cells called T cells. In the blood of a person exposed to the AIDS virus,
T cells sensitized to specific regions of the virus envelope begin secreting a
chemical called IL-2.  By looking at the specific type of T cells making this
chemical, researchers have been able to spot exposure to AIDS in six people
weeks, and in some cases months, before they developed antibodies or turned
positive on the viral detection test.

   NCI researchers have gone on to show that the test correctly identified as
uninfected 120 people at low risk for AIDS and correctly identified as positive
about the same number of people at high risk who were already antibody-positive.

    Another new test, developed by researchers at the National Institute for
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, is able to determine whether infants born to
AIDS-infected mothers are themselves infected or merely carrying their mother's
antibodies. Maternal antibodies usually persist in newborns for about 15 months.

   Maternal antibodies are usually of a class called IGG. The infant's own
antibodies, detectable through the new test, are of a different class, IGA. The
IGA-based test can detect genuine AIDS infection in infants as young as three
months, said the developer, Dr. Thomas Quinn. The test, which was tried out on
more than 200 children, is as easy to perform as standard antibody tests, and
was accurate more than 95 percent of the time, he added.

    Researchers from Immuno-AG, a European-based biotech firm, reported
yesterday that a chimpanzee injected with a recombinant vaccine called RGP160
and exposed to live AIDS virus 2 1/2 years later has remained free of AIDS
infection. The results demonstrate long-lasting immunity, which researchers
consider key for any vaccine.

   In another experiment, a different chimpanzee exposed to live AIDS virus four
months after its last booster shot has remained AIDS-free for 3 1/2 years, the
longest period of protection for a prototype AIDS vaccine in chimps.

    Dana-Farber's Haseltine also reported he has discovered that dendritic
cells, a relatively rare type of white blood cells present in mucus membranes,
can be directly infected with the AIDS virus.

   Although overwhelming epidemiologic evidence shows that saliva and oral sex
are not major routes of AIDS transmission, Haseltine warned yesterday that it is
theoretically possible that these routes of transmission, which involve
dendritic cells, may be more important than previously thought.

   Dendritic cells may be an important reservoir of the AIDS virus, Haseltine
said, because the virus appears to reproduce rapidly inside them, he said.

   From the dendritic cells, the virus spreads to the lymph nodes. These lymph
tissues, too, may be a far more important reservoir of the AIDS virus than had
been thought until recently, according to a number of researchers at the
conference, including Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1991


                             1629 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      June 21, 1991, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 208 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy holds promise against AIDS

BYLINE: Kim Painter

DATELINE: FLORENCE, Italy

BODY:

    Gene therapy could someday play a part in treating AIDS, say scientists at
the seventh International Conference on AIDS.

   The idea was proposed this week by several prominent scientists, including
Robert Gallo of the National Cancer Institute and William Haseltine of the
Dana-Farber Cancer Research Institute, Boston.

   On Thursday, Haseltine said HIV, the AIDS virus itself, might be used in such
a strategy: Genetic material that could disarm real HIV viruses could be
packaged in the emptied shells of decoy HIV viruses that would target infected
cells.

   But, he says, such therapies are years from human testing.

   Also, studies of an AIDS vaccine using modified smallpox vaccine show
promise, a researcher from Vanderbilt University, Nashville, reported.

   - Another top U.S. researcher said it's likely no single vaccine now in
development will be workable everywhere.

   The problem: HIV differs widely around the world, and a vaccine based on
components in one virus might not work against another, says Dani Bolognesi of
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, N.C.

   But some other researchers believe a vaccine that protects against all HIV
strains is needed, because different strains are found even within one infected
human being.


                             1630 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     June 19, 1991, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: Cancer risk in AIDS patients is said to rise as they live longer

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

DATELINE: FLORENCE

BODY:

   People with AIDS are increasingly able to survive opportunistic infections
due to a growing number of improved treatments, but their lives are increasingly
threatened by another major complication of AIDS: cancer.

   In a series of presentations here yesterday at the Seventh International
Conference on AIDS, researchers said that cancer has become a serious problem
for people whose immune systems have been ravaged by the AIDS virus.

   "As we prolong survival, do we face new problems? Yes," said Dr. Ian Weller,
a leading British AIDS and cancer researcher. "As we suppress the common
infections, we see a higher incidence of other problems," particularly "more
tumors and neurological disease."

   Many of the patients who live longer because they take the antiviral drug
AZT, for instance, develop non-Hodgkins lymphoma, a cancer of the lymphatic
system, said Jill Lietzau, a National Cancer Institute researcher.

   After two years on AZT, she said, 12 percent of patients with AIDS or severe
AIDS-related complex develop lymphoma, and after three years, 29 percent develop
it. The patients most susceptible to this cancer are those with the most
weakened immune systems at the time they began taking AZT.

   In the early days of the disease, few people with AIDS survived more than a
year after diagnosis. Now, in the developed world, many survive more than two
years, using drugs to fight off diseases such as pneumonia, toxoplasmosis and
cytomegalovirus.

   An estimated 5,000 patients with AIDS will develop non-Hodgkins lymphoma in
the United States in 1992, according to the National Cancer Institute, which
projects that as many as 10 percent of AIDS patients will develop the cancer
each year.

   "Non-Hodgkins lymphoma is clearly increasing among individuals with AIDS,
creating concern in the medical community about how to best treat the cancer
and, better yet, how to prevent it," Lietzau said.

   AIDS-associated non-Hodgkins lymphoma is very aggressive and patients often
tolerate chemotherapy poorly.

   Researchers are also focusing on Kaposi's sarcoma, another major AIDS-related
cancer, which results in an excessive proliferation of blood vessels. The
lesions caused by Kaposi's sarcoma appear as red blotches on the skin and as
tangles of excessive blood vessel tissue elsewhere in the body.

   Dr. Robert Gallo, head of the laboratory of tumor cell biology at the
National Cancer Institute, presented data yesterday showing the potential
effectiveness of a new Japanese drug against that cancer.

   The drug, called SPPG, is made in bacterial cells by the Daitchi Co. In mouse
studies, Gallo said, the drug was able to "prevent or diminish the lesions of
Kaposi's sarcoma. I am hopeful this drug will go into men soon." For unclear
reasons, homosexual and bisexual men with AIDS appear to be more susceptible to
Kaposi's sarcoma than other AIDS patients.

   Gallo acknowledged in a news conference, however, that Daitchi, with whom he
is collaborating, has been slow to produce sufficient quantities of the drug for
further testing.

   Daitchi officials say they have had trouble increasing production of the
drug, he said.  The National Cancer Institute "offered to help and the offer was
kindly rejected."

   Gallo's lab has also identified a number of specific growth factors that
drive tumors in Kaposi's sarcoma, including a protein called TAT made by one of
the AIDS virus genes.

   Gallo also cited as potentially encouraging two other research developments.

   Scientists have recently found, he said, that DNA from the AIDS virus
resides, possibly in significant quantities, in the cytoplasm or body of an
infected cell. Researchers had thought the virus integrated all its genetic
material into the DNA of the infected cell, deep inside the cell's nucleus.

   Instead, Gallo said, what seems to happen is that once the AIDS virus enters
a cell, it changes from its normal RNA to DNA form, and then, while some of the
DNA goes to the nucleus, other pieces of the newly formed DNA stay in the body
of the cell.

   It is not yet clear whether this means the virus is actively reproducing in
the body of the cells as well as in the nucleus, or whether current antiviral
drugs will act on this form of the virus.

   A possible way to thwart this form of the virus, Gallo said, might be to
block a cellular enzyme that produces the building blocks of DNA, without which,
presumably, more viral DNA could not be made.

   The other potentially encouraging finding, Gallo said, is an early model of
an "intracellular vaccine," which could be a form of gene therapy that might
halt the spread of the disease in an infected person.

   The TAT gene of the AIDS virus stimulates production of new virus by acting
on another part of the virus, a target region called TAR.

   Gallo's lab inserted a large quantity of the TAR material into the DNA of
uninfected immune cells. Gallo said that when these cells were then infected
with the AIDS virus, the TAR areas acted like a decoy, sopping up the proteins
made by the TAT gene, so that the AIDS virus was unable to reproduce.

   The idea, Gallo said, is to take uninfected immune cells called stem cells
from people infected with the AIDS virus, insert large amounts of the TAR part
of the AIDS virus into these cells, then put the cells back into the patient's
body.

   In theory, he said, these cells should be able to repopulate the bone marrow
with cells that are vaccinated against the AIDS virus.

   The therapy has only undergone limited testing in the laboratory; extensive
additional testing is necessary to determine if it will work in human beings.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1991


                             1631 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    June 19, 1991, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: Japanese drug could help AIDS cancer

BYLINE: Kim Painter

DATELINE: FLORENCE, Italy

BODY:

    An experimental Japanese drug holds promise for fighting a cancer common in
AIDS patients, says a top U.S. AIDS researcher.

   The drug, called SP-PG, shrank mouse tumors resembling the human cancer
Kaposi's sarcoma, says Robert Gallo of the National Cancer Institute. He spoke
Tuesday at the seventh International Conference on AIDS.

   Gallo believes the purple KS lesions, which can grow on skin and internal
organs, arise from blood vessel cells and grow in response to substances
released by the AIDS virus. The drug inhibits blood-vessel cell growth and may
have additional effects.

   ''It can literally melt away the tumor, and once treated, the tumor can't
grow back,'' says Martin Delaney of San Francisco's Project Inform, a patient
education group.

   Existing chemotherapy for KS ''poisons the tumor'' and creates significant
side effects, Delaney says. ''This attempts to starve the tumor ... . There's
nothing toxic about it.''

   The drug, made by Japan's Dai-Ichi Pharmaceuticals, is a natural substance
produced by a type of soil bacteria.

   Supplies for studies have been limited, but Gallo says a recently signed deal
with the company should allow research to proceed.

   Gallo's lab, which did key work in identifying the AIDS virus, also has
looked for a separate sexually transmitted microbe linked to KS. Many
researchers suspect such an agent exists because KS is much more common in gay
and bisexual men than in other AIDS patients and sometimes develops in men who
are at high risk for AIDS but have no detectible HIV infection.

   ''We've looked for seven years and haven't found one other virus or
microbe,'' Gallo says.  And other researchers reporting here Tuesday also say
they've been unable to explain KS in HIV-negative gay and bisexual men.

   Despite remaining questions, Gallo says the outlook for treating KS and other
diseases afflicting HIV-infected people is brighter than some other experts
suggest. ''Basic biomedical research can, will and should solve the problems of
HIV-infected people,'' he says.

   In his remarks Tuesday, Gallo also said recent discoveries about the life
cycle of the AIDS virus suggest possibilities for someday helping infected
people with gene therapy. Protective genetic material introduced to the bone
marrow would spread throughout the body and keep the virus out of susceptible
cells.


                             1632 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  June 6, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 243 words

HEADLINE: EXECUTIVE CHANGES

BODY:


   * Alpha Microsystems, Santa Ana, Calif., a microcomputer systems company,
appointed Rene H. Caron vice president of sales and marketing. He replaces
Douglas J. Tullio, who was promoted to president.

* Boston Consulting Group, Boston, named Eran Broshy, Mark F. Blaxill and
Michael Steiner vice presidents.



   * CPT Corp., Eden Prairie, Minn., a producer of value-added equipment,
appointed Richard E. Eichhorn executive vice president.

* Genta Inc., San Diego, a biopharmaceutical company, appointed William Bliss
president.

* Helix Technology Corp., Waltham, Mass., a producer of vacuum pumps and
refrigerators, named Robert E. Anastasi and Gerald J. Fortier corporate vice
presidents.

* Mountain Medical Equipment Inc., Denver, a supplier of oxygen concentrators,
named Paul J. Jerde president.

* National Starch and Chemical Co., Bridgewater, Conn., a unit of Unilever N.V.,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands, named Bernd O. M. Tonnesmann corporate vice
president.

* Siemens Stromberg-Carlson, Boca Raton, Fla., which designs digital voice and
data switching products, appointed Anton Hashoizner president and chief
executive.

* Vical Inc., San Diego, a producer of gene therapeutics, named its president,
Dannie H. King, to the additional post of chief executive.

* World Book Inc., Chicago, a division of Scott Fetzer Co., Westlake, Ohio,
named Robert C. Martin president of its direct marketing divison.

CORRECTION-DATE: June 10, 1991, Monday

CORRECTION:

   An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Thursday
misstated the location of the National Starch and Chemical Company. It is
Bridgewater, N.J.


LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1991


                             1633 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

               May 29, 1991, Wednesday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2319 words

HEADLINE: FUTURE OF S.D. BIOTECH LOOKING LIKE A BILLION;
SCIENCE: AS INDUSTRY CONTINUES TO PROVE ITS WORTH, INVESTORS AND NEW COMPANIES
LINE UP TO TAKE PART.

SERIES: FRONTIERS OF SCIENCE. Inside San Diego's thriving biotech industry. Last
in a series.

BYLINE: By TOM GORMAN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   If you can bear with him, allow Inder Verma to first rattle off, in
scientifically matter-of-fact terms, where the future of biotechnology rests:

   * With gene therapy, in which the human DNA molecule is restructured to fix
this or that disease.

   * With biomodulators, to stimulate the growth of beneficial cells or the
death of destructive ones.

   * With so-called "information molecules," to direct the healthy growth of
otherwise diseased cells.

   * With designer drugs crafted on computers, to attack highly specific
diseases at the molecular level.

   Now let Verma cut to the quick on how he really feels about biotechnology.

   "Every day you open the newspaper, you're reading about some new treatment.
Every day there is something new," said Verma, a professor of molecular biology
and chairman of the faculty at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies.

   "I must say, I'm in a great field," he pronounces unabashedly.

   Even if hometown boosterism is discounted, there seems little doubt that
biotechnology in San Diego is rooted and is moving toward a promising future.

   As local scientists identify, design and develop futuristic medicines and
procedures to produce better diagnoses, they are forcing San Diego to
accommodate a new industry.

   Lawyers, accountants, public relations specialists and other professionals
are adjusting to a new lexicon and business form as they begin to tap San
Diego's newest billion-dollar, high-spec and high-tech industry.

   Developers, property managers and architects now talk about things such as
waste disposal drums for experimental chemical compounds and the construction of
vivariums -- holding areas for lab animals.

   UC San Diego is establishing a center for gene therapy to develop what may be
the ultimate cure-all for human disease, and is developing new partnerships with
other basic research institutions in San Diego as well as with private biotech
firms to hasten the development of medicines from the basic research lab to the
bedside.

   Conscious of the ethical concerns of biotech's promises -- and abuses -- the
Salk Institute has established a Center on Bioethics to debate how and when to
apply their own breakthroughs.

   As biotech advances continue to prove their worth in laboratories and
clinical trials, investors and outside companies are expected to pump an
additional $3 billion to $5 billion into San Diego biotech companies during the
rest of the 1990s.

   And the commercial biotech industry in town is headed into a major
transition, from research and development and its attendant high-end employment
force, to a broader-based, vastly enlarged and more rank-and-file work force
that will handle the manufacturing, sale and distribution of its product lines.

   Indeed, some companies that specialize in diagnostic procedures have already
sent their products -- cancer and pregnancy detection kits, for example -- to
market. The grandfather of these companies, 800-employee Hybritech, has
generated more than $100 million in sales alone.

   A dozen or more other companies say they are within a few years of winning
U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval for their proposed medicines. If
successful, they can be expected to tap marketplaces even more lucrative than
their diagnostic cousins, and will make the turn from cash-draining research and
development to the cash cow of medical sales.

   The maturation of San Diego's biotech community signals more than just the
potential of million-dollar payoffs for the companies and their speculative
investors. It will also mean thousands of new jobs in a high-tech industry, from
assembly line workers to salespeople.

   Civic leaders are calling biotech San Diego's new sunrise industry, a
high-tech alternative to tuna fishing and shipbuilding.

   "The industry has come of age," said Tom Adams, founder and president of
Genta, a private company working to develop "antisense technology," a technique
for halting disease at the genetic level that is being studied at only a handful
of companies nationwide. "The technologies people were wondering about 10 years
ago are now being applied."

   Ted Greene, who has helped start nine local biotech companies -- including
Hybritech -- compares San Diego's biotech industry to Silicon Valley's legendary
upstart computer industry.

   "We're where the computer industry was in the 1960s," Greene said. "This
(biotech industry) is what America will lead the world in for several decades."

   And San Diego is claiming its role:

   * Cures for AIDS are being researched at the Salk Institute, Agouron
Pharmaceuticals, Viagene, Immune Response and Lidak Pharmaceuticals, which has
developed its own colonies of mice implanted with human immune systems to
further its research.

   * Cures for cancer are being sought at, among other places, the renowned La
Jolla Cancer Research Foundation and IDEC Pharmaceuticals and the brand-new San
Diego Regional Cancer Center, which was founded by Ivor Royston, a UCSD
professor who began Hybritech.

   * Cures for influenza and herpes, and maybe even the common cold are being
studied in the labs of Genta Inc. and Isis Pharmaceuticals, where research is
under way to rewrite chemically based genetic messages.

   * Medicines to cure diabetes and obesity are being researched at Amylin;
Cytel and Immune Response are studying ways to modulate the human immune system
to bring an end to, among other things, arthritis.

   * Corvas is working to stop unwanted blood clotting; Gensia is working to
minimize the damage caused by heart attacks; Telios Pharmaceuticals is
developing medicines to better treat skin wounds, and, across the street,
Marrow-Tech is working to clone human skin for use in transplantations and
toxicology testing, and Ligand is looking to cure osteoporosis.

   "A lot of companies are in Phase 2 or Phase 3 (the testing of proposed drugs
on humans, to determine toxicity and dosage levels) of their clinical trials,"
said David Hale, president of two San Diego biotech firms, Gensia and a spinoff
company, Viagene. "In the next couple of years, we'll see some of these products
hit the market. That will finally demonstrate the impact the industry is having.

   "And one of the things that we'll see in San Diego is the transition from
research and development to manufacturing and selling," he said. "When that
happens, the number of employees in biotech will increase significantly. There
are probably 5,000 people working in biotech in San Diego right now, and, by
1995, I bet there will be 10,000."

   Martin Nash of La Jolla, president of the Assn. of Biotechnology Companies
and a biotech consultant, predicts not only growth in the biotech employment
base in San Diego, but in the number of new companies as well.

   From San Diego's point of view, biotech money is new money.

   Most of the venture capital used to finance the biotech start-ups, Nash
noted, comes from New York or San Francisco. Most of the domestic corporate
money invested in the local firms -- in terms of corporate sponsorships,
licensing agreements, marketing and distribution rights and the like -- comes
from New Jersey, home of most of the pharmaceutical giants in this country.

   In addition, millions of dollars have been invested in San Diego by
pharmaceutical companies in Europe and Japan as they sign their own pacts with
local firms.

   "Biotechnology as a San Diego industry certainly has had a favorable trade
balance for the region," Nash said. "It's brought in outside money, created
jobs, helped fill buildings and paid taxes. It's a strong, net positive cash
flow."

   The largest single cash influxes into San Diego have come from outright
purchases of home-grown biotech firms by outsiders, led by Eli Lilly's
$490-million cash-and-stock purchase of Hybritech, and the $100-million purchase
of Gen-Probe, a manufacturer of tests for sexually transmitted diseases, by
Chugai Pharmaceuticals of Japan.

   San Diego State University management professor Daryl Mitton estimates that
an additional $482 million has been pumped into San Diego biotech firms over the
years by outside companies, for research, marketing, licensing, manufacturing
and equity rights of local firms.

   Nearly $400 million has been invested in local biotech by private, start-up
investors and longer-range venture capitalists, Mitton estimated.

   All told, about $1.37 billion has been raised so far in getting San Diego's
biotech business rolling.

   "The reason people are putting this kind of money into San Diego biotech is
because they expect payoffs. They wouldn't nurture biotech firms for six or
seven or 10 years if they didn't expect a harvest for their investors. They see
this as a real growth industry," Mitton said. "Everyone who examines these
companies and who is in the know continues to pour more money into them."

   To that point, Bill Otterson, director of UCSD's Connect program, which
promotes high-tech entrepreneurship, estimates that another $3 billion to $5
billion will flow into San Diego biotech's coffers by the year 2000.

   While San Diego firms are enjoying relative success in tapping research money
and investment capital to develop their compounds, cures and diagnostic devices,
their executives complain of bottlenecks at the back door of their trade.

   They grumble about the three-year waiting list for review of patent
applications -- and wonder how many competitive ideas are in the pipeline ahead
of theirs. They also complain about the time it takes to win FDA approval of new
drugs.

   Still, the early success and growth of biotechnology in San Diego has
continued to attract firms from outside the area as well as locally.

   A major attraction for start-up biotech firms is the presence of such
research icons as UCSD, the Salk Institute, the Scripps Clinic and Research
Foundation and other renowned, albeit smaller and more specialized, institutions
such as the La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation.

   "The talent pool locally is much less of a concern for San Diego than it is
elsewhere in the country, since UCSD is the life sciences headquarters for the
UC system," Nash said. "We have enough home-grown talent, and station wagons
full of talent still come out here in June because they want to get jobs out
here before winter sets in."

   With the changing demands and complexity of biotech, the old-timers are
adjusting accordingly.

   Dr. Gerard Burrow, dean of medicine at UCSD, sees the role of the university
changing in coming years, to encourage even greater interaction between his
campus and the rest of San Diego's biotech community.

   Already, UCSD is home to Connect, which has developed a successful record as
a matchmaker between scientists and investors.

   The university is also planning a graduate program whose enrollees will not
only study in the School of Medicine but in the departments of biology and
chemistry, as well as off-campus at Salk, Scripps and the La Jolla Cancer
Research Foundation.

   Burrow hopes there will also be some loosening of restrictions so that more
of his faculty -- now numbering about 500 members -- can champion their own
discoveries in the commercial arena without having to leave their campus posts.

   Too many scientists feel they must outright leave campus in order to shepherd
their ideas into and through commercial development, because of campus
guidelines regarding conflict of interest, Burrow said. A better system than
what now exists needs to be defined, he said.

   For instance, UCSD molecular genetic scientists Theodore Friedmann and Fred
Gage have founded their own biotech company, GeneSys, to exploit their findings
on gene manipulation. Gage, a neuroscientist, and Friedmann worked in grafting
genetically altered cells into the brains of rats as part of their research into
Parkinson's disease.

   It's that kind of research that raises eyebrows among critics who wonder
whether science should be tinkering with life's building blocks, also known as
the DNA molecule. The issue is not lost on local scientists.

   Skeptics raise the specter of political and discriminatory abuse that could
arise from biotechnology's advances -- for instance, screening people to
determine whether they have genetic traits that employers or insurance carriers
might consider liabilities. They debate whether biotech advances may be more
expensive to the public -- and offer no greater remedies -- than more
traditional, and proven, medical cures.

   To that end, the Salk Institute in December established its own bioethics
center, where scientists, public policy-makers and others can debate the ethical
issues of biological research.

   But, for people such as Friedmann, research -- even at the level of rewriting
the body's genetic instruction -- is a necessity if medical scientists are to
play out their role to logical conclusion, from the research lab to commercial
development.

   "I'm medically trained and have a moral obligation to deliver therapy,"
Friedmann said. "But I can't do that in a university setting. I don't have a
penny to take some of our findings and do the developmental work that turns a
finding here into a drug or therapy. In our society, it can only be done with
the infusion of massive amounts of money."

   Friedmann suggests that the pace of basic biotech research has outstripped
the capacity of American business to develop it -- and that bringing the
development sectors of biotech up to speed may be one of biotech's most pressing
challenges.

   "We are not yet coping with this flood of (basic research) information as
well as we could, to bring it to fruition, for the welfare of people," he said.
"After all, we've only been in the midst of this biotech revolution for a decade
or two.

   "It takes a long time to build a structure to deliver it," he said. "That's
the structure you see being built now -- the biotech industry. It is responding
to the needs and opportunities to deliver the discoveries of biology and
biomedicine and genetics."

GRAPHIC: Photo, Alliance Pharmaceutical is just one of the many biotech firms
that now calls San Diego home.  BRUCE K. HUFF / Los Angeles Times; Photo, Martin
Nash MITSU YASUKAWA / Los Angeles Times


                             1634 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

               May 29, 1991, Wednesday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words

HEADLINE: MEET THE MR. GREENGENES OF BIOTECH;
GENE THERAPY: UCSD'S THEODORE FRIEDMANN MAKES NO APOLOGIES FOR SCIENTISTS
TINKERING WITH WHAT HE CALLS NATURE'S 'MISTAKES.'

SERIES: FRONTIERS OF SCIENCE: Inside San Diego's thriving biotech industry. Last
in a series.

BYLINE: By TOM GORMAN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   As the front lines of technology have advanced over the years, Theodore
Friedmann could be found in one of the trenches.

   As a young pediatrician in the 1960s, he was doing research in the Cambridge
University laboratory of Dr. Frederick Sanger, the recipient of the Nobel Prize
in chemistry for establishing the chemical structure of insulin.

   In the 1970s, after stints at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda,
Md., and the Salk Institute in San Diego, Friedmann was at UC San Diego, writing
one of the first scientific papers on gene therapy -- the potential to not just
treat symptoms of disease with traditional medicines, but to actually fix or
override the defective genes with new ones.

   In the 1980s, as a member of UCSD's Center for Molecular Genetics, he was
successfully grafting genetically altered cells into the brains of rats, an
extension of his research into how genetically modified cells might one day be
used to treat human disorders.

   Now, in the 1990s, Friedmann is helping establish a human gene therapy
program at UCSD's School of Medicine -- one of only a handful of such
university-based centers in the nation, he says -- so scientists can develop
ways to effectively and cheaply use human genes as medical science's ultimate
fix-it kits. The initial targets: cancer, AIDS and Parkinson's disease.

   It is the stuff of dreams: eliminating cancer, for example, not by destroying
the consequences of cancer -- cells gone amok -- but by targeting the root and
repairing or replacing the defective gene that allows the cancer to express
itself in the first place.

   Given the revolutionary pace of biotechnology advances -- breakthroughs for
which Friedmann has been either ringside or in the ring itself -- what does he
see in store for the year 2000 and beyond?

   He won't even speculate.

   "And that's the most impressive thing about biotechnology: how fast it's
moving," he said. "It's technologically almost out of control. There are new
revelations every day."

   As Friedmann sat in his office, its window wall offering him an expansive
view into the laboratory, researchers were tending to various recombinant DNA
chores that are their workaday routine.

   "Some of the people who come into this lab, the young ones, aren't aware of
the history of biotechnology," he said. "They don't know that just 20 years ago,
none of this was possible. They come into a lab now that's doing recombinant DNA
technology and, for them, it's already old hat. They don't think twice about
putting bits of genes together. That's what they do for a living."

   Friedmann laughed at the memory of a sign hanging over Sanger's desk back in
the '60s -- a prediction by a prominent American biochemist that the sequencing
of the DNA molecule would not come about until the 21st Century. By showing the
sequence, or precise order, of chemical sub-units that make up the genetic code
on the DNA strand, researchers can decipher the genetic message of any gene.

   Sanger told his assistant, Friedmann, that the breakthrough wouldn't take
that long.

   Hardly. DNA sequencing began in the 1970s. And in 1980, Sanger shared in a
second Nobel Prize in chemistry -- as a senior scientist among a group honored
for developing a technique enabling researchers to sequence about 1,000 DNA
sub-units a day. Before that, it might have taken 12 months to sequence just 50
sub-units.

   Given such advances, scientists have embarked on a $3-billion, federally
funded campaign called the Human Genome Project, which will catalogue the body's
100,000 or so genes and their 3 billion or so chemical sub-units. The goal is to
identify all of the genetic information needed to make a human being.

   Other scientists are identifying which diseases are caused by genes wrecked
since birth or mutated afterward. They have identified 4,000 such diseases so
far.

   Such is the accelerated learning curve in biotechnology.

   "And what we're doing in this lab today will look absolutely silly and
inefficient 10 years from now," Friedmann said. "We know that the science won't
end here. Five or 10 years from now, what we're doing here will look very
primitive. People will scratch their heads and say, 'Did they really do it that
way, back in those days? How could they have been so dense?' "

   Friedmann knows the concerns voiced by ethicist Jeremy Rifkin and others:
that scientists are too liberally tinkering with the most basic building blocks
of life and are at risk of upsetting the course of evolution.

   He rejects them out of hand.

   "I have trouble with criticism that we're interfering with nature, and that
it shouldn't be done," Friedmann said. "Medicine, by its very nature, interferes
with nature. The profession of medicine exists because we reject some of what I
call 'mistakes' that nature presents us with."

   "One should not interfere with nature whimsically, but we're not doing that,"
he said. "We're saying there are some serious genetic situations that are
leading to enormous amounts of human suffering, and we feel compelled to change
that."

   Friedmann suggests that the public has been spoiled by the fast-paced --
albeit largely esoteric and not-yet applied -- success of biotechnology, and now
demands even more success, and even quicker, especially in the newest front line
of the field, gene therapy.

   "We're trying to learn how to introduce these genes into defective cells, so
we can turn the cell that's working improperly because of a genetic defect into
one that works correctly," Friedmann said.

   "That concept of gene therapy was, in large part, born here" at UCSD, he
said. "But now we have to temper our enthusiasm with the knowledge that it's
still going to be very difficult, technically. We're in a new era of medicine.
It's epochal. We've now got a new target for therapy. We're no longer looking at
the consequences of a genetic defect, but we're looking at therapy for the
defect itself."

   Even the acceptance of that notion, of addressing genetic flaws through
gene-to-gene combat, is considered a biotech revolution. And, although people
like Rifkin challenge it, scientists try to execute it.

   "And there's a danger, of offering an apparent promise of delivering too much
too soon," Friedmann said. "Science has that problem, of promising too much.

   "Maybe one problem is, we've all made it sound so simple."

GRAPHIC: Photo, Theodore Friedmann, who helped establish UCSD's human gene
therapy program, says there are "new revelations every day." MITSU YASUKAWA /
Los Angeles Times


                             1635 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

               May 29, 1991, Wednesday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: TAKE 2 ASPIRIN AND CALL THEM IN 20 YEARS -- THEY JUST MIGHT HAVE A
CURE;
ILLNESS: BIOTECH IS WORKING ON A FIX FOR THE COMMON COLD, BUT THE MALADY'S
COMPLEXITY AND THE PRIORITY GIVEN LIFE-THREATENING DISEASES MEANS IT MUST WAIT.

BYLINE: By TOM GORMAN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   So when will biotechnology cure the common cold?

   It's on the agenda of San Diego biotech firms -- but nowhere near the top,
for a variety of reasons.

   For starters, the cold is one of the most complex and perplexing maladies
facing man.

   Dr. Vernon Knight, a professor of medicine and for 22 years chairman of the
department of microbiology and immunology at Baylor University in Texas, is
researching a cure for the cold.

   He thinks there might be one in 20 years.

   One of the keys, he said, is in developing a procedure in which the DNA of
the infected cells can be analyzed to determine which one of 200 possible
viruses has triggered the cold. Only after the specific virus is identified can
the appropriate and equally specific medicine be accurately prescribed.

   Researchers are working on the mechanics of taking a few cells from nasal
mucus, adding chemicals to multiply them to a trillion pieces of DNA, and then,
in the course of two or three hours, accurately assessing the particular virus.

   At the same time, research is under way to develop a system of delivering the
cold medicine through an aerosol spray.

   "We're working toward instrumentation that will allow rapid diagnosis of the
specific virus, and specific treatment. Still, we're 20 years off," Knight said.

   A San Diego company that is considering the cold is Genta, which is pursuing
so-called antisense technology, which calls for illnesses to be waylaid at the
DNA level.

   "The cold will be one of the last things we cure," said Genta President Tom
Adams. "A lot of molecular biology still needs to be done to know exactly what
to target."

   Besides, he said, clinical testing for cold cures won't receive the attention
of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as quickly as, say, potential cancer
and AIDS cures because the cold is not life-threatening.

   From a commercial biotech viewpoint, Adams said, "it makes better sense to go
after life-threatening diseases. Those are better targets, from a regulatory
strategy, because they are given more prompt attention by the FDA.

   "It's a front-office decision not to pursue the cold, for now," he said.

   If the common cold might be cured in 20 years or so, what does biotechnology
promise 100 years from now?

   Gene therapy, the ability to fix flawed genes or replace them with healthy
proxies, will be more commonplace, scientists say, thereby all but ending
certain diseases.

   That technology will essentially allow the human body to be genetically
retrofitted.

   The challenge for now, researchers say, is in figuring out how to deliver
cloned genes to the appropriate cells.

   But most researchers -- even self-proclaimed biomedical futurists -- are
reluctant to speculate much beyond the turn of the century. Most are afraid of
being ridiculed if their projections don't hold true.

   Ellen Morrison is a research fellow specializing in health care issues at the
Institute for the Future, in the Bay Area community of Menlo Park.

   "And we only focus on the next five or 10 years," she said. "Beyond that,
there are too many variables, not the least being the cost of health care and
who is going to pay for it.

   "The thing that we need to take into account, while we watch 'Star Trek,' is,
who is going to pay for that technology?" Morrison said. "We can't even afford
to build the USS Enterprise, let alone stock it with the kinds of advances we
see on TV."


                             1636 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                    May 28, 1991, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1392 words

HEADLINE: SKIN CANCER ... THE SEARCH FOR A CURE

BYLINE: William Allen Of the Post-Dispatch Staff

BODY:


   THIRD OF THREE ARTICLES (REST) SCIENTISTS are trying to create something new
under the sun: ways to prevent and cure skin cancer, the most common cancer in
the United States.  Health officials say the best way to overcome skin cancer is
to prevent it by minimizing sun exposure and to detect it early by being alert
to its warning signs.  Skin cancer is among the most curable of cancers if
caught early.  But if the cancer has spread elsewhere in the body, little can be
offered in the way of effective treatment - yet.  ''In practice, we're still at
the stage of cutting it out,'' said Dr.  Jerome Aronberg, a St. Louis
dermatologist. ''But I suspect that over the next 10 years that will change.''
Changes in treatment will stem from intriguing lines of research.  Some
researchers are studying the basic chemistry of sunlight-induced damage and
self-repair in hopes of aiding the development of safer and more effective
treatments.  Others are already experimenting with anti-cancer vaccines, creams
and drugs.  The quest is important because skin cancer has risen dramatically in
the past decade, health experts say. They expect the trend to continue, possibly
enhanced by the depletion of the Earth's protective ozone layer.  More than
600,000 new cases of skin cancer will be diagnosed this year in the United
States and 8,500 people will die from the disease, the American Cancer Society
estimates.  The prime focus in the search for a cure is on malignant melanoma,
which accounts for three-fourths of all skin cancer deaths. The swine factor:
University of Missouri researchers hope the secrets of melanoma can be found
down on the farm.  Immunologist Michael Misfeldt at the university's School of
Medicine in Columbia is studying a special breed of miniature pigs that cure
themselves of melanoma.  The pigs, known as Sinclair swine, develop the cancer
just after birth. By probing the details of how this happens, Misfeldt hopes to
come up with basic information needed to develop a cure for human melanoma.
Nearly nine out of 10 Sinclair swine develop black, scab-like melanoma tumors on
their skin within six weeks of birth, even if they're kept out of the sun. But a
month later, the cancer starts to regress, and eventually it disappears.  ''We
think there's an important protective mechanism at work here'' that involves the
immune system, Misfeldt said.  Researchers worldwide are still trying to
understand the details of the immune systems in humans and other animals. These
systems maintain an array of early-warning mechanisms and biological weapons to
fight off a wide range of diseases.  Misfeldt has discovered a particular kind
of biological weapon that the pig apparently uses against melanoma. This weapon,
known as a gamma delta T cell, hunts down and kills the tumor cells as well as
the pigment-producing cells that became cancerous in the first place.  ''If we
could demonstrate that these cells represent an immune mechanism that is
controlling the melanoma, then there may be a way to enhance the numbers of
gamma-delta cells in human skin that would allow them to (destroy human melanoma
lesions,'' Misfeldt said.  The University of Missouri researchers also disc
overed specialized proteins in the swine tumors that the pig's immune system
apparently sends there to trigger the activity of cancer-killing ''macrophage''
cells.  Misfeldt found the macrophages in large numbers in the tumors.  A new
litter of Sinclair swine was born in April. Misfeldt plans to follow them
closely as their melanomas are repaired. He will analyze the progress of the
tumors, study the kinds of defensive cells present at each stage and determine
the components released by the tumor cells as they are destroyed.  Melanoma
vaccine: Researchers at the New York University School of Medicine are putting
knowledge of the human body's immune response into practice. In the next few
months, they plan to begin large-scale human trials of a vaccine they developed
to prevent melanoma.  The vaccine takes advantage of the fact that the body has
the machinery necessary to kill melanoma cells, said Dr. Jean-Claude Bystryn, a
dermatologist at the school.  In tests on lab animals, the vaccine prevented
melanoma and successfully triggered attacks on melanoma tumors that already
existed, Bystryn said. In preliminary tests on a small number of people with
advanced melanoma, the vaccine prevented or slowed the progression of melanoma
in about half the patients.  ''We can think of using vaccines to prevent
melanoma in patients who have a high risk of getting this disease,'' Bystryn
said.  The roots of sun damage: At Washington University, chemist John-Stephen
Taylor investigates the link between sunlight, DNA damage and skin cancer. DNA
is the genetic material containing the blueprint for all living things.
Researchers know that sunlight triggers damage in the DNA, as well as starting a
cascade of complex chemical reactions in skin cells. These changes sometimes
trigger the development of cancer.  Scientists also know that skin cells in some
people can repair the DNA damage. Taylor and others are trying to understand the
details of the damage and repair process.  ''If you understood these pathways
and knew the molecular details of the process, then you should be able to design
a drug that would interfere with the process,'' Taylor said. ''In principle, you
could reverse the effects, or at least prevent the progression to cancer.'' In
his laboratory, Taylor has triggered damage at specific sites on DNA molecules
and has studied the processes that eventually lead to cancer.  He and colleagues
have discovered a previously unknown type of damage that is created when
sunlight hits DNA.  This damage, known as a Dewar photoproduct, is a slight
variation of damage widely studied by sunlight researchers as a suspect in
causing skin cancer.  The longer DNA is exposed to sunlight, the more Dewar
photoproduct is produced.  ''The intriguing possibility is that perhaps it's the
Dewar product that's related to skin cancer,'' Taylor said.  Morning-after
cream: A Freeport, N.Y., company claims it has developed a ''morning after''
cream, to be spread on sunburned skin to repair DNA damage.  The company,
Applied Genetics Inc., is testing a cream that has been shown to enhance DNA
repair and prevent skin cancer in lab mice, said company president Daniel
Yarosh, a molecular biologist.  The company was awarded a $500,000 grant by the
National Cancer Institute this month to continue research on the cream. The firm
has applied to the U.S.  Food and Drug Administration to test the cream on
humans.  The cream contains repair enzymes that seek out DNA damage and fix it
before it has a chance to trigger cancer, Yarosh said.  Mice exposed to
cancer-causing ultraviolet radiation were one-third less likely to get skin
cancer if they were given the cream, he said.  Dermatologists may be able to
prescribe the cream ''within two or three years'' if clinical trials and the FDA
drug-approval process go well.  Vitamin A derivatives: At the National Cancer
Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.,
researchers have been testing whether a drug called isotretinoin can prevent
skin cancer in people with a high risk of developing the disease.  The drug has
some serious side effects, but in seven years of tests it has proven effective
in treating people with Xeroderma pigmentosum, or XP. This rare hereditary
disorder leaves people unable to repair DNA damage caused by the sun.  The
promise of isotretinoin is that it is only one of 2,000 synthetic derivatives of
Vitamin A. Several of these may one day be used to treat skin cancer in people
other than those who have XP, said Dr. John DiGiovanna.  He is an investigator
at the cancer institute's dermatology branch.  ''These new derivatives may yield
drugs which are more effective and less toxic,'' DiGiovanna said.  Gene therapy:
Other researchers at the National Institutes of Health have done preliminary
experiments in which they gave melanoma patients cells that had been altered by
inserting new genes.  In this form of ''gene therapy,'' the new genes direct the
manufacture of substances that enhance the body's anti-melanoma defense. So f
ar, two patients have been treated. It is too soon to judge the therapy's
success.

GRAPHIC: Photo Graphic; LOGO (COLOR) ... THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN Photo (COLOR)
by University of Missouri ... ABOVE: University of Missouri scientist Michael
Misfeldt searches for the secrets of skin cancer in a special breed of miniature
pigs. Known as Sinclair swine, the pigs develop skin cancer just after birth but
cure themselves. Misfeldt hopes the research will lead to a cure for human
melanoma, the most deadly skin cancer. (NOTE: Same photo ran on page 1A with
this CUTLINE: ... EVERYDAY ...Scientist And Subject: Michael Misfeldt with a
Sinclair swine. These pigs develop skin cancer, then cure themselves. Research
Targets Skin Cancer ... Scientists at the University of Missouri and elsewhere
are looking for ways to prevent and cure skin cancer.) Photo (COLOR) by Karen
Elshout/Post-Dispatch ... LEFT: Washington University chemist John-Stephen
Taylor holding a plastic model of DNA, the genetic blueprint for all living
things. Taylor is studying how sunlight triggers damage in DNA and often leads
to skin cancer.  Better understanding of this process may lead to treatments for
skin cancer.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1993


                             1637 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                 May 27, 1991, Monday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2276 words

HEADLINE: S.D.'S BIOTECH INDUSTRY IS ROOTED IN ACADEMIA;
SCIENCE: COMPANIES, IN HYBRITECH'S FOOTSTEPS, STARTED OUT MODESTLY, WITH LITTLE
MORE THAN IDEA, AND CAUGHT ON.

SERIES: FRONTIERS OF SCIENCE: Inside San Diego's thriving biotech industry.
Second in a series. TUESDAY: A look at the development of the drug 2-CdA, which
may be approved as a cure against one form of cancer.

BYLINE: By TOM GORMAN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   The rise of biotechnology in San Diego has become evident in the hushed
corridors of Procopio, Cory, Hargreaves & Savitch, an old-line commercial
services law firm 19 stories above B Street.

   It was there, a few years ago, that attorney Wain Fishburn Jr. started
infusing the more traditional lawyers' lexicon -- injunctive relief and cause of
action and corporate liquidations -- with a new workaday vocabulary: receptor
binding sites and cleaving enzymes and thrombosis cascade.

   Fishburn had become the resident expert on biotechnology -- a new field of
business for the law firm that had some of the old-timers shaking their heads.
Fishburn was now talking about seed-round investors and burn rates and cram-down
financing and strategic alliances -- moneyspeak in the world of biotechnology
start-up companies. One attorney even made a list, for circulation within the
office, of these new "Wainwords."

   "They started taking me seriously, though, when they started seeing biotech
stories in the business pages," Fishburn said. "They realized that maybe I was
onto something."

   Indeed, biotechnology is no longer the new kid on the block in San Diego. It
may still be the stranger, but it's been around long enough now to have made
some critical friends in town.

   Those friends include investors and property leasing agents, accountants and
attorneys, supply houses and public relations professionals.

   Today, San Diego is the nation's fifth-largest center of biotechnology and
growing faster than the rest.

   "Thanks to biotech, I think we've got more Ph.D.s per capita in San Diego
than in any other major city in the nation," said Bill Otterson, director of UC
San Diego's Connect Program, which encourages high-tech entrepreneurship in the
area.

   He predicts that $1 billion in outside corporate investment will be pumped
into local biotech firms over the next year or two, and he names 10 companies
that each hopes to raise $100 million in capital this year alone.

   "If even half of those companies succeed," he said, "we'll have five
companies in San Diego that will be larger than Genentech," the biotech success
story of San Francisco.

   How did it evolve, this San Diego biotech industry? It seems to have happened
almost surreptitiously, as if the companies were cloaked in the latest Stealth
technology.

   Yet the process has been fairly simple. The companies start off as small,
privately financed ventures, with arresting ideas but no product to promote.
They're tiny at first, employing a handful of people. They lease. And they often
go years without justifying a single newspaper headline.

   Biotechnology really isn't new to San Diego. Its roots are established at
UCSD, the Scripps Institute and Research Clinic and the Salk Institute --
premier institutions among the nation's research facilities that focus on life
science.

   Associated with them are an estimated 3,000 biotech researchers -- Ph.D.s and
postdoctorate fellows, Nobel laureates and young lab technicians -- who add to
humanity's understanding of life science and publish their discoveries in
science journals, nurturing still more discoveries in other labs.

   Theirs is basic, raw scientific research, the starting point of discovery,
where there may be no greater agenda than the most pure: to learn something new
simply because it has never been learned before.

   For these researchers, the payoffs have been relatively simple: winning the
recognition of peers by having scientific papers published, and, later, by
winning grants for continued research.

   "You can insult these people by saying they do applied research," cautioned
Ray Kahn, who oversees technology transfer at Scripps.

   But many researchers want to follow through on their discoveries and
determine if they have real-life applications. Typically, that applied research
is conducted outside the basic research institutions, in an arrangement known as
"technology transfer," whereby a private company will negotiate an agreement to
exploit the institution's basic findings. The institutions value such a
licensing agreement because it validates their research, puts the discovery in
the commercial arena where it can be developed to serve the public, and because
the agreements can become a significant source of funding for continued research
projects. A single licensing agreement can amount to tens of millions of
dollars.

   The particular researcher may enjoy a relatively small financial reward for
his or her work; more typically, the money simply funds more work. In some
cases, the researcher may become a consultant for the company that is pursuing
the product -- a high-tech moonlighting job, of sorts, that is closely monitored
by the institution itself.

   "Consulting is acceptable. A little bit of prostitution is OK," quipped Dr.
Gerard Burrow, vice chancellor and dean of the School of Medicine at UCSD.

   Sometimes, though, a researcher who believes he is on the threshold of
developing an altogether new and needed drug may choose to champion it full
time. He will abandon his institutional research post -- jump ship -- and go to
the commercial side of the business to continue focusing on the work.

   Burrow says he is saddened by those who do. "When they leave, they've sold
out to Mammon (the god of greed). . . . I would never leave. I'm a researcher.
That's what drives me."

   But some scientists say they have little choice. Too many commercial
companies won't pursue a drug that hasn't been designed within their own ranks,
they say.

   "It's the not-invented-here syndrome," said Dr. David Katz, president of
Lidak Pharmaceuticals in Torrey Pines.

   Biotech executives wonder how many hundreds or thousands of great ideas are
not pursued because they weren't conceived in-house and were shunned when
offered by an outsider. As a way of keeping a drug invention alive, a researcher
may follow it to a company that will pursue it, or may start his own company --
first by finding someone with the money to back him and then, most likely,
finding a chief executive officer with business acumen in pharmaceuticals to run
the business side while he runs the lab.

   That's essentially how Hybritech, the granddaddy of commercial biotechnology
in San Diego, started in 1978.

   Dr. Ivor Royston, a cancer specialist, and his lab technician, Howard
Birndorf, studied monoclonal antibodies together at Stanford University. They
continued their work when Royston came to UCSD in 1977 and asked Birndorf to
join him.

   As part of the body's natural immune system, antibodies seek out and mark or
kill specific cells, typically unwanted ones that would cause illness. Early
research indicated that artificially created, genetically engineered
single-purpose monoclonal antibodies could be bred en masse in test tubes. Among
their potential uses were in medical diagnostic kits, to seek out and chemically
mark the presence of, say, an allergy, cancer or an embryo.

   Royston wondered how to capitalize on the new technology and in 1978 ran the
idea past San Francisco venture capitalist Brook Byers. After reviewing
monoclonal antibody research for six months, Byers decided to invest $300,000 to
get the company started.

   Royston remained at UCSD but was Hybritech's chief scientist; the 28-year-old
Birndorf left UCSD to run Hybritech's laboratory, and money man Byers selected
Ted Greene -- an Orange County businessman who was also talking of starting a
monoclonal antibody company -- to be president.

   Hybritech is widely regarded as San Diego's first and most successful
commercial biotech company. In 1985, Eli Lilly & Co., a pharmaceutical giant,
bought Hybritech for nearly $500 million. An estimated 2 dozen ground-floor
Hybritech employees became instant millionaires. Even the person assigned to
wash the lab glassware made $500,000 when the company was sold, Byers said.

   About 50 Hybritech people have since left the company to work for other San
Diego biotech firms, or to start their own.

   Today, the English-born Royston, 45, is founder of Idec Pharmaceuticals and
is starting the nonprofit San Diego Regional Cancer Center. Birndorf, now 40,
has helped form four new companies, the most recent of them Ligand
Pharmaceuticals, which is working on arthritis, osteoporosis and heart disease.

   Greene, 48, has helped start nine companies in San Diego, most recently
Amylin Corp., which is working to develop hormones to diagnose and treat
diabetes. And Byers, 45, has helped stake six biotech companies in San Diego to
the tune, he says, of $30 million.

   "Every three or four weeks, I'm hearing of a new biotech company in San
Diego," said Martin Nash of La Jolla, president of the Assn. of Biotechnology
Companies.

   "We won't blow away the classic pharmaceutical companies," he said. "They
look for traditional extracts to serve as new medicines. But we're taking the
virus, seeing how it works and looking for the molecule -- or designing new
compounds -- to stop it."

   Ernst & Young, which annually surveys the biotech industry nationwide, and
UCSD's Connect Program, established to promote high-tech entrepreneurship, last
surveyed the local biotech community about a year ago. The results, released in
November, show that five new biotech firms had been formed in San Diego over the
past 12 months, six companies brought their first products to market, and
employment in the private, commercial ranks of

   biotech in San Diego had grown to more than 5,000.

   A third of the responding biotech companies said they primarily develop
medical diagnostic products. More than one in four said they focus on
therapeutic drugs, and nearly one in four identified themselves as biotech
suppliers.

   Why do biotech companies locate in San Diego? More than one in four said it
was the quality of life; nearly that many said it was the access to universities
and research institutes, and one in five said they were drawn here by the
region's existing reputation as a biotech center.

   As the region's biotech industry has matured, once-reluctant landlords have
grown more willing to lease their buildings to scientists.

   "Fourteen years ago, landlords thought I was off my rocker, trying to get
them to lease buildings -- and put in $100 a square foot in improvements -- for
a start-up company that's got very little money to start with, losing money
every month, gets approval for funding from venture capitalists on a
year-to-year basis, and won't have a product to sell for at least 10 years,"
said Brent Jacobs, who specializes in biomedical clients for real estate
brokerage firm John Burnham & Co.

   Landlords were at first troubled, he said, by demands for storage of
hazardous waste, sturdier floors to handle heavy lab equipment, air-conditioning
and ventilation systems that would quickly recirculate 100% of the lab's air,
and the need for vivariums -- holding areas for small rodents.

   "Those things can run $300 a foot to build. Landlords get very skeptical when
you start talking about clients doing AIDS research, of 'dirty mice' getting
loose and running to the insurance company next door," he said.

   Overall, he said, biotech labs cost twice as much to construct as normal
office buildings -- costs the landlord must front and pass on to the tenant over
the life of a five- or 10-year lease.

   "It's easier now to get the landlords to do that," Jacobs said. "They realize
that these companies are good citizens who pay their rent. They see San Diego
developing more success stories like Hybritech. And, if their tenant does go
under, the landlords realize now that there will be another start-up company
waiting in the wings, ready to use those same improvements."

   TO MARKET: The path from idea to marketplace is long and sometimes risky. B1

   Some Landmarks on San Diego's Biotech-Scape

   1. -- Hybritech Inc., San Diego's first and most successful biotech firm.
Established in 1978, it makes diagnostic kits.
2. -- Cytel Corp., looking for cures for arthritis. Led by Jay Kranzler, one of
the youngest biotech chief executives in the country.
3. -- Lidak Pharmaceuticals, searching for a cure for herpes and AIDS.
4. -- Stratagene, a supply firm specializing in DNA analysis kits.
5. -- Corvas Inc., where researchers are studying how blood clots are formed and
can be dissolved.
6. -- Telios Pharmaceuticals, working on medicines to better heal skin wounds.
7. -- Gensia Pharmaceuticals, below Torrey Pines Mesa in Sorrento Valley,
developing cardiovascular drugs.
8. -- Genta Inc., on the grounds of general Atomics, investigating "anti-sense"
technology as a way to stop disease at the genetic level.
9. -- Salk Institute, one of the three pillars of biotech basic research in San
Diego, along with Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation and UC San Diego.
10. -- Mycogen, in Sorrento Valley, where researchers are developing new forms
of agricultural pesticides.
11. -- Ligand Pharmaceuticals, on Towne Centre Drive, where they're looking for
cures for arthritis, osteoporosis and heart disease.
12. -- Amylin, next door to Ligand, where hormones are being studied to diagnose
and treat diabetes.
13. -- UC San Diego, home of John Muir College and the first university-based
center for the study of molecular genetic therapy in the nation.
14. -- Choices Restaurant, on the campus of the Scripps Clinic and Research
Foundation, featureing perhaps the cheapest -- and healthiest -- dell and salad
bar lunch around Torrey Pines.
15. -- Sheraton Grande Torrey Pines, next door to Scripps, popular for its
buffet lunch and the year-round home of a venture capitalist who visits his La
Jolla companies frequently from Marin County.

GRAPHIC: Chart, Some Landmarks on San Diego's Biotech-Scape, STEVE LOPEZ / Los
Angeles Times ; Drawing, Some Landmarks on San Diego's Biotech-Scape, STEVE
LOPEZ / Los Angeles Times


                             1638 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     May 22, 1991, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 72

LENGTH: 202 words

HEADLINE: Etc.: Malaria vaccine a goal;
BUSINESS, BRIEFLY

BODY:

    Cambridge Biotech Corp. of Worcester will work with the Walter Reed Army
Institute of Research to develop a marketable malaria vaccine . . . Raytheon
Co.'s Missile Systems Division has agreed to offer the Patriot Air Defense
System to the British Ministry of Defense, which is retiring its Bloodhound
system. British Aerospace Dynamics Ltd. will coordinate the program . . . Boston
Acoustics Inc. of Lynnfield raised its quarterly dividend to 10 cents a share
from 7 cents, payable July 19 to shareholders of record June 21. The company
will seek approval at the annual meeting in August to increase authorized common
stock to 6 million shares to enable a 2-for-1 stock split . . . K. Michael
Forrest was named president and chief executive of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
of Cambridge. Forrest previously was a Lederle International vice president . .
. Tim Davenport has been promoted to vice president of Lotus Development Corp.'s
graphics products division. Davenport was previously general manager of the
unit, which is responsible for the Cambridge company's Freelance and Agenda
product lines . . . Easel Corp. of Burlington signed Empresarios Agrupados of
Madrid as its Spanish distributor.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1991


                             1639 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 22, 1991 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1727 words

HEADLINE: La Jolla labs are far from mere footnote;
Highly cited, research here tops the charts

BYLINE: Bruce V. Bigelow, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   Evidence accumulating in the footnotes of science shows that some of the most
influential research laboratories in the world have settled within a few miles
of each other atop La Jolla's Torrey Pines Mesa. Insiders have long praised the
local "shrine to science," embodied by the congregation of laboratories on the
coastal bluff, especially for their excellence in the burgeoning field of
molecular biology. For the laity, however, claims of San Diego's scientific
excellence are taken more or less as an article of faith.

   Even scientists find it hard at times to judge the mumbo jumbo of specialized
research that's beyond their own expertise. A computer-savvy group in
Philadelphia, however, has found a way of approximating the relative influence
of scientific research by simply counting the number of footnotes referring to a
particular study in articles published by other scientists. The Institute of
Scientific Information produces a variety of surveys listing the most highly
cited scientific papers in what amounts to a worldwide pop countdown in the hit
parade of science.

   The method is called "citation analysis." The scope of work done by ISI is
numbing -- counting and sorting some 10 million footnotes a year in articles
published in 3,200 elite scientific journals around the world.

   As daunting as the numbers seem, ISI surveys only about 10 percent of the
scientific literature -- a bias that favors established scientific journals.
Such data can be used to show which research laboratories produce the most-cited
scientific papers -- and several recent surveys by ISI yielded a number of
surprises for San Diego: o A survey of studies published by scientists at
independent biological research laboratories found that three of the top dozen
labs in the world are based in La Jolla. o Among the top 12 labs, the relatively
obscure La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation ranked third -- above San Diego's
renowned Salk Institute for Biological Studies, which ranked fourth, and the
Research Institute at Scripps Clinic, which ranked 12th. o Several separate
surveys, conducted by ISI for the San Diego Tribune, found that from 1981 to
1990 the average rate of citations at all three San Diego labs increased at
least three times the national average. The in-depth surveys also provided
insight to the top researchers at each lab.

   A closer look at the La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, for example, shows
that chief scientist and President Erkki Ruoslahti, 51, was an author or a
co-author on 19 of the top 20 studies done in the lab -- making him something of
a scientific hit machine. In another ISI survey of U.S. universities, the
University of California at San Diego ranked ninth in the biological sciences
and 18th in the physical sciences.

   A separate 10-year survey done for the Tribune, however, shows citations to
UCSD research increased only 2 percent over the national average from 1981 to
1990. Proponents say such surveys are reliable because the commandments of
scholarship require scientists to acknowledge each debt of intellectual
gratitude -- and science, like the law, is built on precedent. Yet many San
Diego scientists and administrators voiced skepticism about the usefulness of
such surveys in assessing the importance of scientific research -- even though
they often agreed with the findings. "You wouldn't want to say this is the
indicator of quality, but it is certainly an indicator," said Richard Attiyeh,
dean of graduate studies and research at UCSD. One skeptic pointed out that the
pioneering studies in genetics done by Gregor Mendel in the 1860s went unnoticed
and uncited by other scientists for 34 years -- possibly because no one grasped
Mendel's use of statistics. William H. Beers, an associate director at Scripps,
pays little heed to footnote surveys, saying, "I'm not sure it's a terrific
measure of what you're supposed to be doing scientifically. Just because a study
is highly cited doesn't necessarily mean it concerns an important scientific
breakthrough or a new discovery, critics said. Studies are often quoted simply
because they describe a basic method or widely used process that has scant
scientific importance. Such complaints are familiar to David Pendlebury, an ISI
research analyst. "Maybe we shouldn't be so dismissive about `methods' papers,"
Pendlebury said.

   "More and more, I'm finding that science is driven by new technology, and
these new methods provide the tools that enable scientists to make new
discoveries." Critics say other articles are highly cited because they round up
all the research conducted in one specialized field.

   This simplifies a scientist's job of acknowledging a number of previous
sources and results in a lopsided number of references to so-called review
articles. Nevertheless, officials who reviewed ISI surveys of San Diego's top
laboratories found the list of highly cited papers includes studies they often
characterized as "extremely important" and "classic." In short, the survey nets
all sorts of highly cited articles, but it is still necessary to differentiate
between what's important and what's not. Ruoslahti, looking over a survey of top
papers produced at the La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, said, "This third
one is a real classic.

   It may well be the most important paper I've ever published." The article,
published in the journal Nature in 1984, details how a stringy adhesive protein
called fibronectin connects to cells, holding tissue cells together in a
microscopic scaffolding. "Much to the surprise of everyone, we found that the
cell binds to a very, very small portion of this gigantic molecule," Ruoslahti
said.

   The fibronectin molecule is composed of 2,500 amino acids, but only three are
absolutely necessary to chemically bind it to a cell. The discovery set off a
stampede of new cancer research and also led to new developments in other
fields. Likewise, an ISI survey of papers published at the Salk Institute over
the last 10 years amounts to "a reasonable mirror of what's going on up here,"
said Kenneth Klivington, the institute's scientific spokesman. The No. 1 study
in Salk's hit chart was a 1981 article published in the journal Science that
detailed the molecular structure of a brain peptide called CRF, which controls
the body's response to stress.

   Much of the work at Salk is focused on analyzing substances that are
important to the brain. "People had looked at CRF to try to get the structure of
it for 25 years," said Wiley Vale, who was chief author of the study.

   "What made it have so much impact was that it not only described the
structure of a peptide that was very important in stress response but (the
peptide) also mediates many other responses and even some types of behavior."
Other highly cited papers at Salk reflect the revolution in genetic engineering
and molecular biology led by Salk and other laboratories during the 1980s. The
studies reflect a cavalcade of modern biology, from deciphered genes and
proteins to factors in tumor development and brain research. "What I see is that
the names of our senior scientists keep popping up here," Klivington said.

   The list includes Jean Rivier, who works with Vale; cancer specialist Tony
Hunter, molecular biologist Ron Evans and Inder Verma, a pioneer in the field of
gene therapy. Even Beers acknowledged that ISI's survey of research at Scripps
since 1981 included work prized by Scripps' administrators. Two articles by
immunologist Eng M. Tan that reviewed separate fields of research were the most
highly cited papers at Scripps. The survey also netted other significant
articles by Scripps scientists, including several studies by institute Director
Richard A. Lerner, whose research has focused on improving antibodies for a
variety of medical and commercial uses. But one of Scripps' breakthroughs, which
Beers said has probably had the most widespread medical benefit, failed to make
much of an impression in the survey of highly cited studies. The late Ted
Zimmerman and his co-workers developed a procedure for purifying "factor VIII,"
an important blood-clotting protein used to treat hemophiliacs, Beers said.

   Until Zimmerman's process was perfected, possible contamination of the
blood-clotting factor put hemophiliacs and others at high risk for contracting
hepatitis, AIDS and other serious viral diseases. Critics like Beers concede,
however, that survey findings accurately reflect San Diego's transformation into
a global hotbed of biological research. "The scientific research enterprise in
San Diego is unlike anyplace else in the United States," said Renato Dulbecco,
president of the Salk Institute and a Nobel laureate.

   "Mostly because here these institutions are very close to each other. "In
Boston, you have Harvard, MIT, the Whitehead Institute and several other
universities," Dulbecco said.

   "But it is a big city.

   It's difficult to get around with traffic and so forth, and the interactions
are much more difficult." Visiting scientists often are aware that San Diego
hosts some of the top laboratories in the country, Beers said.

   But after they arrive, they are stunned to realize just how close the
institutions really are. Proximity encourages cooperation among various
researchers, but a linchpin in the arrangement is UCSD, scientists said. At
Salk, for example, 29 of Salk's 46 faculty members hold adjunct appointments at
UCSD. More than 40 UCSD graduate students, in turn, are doing their doctoral
research at Salk. Others, who graduated with a bachelor's degree, find
employment as laboratory technicians. A number of Scripps' 160 faculty members
also hold joint appointments at UCSD, but Scripps started its own doctoral
program two years ago.

   Still, the degree of interaction is high. Torrey Pines Mesa "is almost like a
huge campus that all functions together," although the independent facilities
operate by their wits with little or no bureaucracy, La Jolla Cancer Research
Foundation's Ruoslahti said.

   With less than 20 scientists on staff, he added, "It's quite clear that this
kind of institution couldn't make it all by itself somewhere where there would
be no other research going on." It's as if the concentration of laboratories on
Torrey Pines Mesa has achieved a critical mass fueling scientific research,
although Ruoslahti noted that biologists have a more appropriate term for it.
"It's synergy," he said.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1640 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     May 22, 1991, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 885 words

HEADLINE: Someday, a vaccine may prevent cancer;
Lab report: Update on genetic discoveries

BYLINE: Brian Gallagher

BODY:

    Q: Will genetic research cure cancer?

   A: We're just at the beginning. On Jan. 29, for the first time, gene therapy
was conducted in cancer patients here at the National Cancer Institute. How far
we'll be able to take this, we don't know.

Q: When will the public benefit from this?

   A: It's certainly far too early to talk about a cure. Ultimately - and we're
probably talking the 21st century - it may be possible to immunize patients
against cancer.

Q: What can you do right now?

   A: The cancer that we've concentrated on is mainly malignant melanoma, which
is a cancer that starts in black moles in the skin and can spread throughout the
body. This is the kind of cancer for which there is no successful treatment once
it has spread.

Q: How are your experiments working?

   A: We can cause the complete disappearance of cancer in about one in 10
patients who have widespread melanoma and a reduction in the cancer in another
10-15%.

Q: Who can get that treatment?

   A: Right now, these gene therapy approaches are only being used here at the
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, and we're approved to treat 50 patients.

Q: What other cancers are under study?

   A: We're studying renal cell cancer; we're studying colorectal cancer and
breast cancer, but those are not yet ready for clinical application. Hopefully,
treatments we develop in one disease can become applicable for others.

Q: Why is it necessary to tamper with human genes?

   A: Surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy can cure half the people who
develop cancer. But the half that can't be cured last year accounted for 514,000
deaths. So we desperately need new ways to treat cancer. A fourth way is
immunotherapy - ways to stimulate the body's immune system to fight the disease.
Gene therapy is one way to try to strengthen this new treatment.

Q: Gene therapy may be years away. But genetic research already is affecting
lives in other ways.

   A: Oh, certainly. There are tests to define certain diseases based on the
genetic analysis. For example, women who are pregnant and 40 or older almost
routinely now have what's called an amniocentesis. The fluid surrounding the
fetus is withdrawn to see if those babies have serious genetic diseases like
Down's Syndrome.

Q: And genetic research has produced some drugs for treatment of disease.

   A: Many drugs are now produced using genetic engineering - most recently
drugs that can stimulate blood cells to be produced. There are genetically
derived insulin, genetically derived growth hormones. But that's not gene
therapy. In other words, that's the application of genes in the laboratory as
opposed to in the human body.

Q: What do you say to people who say we shouldn't
tamper with the genetic makeup of people or animals?

   A: I'd say 500,000 people a year are dying. We have to do it very
thoughtfully, but we cannot afford to leave behind potentially useful techniques
when so many people are dying.

Q: You have some critics among animal rights groups. Is it necessary to test
treatments in animals?

   A: None of these treatments would have been possible had we not been able to
work in experimental animals, especially mice. All of this research would have
been totally paralyzed.

Q: Is it an affront to nature to put components of a human in a mouse?

   A: I'm a doctor, and I take care of people who are sick. My guess is the
first time somebody used an umbrella when it was raining, somebody argued that
God made rain because he wanted everybody to get wet. You should use an
umbrella. We have to use our creativity to try to solve human problems, and the
human problems presented by cancer are desperate and may well require desperate
means to solve them.

Q: And someday genetic therapies could help cure everything from cancer to the
common cold?

   A: It's possible that these approaches can change the very face of medical
practice in the 21st century. It is possible. But it's going to require a lot of
hard work, a lot of creativity to figure out ways how to use this tool to the
benefit of people who are sick.

    Lab report: Update on genetic discoveries

   Recent developments in genetic research:

   May 17: Discovery is announced of a gene that helps suppress lung cancer. The
gene often is missing in people who get lung cancer, raising hope that a
substitute can be developed.

   May 16: Researchers say they have found approximate location of a gene that
causes one form of Lou Gehrig's disease. It is first major step toward
discovering a cause of the disease.

   April 19: Scientists announce they have transferred a human gene into lungs
of a mouse. The development aids experimentation that could lead to cures for
cystic fibrosis and alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, the two most common lethal
hereditary diseases in the USA.

   March 15: Discovery is announced of gene that plays key role in some colon
cancers; could lead to tests that identify high-risk individuals, aid in early
detection or even treat the disease.

   Feb. 9: The National Museum of Health and Medicine announces it is
considering genetic research on samples of Abraham Lincoln's hair, bone and
blood. Some historians suspect he suffered from Marfan Syndrome, which could
have accounted for his tall, gangly appearance, and chronic depression.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC; b/w, Julie Stacey, USA TODAY (Diagram); PHOTO; b/w

CUTLINE: STEVEN ROSENBERG


                             1641 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     May 22, 1991, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 278 words

HEADLINE: Ethical pitfalls await world of gene therapy

BYLINE: Barbara Reynolds; Duane Freese

BODY:

    The side effects from genetic research could be as bad as the ills it cures,
says James Nelson, associate at the Hastings Institute in Briarcliff Manor,
N.Y., which examines ethical issues in medicine.

   The motivation behind genetic research - to combat dread diseases that
disable and kill people - ''is a very good one,'' according to Nelson.

   But, in the process, he says, ''We might develop a whole new category of
people - the healthy ill.''

   For example, ''people who are diagnosed early in life as being susceptible to
stress or at a high risk of a heart attack or some other diseases may find
themselves uninsurable and perhaps unemployable as well,'' Nelson says.

   Even laws against such information being used by employers or insurance
companies to deny a job or insurance couldn't fully protect an individual. ''If
I'm an employer and I know that a member of my workforce is likely to cost me a
lot money, I might find other reasons for not promoting or retaining that
person,'' he says.

   Conditions that gene therapy might change pose equally serious social
dilemmas.

   Firstborn children tend to do better in terms of education, employment and
income. If parents use sex selection to follow current patterns of wanting a boy
first and a girl second, ''that would reinforce the already unfair distribution
to men rather than to women,'' Nelson says.

   And if people are genetically engineered to be more intelligent or possess
other positive traits, Nelson asks, would the world be less hospitable for those
who are handicapped or weren't engineered to be perfect?

   All of which fills the brave new world of gene therapy with pitfalls as well
as cures.


                             1642 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      May 21, 1991, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 20; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 239 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC CANCER THERAPY UNVEILED

BYLINE: By United Press International

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A government scientist Monday unveiled a new gene therapy strategy to combat
cancer, an approach aimed at "immunizing" cancer patients against their tumors.

   Dr. Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute said he hoped to begin
testing the innovative tactic on people suffering from incurable cancer within
six months.

   The technique would involve removing a small piece of a patient's tumor and
inserting into the tissue's genes coding for the production of tumor necrosis
factor or interleukin-2, which are natural immune system chemicals.

   The genetically engineered tumor cells would then be injected under the
patient's skin, where it is hoped that they would spur the body's immune system
to attack cancer elsewhere in the body. Rosenberg likened the approach to how
vaccines work: Injecting a substance associated with a disease boosts immune
response.

   In studies of mice, researchers found that gene-altered tumor cells grew for
a short time and then shrank and disappeared. Mice treated in such a way had
increased levels of beneficial tumor-attacking cells, and their immune systems
were able to destroy new cancer cells injected by researchers, Rosenberg said.

   "Whether this will work the same way in people and whether this will make
cancers go away in people, we definitely do not know," said Rosenberg, who
presented his work at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's annual meeting
in Houston.


                             1643 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 21, 1991, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: Genes tag cells so body can fight cancer

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Placing a ''red flag'' in cancer cells so the body's defenses can seek and
destroy them more rapidly is the next form of gene therapy scientists may try in
the coming months.

   This new strategy targets tumors of the colon, kidneys and skin, Steven
Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute said Monday at an American Society of
Clinical Oncology meeting in Houston.

   ''By introducing foreign genes into tumor cells, we hope to make the cells
more easily recognized by the immune system as foreign substances,'' says
Rosenberg, who has received initial approval from NCI to begin the experiment.

   Mouse research shows animals developed immunity to their cancers after
doctors put genes for tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-2 (IL-2)
directly into tumor cells. The genes signal the immune system to mount an
offense.

   Before human experiments with the strategy can begin, the National Institutes
of Health and other agencies must give final approval. Rosenberg expects no
problems.

   Gene therapy, in which new genes are inserted into cells to change their
function, promises to become a mainstay of cancer treatment over the next two
decades. The first human experiment, pioneered by Rosenberg, was begun Jan. 29
in two patients with melanoma, a deadly skin cancer.

   In the next 20 to 30 years, Rosenberg believes gene therapy may prevent
cancer from ever developing in healthy people. NCI scientists are trying to find
key genes that could be used to make cancer vaccines.


                             1644 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     May 16, 1991, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 605 words

HEADLINE: MUSIC MAVEN

BODY:

    Prolific Diane Warren was named songwriter of the year Wednesday by the
American Society of Composers, Authors & Publishers, which recognizes creators
and publishers of the year's most-performed songs. She won the same honor last
year. Her 1989-90 output includes: Taylor Dayne's I'll Be Your Shelter and Love
Will Lead You Back, Michael Bolton's When I'm Back on My Feet Again and How Can
We Be Lovers, Bad English's When I See You Smile, Joe Cocker's When the Night
Comes, Cher's If I Could Turn Back Time and (whoops) Milli Vanilli's How Can We
Be Lovers.

 THE BOB ADVANTAGE: It's easy to remember and hard to misspell, and it's a
palindrome to boot. More importantly, the name Bob sometimes can get you into
movies free. Touchstone Pictures sent invitations to hundreds of Bobs in more
than 25 cities, asking them to attend screenings tonight of What About Bob?
starring the unfortunately named Bill Murray and Richard Dreyfuss.

 TROOP WELCOMES: Kathy Mattea headlines a Memorial Day concert in Frankfurt,
Germany, to welcome back troops from the Gulf War. And back in the USA, Major
Dad's Gerald McRaney and Designing Women's Delta Burke are grand marshals of an
Armed Forces Day parade Saturday at Universal Studios in Florida. Uniformed
military and their families get in free, and so does Secretary of Defense Dick
Cheney, who will welcome them.

 LAST IN LINE: AIDS sufferers who are women, minorities or drug users are less
likely to get life-extending medical care, says the first study of treatment
trends for an entire state. The analysis of Maryland AIDS patients, in today's
New England Journal of Medicine, provides some of the strongest proof yet that
those who get the drug AZT, and the medical attention that usually goes with it,
live much longer than those who don't. It also confirms that white men get
better care than others. Access to insurance can't be the only reason, since
most of the 719 patients had coverage, says Dr. Richard Moore of Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore.

 MEDICAL SUCCESS STORY: The world's first recipient of gene therapy to correct
an inherited disease is well enough to ice skate and take dancing lessons, her
doctor said Wednesday. The recipient, a 4-year-old girl whose name hasn't been
made public, was born without an immune system to protect against disease. A
common cold could have been fatal. In an experiment that began Sept. 14, some of
the child's blood cells were removed, injected with normal copies of the damaged
gene, and returned to her bloodstream.

 SPAM-O-RAMA: Back when God created pigs, he made them a deal. They would be off
limits to two of the world's major religions, but for the rest, he would create
Spam. Saturday, Geo. A. Hormel & Co. celebrates its 100th birthday with a
festival in honor of its most famous product. The first Spam Jamboree Day in
Austin, Minn., will feature a Spam eating contest, Spam sculpting contest, Spam
recipe contest, selection of the Spam King and Spam Queen, all-you-can-eat Spam
breakfast, Spam sandwiches and Spam pizza.

 SQUID ALERT: Just when you thought the ''just when you thought'' tease had
faded into history, comes an ad campaign for Beast, a new monster-in-the-deep
book by Jaws author Peter Benchley. During the Fourth of July weekend, Random
House plans to send planes, trailing banners that read, ''There's something in
the water ... Beast,'' to the New York, New Jersey and California coastlines to
give beachgoers something extra to think about. The book, about a mean giant
squid, will be out in June, and the inevitable movie is due next year.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; color, USA TODAY

CUTLINE: MATTEA: Headlines concert for troops


                             1645 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   May 15, 1991, Wednesday, Southland Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 14; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE GENETIC ENGINEERING:  TECHNIQUE BLOCKS AIDS-TYPE VIRUSES

BYLINE: From Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   An experimental genetic engineering technique called "antisense" can block
infection by the type of viruses that cause leukemia and AIDS, according to Ohio
University researchers.

   Their results, published today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, mark the first time the technique, widely studied in the laboratory,
has been shown to work in animals.

   Molecular biologist Thomas E. Wagner and his colleagues inserted a special
genetic sequence called antisense into the chromosomes of fertilized mouse eggs.
When the animals grew up, the antisense molecules produced in their cells made
them immune to a virus that causes leukemia in mice.

   The same technique could be used to attack the AIDS virus, Wagner said, if
researchers can find a way to insert the genetic sequences into human cells.

   Molecular biologist W. French Anderson of the National Institutes of Health,
who was the first to treat cancer patients with gene therapy, said the Ohio
experiment was "very important" because it demonstrated that the antisense gene
manipulation can prevent disease.

   Mouse leukemia and AIDS are caused by an infective organism called a
retrovirus. This is a virus that invades cells, inserts its own gene pattern
into the nucleus and forces it to make more virus particles.

   "That's what's frightening about retroviruses," Wagner said. "They
genetically engineer your chromosomes to make more viruses. Up to now, there's
nothing you can do about it."

   Wagner said his laboratory made a gene that expresses a type of ribonucleic
acid, or RNA, that works against the retrovirus. This new gene was inserted into
fertilized mouse eggs that were returned to the mother mouse.

   When the babies were born, each contained the new gene as part of their
chromosomes, and the RNA was produced in white blood cells (lymphocytes), the
normal target of the virus.

   "All of the lymphocytes are making this little piece of RNA," Wagner said.
"It doesn't do anything but hang around in the cell unless it's infected by a
retrovirus."

   When the cells were invaded, the antisense molecules used in the experiment
specifically masked the genetic codes that a retrovirus needs to package new
viral particles so they can spread infection. Without the proper packaging, the
viral particles produced were not infectious and thus were "shooting blanks,"
Wagner said.

   Result: The virus infection is stopped.

   Wagner said that to test the system, the researchers injected leukemia virus
into mice carrying the antisense gene and into mice with normal genes.

   Eleven of 36 mice with normal genes developed leukemia, but none of the
transgenic mice developed symptoms of leukemia.

   Wagner said this is the first time the theory of antisense has been
demonstrated by preventing disease.


                             1646 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                   May 5, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12; Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 205 words

HEADLINE: DR. ANDERSON'S GENE MACHINE

BODY:

   I learned the following things from Robin Marantz Henig's article "Dr.
Anderson's Gene Machine" (March 31): that two cancer patients and two young
girls (4 and 9 years old), who suffer from an enzyme deficiency that leaves them
vulnerable to infection, have been given gene therapy. The 4-year-old has been
receiving the therapy for six months; she was the first in her family to recover
from the flu; she smiles more and Dr. Anderson believes it is because of the
therapy. I learned also that Anderson is as successful a politician and
businessman as he is a scientist.

   It takes at least 20 years to find out that promising technologies may have a
dark backlash -- X-rays can cause cancer, antibiotics can wreck the immune
system, DES can be harmful to the daughters of women who've taken it.

    I would like to see articles on noninvasive healing modalities as well as on
aggressive therapies. The evidence of one person recovering from terminal cancer
following dietary changes is no more anecdotal than the description of one child
treated experimentally with gene therapy. I hope you will soon acknowledge this
other side of the health revolution that is taking place now.

ANNEMARIE COLBIN
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1991


                             1647 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 103 words

HEADLINE: DR. ANDERSON'S GENE MACHINE

BODY:

   Robin Marantz Henig's article "Dr. Anderson's Gene Machine" (March 31) is
informative on the subject of developments in gene therapy and the medical,
political and ethical considerations involved. What is missing from this
article, however, is a picture of the desperation of patients suffering from
genetic diseases or cancer. For many of these people, genetic engineering may
provide a way to live a somewhat normal life.  For those who are dying,
political and vague ethical concerns will remain secondary to the more urgent
quest for better treatments and effective cures.

MIRIAM R. BARRY
Brooklyn

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1991


                             1648 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 26, 1991 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. AA-1

LENGTH: 517 words

HEADLINE: Viagene's AIDS work gets a boost;
Japanese blood company may infuse up to $40 million

BYLINE: Elizabeth Douglass, Tribune Financial Writer

BODY:

   A major Japanese supplier of blood products is acquiring at least 15 percent
of San Diego-based Viagene Inc. in a $40 million deal that will boost the
biotechnology firm's efforts to develop a treatment for AIDS. The Green Cross
Corp.

   of Osaka, Japan, will invest $4.75 million in Viagene and provide additional
payments over the next four years as the company's HIV ImmunoTherapeutic drug
progresses through the regulatory approval process and onto the market. Green
Cross will own from 15 percent to 20 percent of Viagene after the transaction is
complete, according to Viagene President Robert Abbott. Viagene's new drug, not
yet proven in clinical trials, is a possible treatment for people infected with
HIV, the virus associated with AIDS. The company expects to begin testing the
drug on AIDS patients in 1992. The company used complex gene-transfer technology
to help develop the new drug, which Viagene says triggers the immune system to
step up production of special, HIV-killing cells, once it is inside the body.
Abbott said his company's agreement represents the first major partnership
agreement for a biotech firm pursuing gene therapy treatments. "I think it
definitely is an indicator that gene therapy is being seen as a major
technological opportunity by the big pharmaceutical companies," Abbott said.
Abbott said the company is particularly pleased that it has attracted a Japanese
firm as its first partner. "The main advantage to having a Japanese partner vs.
a U.S. partner is their patience with the long-term nature of developing
pharmaceutical products," he said.

   "U.S. partners often have a shorter-term focus." The Viagene executive added,
however, that the company is talking with other companies and investors --
including U.S. firms -- about further funding and that those discussions also
include equity investments. With its new Japanese partner, Viagene is now
assured of adequate funds not only for continuing research and development of
the drug, but also for the expensive human-testing phase of the drug approval
process. The cost of human trials for pharmaceutical drugs is usually about $10
million. Under the agreement, Viagene will also receive progress payments as the
ImmunoTherapeutic drug moves forward toward Food and Drug Administration
approval and then sales. In return, Viagene will receive royalty payments on any
future sales of the drug and will retain the right to manufacture the drug once
it's approved for sale. Although Viagene did not quantify the expected progress
payments or the other funding, the company said its Green Cross partnership
could be worth $40 million to the young company through 1995. The $40 million
figure includes a $4.75 million investment that Green Cross made in the company
itself, making it a part-owner.

   The Japanese firm made a $2 million investment last summer and will make the
remaining $2.75 million payment as part of the agreement announced today.
Viagene, formed in 1987 as a spin-off from Gensia Pharmaceuticals, had raised
$13 million in venture capital funds since its founding.

   It employs about 45 people.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1649 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 25, 1991 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. AA-1

LENGTH: 517 words

HEADLINE: Japanese firm buys stake in Viagene, boosting AIDS drug

BYLINE: Elizabeth Douglass, Tribune Financial Writer

BODY:

   A major Japanese supplier of blood products is acquiring at least 15 percent
of San Diego-based Viagene Inc. in a $40 million deal that will boost the
biotechnology firm's efforts to develop a treatment for AIDS. The Green Cross
Corp.

   of Osaka, Japan, will invest $4.75 million in Viagene and provide additional
payments over the next four years as the company's HIV ImmunoTherapeutic drug
progresses through the regulatory approval process and onto the market. Green
Cross will own from 15 percent to 20 percent of Viagene after the transaction is
complete, according to Viagene President Robert Abbott. Viagene's new drug, not
yet proven in clinical trials, is a possible treatment for people infected with
HIV, the virus associated with AIDS. The company expects to begin testing the
drug on AIDS patients in 1992. The company used complex gene-transfer technology
to help develop the new drug, which Viagene says triggers the immune system to
step up production of special, HIV-killing cells, once it is inside the body.
Abbott said his company's agreement represents the first major partnership
agreement for a biotech firm pursuing gene therapy treatments. "I think it
definitely is an indicator that gene therapy is being seen as a major
technological opportunity by the big pharmaceutical companies," Abbott said.
Abbott said the company is particularly pleased that it has attracted a Japanese
firm as its first partner. "The main advantage to having a Japanese partner vs.
a U.S. partner is their patience with the long-term nature of developing
pharmaceutical products," he said.

   "U.S. partners often have a shorter-term focus." The Viagene executive added,
however, that the company is talking with other companies and investors --
including U.S. firms -- about further funding and that those discussions also
include equity investments. With its new Japanese partner, Viagene is now
assured of adequate funds not only for continuing research and development of
the drug, but also for the expensive human-testing phase of the drug approval
process. The cost of human trials for pharmaceutical drugs is usually about $10
million. Under the agreement, Viagene will also receive progress payments as the
ImmunoTherapeutic drug moves forward toward Food and Drug Administration
approval and then sales. In return, Viagene will receive royalty payments on any
future sales of the drug and will retain the right to manufacture the drug once
it's approved for sale. Although Viagene did not quantify the expected progress
payments or the other funding, the company said its Green Cross partnership
could be worth $40 million to the young company through 1995. The $40 million
figure includes a $4.75 million investment that Green Cross made in the company
itself, making it a part-owner.

   The Japanese firm made a $2 million investment last summer and will make the
remaining $2.75 million payment as part of the agreement announced today.
Viagene, formed in 1987 as a spin-off from Gensia Pharmaceuticals, had raised
$13 million in venture capital funds since its founding.

   It employs about 45 people.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1650 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 April 23, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: Gain Seen in Quest for Genetic Treatment of Cystic Fibrosis

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A NORMAL human gene has been transferred directly into the cells of living
laboratory animals in what may be an important step toward genetic treatment for
inherited respiratory diseases like cystic fibrosis.

   Scientists at the National Institutes of Health said that they had used an
inactivated virus of the common cold to carry the human gene into the lung cells
of live rats and that the transferred gene had then performed its normal
function. Their findings are reported in the current issue of the journal
Science.

    Dr. Ronald Crystal, director of the pulmonary branch of the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute, said the technique might eventually be applied to
correct the genetic flaw that causes cystic fibrosis and a form of inherited
emphysema called alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency.

   "The two most common lethal hereditary diseases in the United States are
alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency and cystic fibrosis," Dr. Crystal said. "Both are
lethal because of the respiratory manifestations."

Correcting Flawed Genes

    He said that if a way could be found to correct the flawed genes in the lung
tissues of victims of those diseases, then the fatal effects of the disorders
could be avoided.

   "The problem in trying to correct these diseases is that the lung is a very
complex organ," Dr. Crystal said. "The techniques used for gene transfer up to
this point have been to take cells out of the body, modify the cells and then
put them back. For the lung, we can't do this."

   Instead, the scientist said his team needed to find a way to place the
correct gene directly into the living cells of the lungs. To do this, he said,
some type of virus that enters the cells had to be found.

   "It turns out that a form of a cold virus, an adenovirus, will do it," Dr.
Crystal said.

Virus as a 'Delivery Truck'

    In effect, the researchers redesigned a cold virus to turn it into sort of a
delivery truck that would carry the human gene to targeted cells.

   "We modified an adenovirus by taking out the bad parts, the parts that make
the cells ill when they are infected," Dr. Crystal said. "Then we inserted into
the virus a human gene that produces the alpha-1-antitrypsin proteins."

   After being mixed with a sterile solution, the manipulated virus was forced
into the lungs of laboratory rats.

   Later, samples of fluid from the rat lungs were removed and analyzed. Dr.
Crystal said the fluid contained bits of alpha-1-antitrypsin protein, proving
that the gene had been carried into the lung cells by the virus and was
producing the human protein. The scientist said the gene continued to function
for at least six weeks.

   Dr. Crystal said that another experiment, this time using the cystic fibrosis
gene, was under way and that it was "very promising."

   Before the technique can be used on humans, Dr. Crystal said, experiments in
monkeys will be necessary to prove that the gene transfer does not harm the
recipient.

   These studies could take years, but he said the gene-therapy technique could
be used experimentally on human patients within this decade.

   About 30,000 Americans suffer from cystic fibrosis. Symptoms of the disease
appear in infancy and victims seldom survive childhood. The alpha-1-antitrypsin
deficiency disease strikes people in their 30's and 40's and always leads to
early death from a form of emphysema. There are about 40,000 cases of this
genetic disorder in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1991


                             1651 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                      April 19, 1991, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 658 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy reportedly altered lung cells in rats

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Scientists say they have used a tamed cold virus to put human genes into rat
lung cells, an important step toward a new form of gene therapy that could
become a treatment for cystic fibrosis and other incurable genetic diseases.

   The experiment showed that a common virus, rendered harmless in the
laboratory, successfully carried genes into cells lining the animals' lungs and
caused the cells to make a crucial protein.

   Two of the most prevalent inherited killers, hereditary emphysema and cystic
fibrosis, are caused by defective genes that fail to make a vital protein in the
lung.

   "This is a new form of gene therapy" that is designed to implant normal genes
into the lungs of patients, said Dr. Ronald Crystal of the National Heart, Lung
and Blood Institute.

   Although the animal experiments are far too preliminary for researchers to
predict if and when they might be applied to humans, it is hoped that genes
could be delivered in an aerosol mist that the patients would breathe.

   Until now, attempts to treat inherited diseases with gene therapy have been
limited to those in which a normal gene can be implanted in blood cells, since
those cells can be removed from the body, given the new genes and replaced.
However, many of the 3,000 known genetic diseases affect organs or tissues that
scientists don't yet know how to reach with gene implants, such as the nervous
system, the brain or connective tissue of the body.

   In the case of hereditary emphysema and cystic fibrosis, "we have access to
the lungs, and people take drugs in aerosols all the time," said Crystal, who
headed the project carried out by researchers at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, a French agency and a Swiss biotech company, Transgene SA.

   Hereditary emphysema, also known as alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency, makes
people who have it susceptible to premature lung damage and death because their
lungs lack a protein that protects breathing cells against an enzyme made by
white blood cells.

   Cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal genetic disease in the United States,
causes progressive lung damage because of a flaw in a gene that makes a protein
structure that is crucial for proper water and salt balance in the lungs.

   The gene causing cystic fibrosis was isolated less than two years ago,
raising hopes that the long-baffling and untreatable disease might eventually
yield to new strategies such as replacing the defective gene.

   The key to the experiments headed by Crystal's group involved selecting a
virus that could infect lung cells and act as a shuttle to carry normal genes
into those cells. They chose a microbe called an adenovirus that causes
respiratory infections, including the common cold.

   The adenovirus homes in on cells lining the lung, like a missile designed to
hit a specific target. Researchers engineered the virus for safety by removing
the its reproductive mechanism.

   The researchers spliced into these virus carriers the desired genes.

   Crystal reported that the viruses successfully infected the cells and the
genes carried inside caused the cells to manufacture the alpha 1 antitrypsin
protein for at least one week.

   In subsequent experiments in the laboratory, adenoviruses were used to carry
both alpha 1 antitrypsin protein and the protein missing in cystic fibrosis into
lung cells taken from normal humans.

   Alan Smith, a scientist at Genzyme, a Framingham biotech company also
pursuing gene therapy and other treatments for cystic fibrosis, called the
experiment "very nice work, a step in the right direction."

   Smith noted, however, that the National Heart, Lung and Blood Instititute and
French researchers do not know how long the imported genes will stay in the
cells. Questions of safety are not resolved either, Smith noted, and Crystal
said more work is needed to rule out the possibility that the tamed viruses
might combine with "helper" viruses and become able to reproduce.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1991


                             1652 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      April 19, 1991, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 22; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: DEFUSED VIRUS STUDIED IN GENE THERAPY;
MEDICINE: TEST, WHICH PRODUCED HUMAN PROTEIN IN RATS, SHOWS PROMISE IN TREATING
CYSTIC FIBROSIS AND INHERITED EMPHYSEMA.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists using a defused common cold virus as a weapon have developed a new
form of gene therapy that shows great promise for treating such lung disorders
as cystic fibrosis and inherited emphysema, the two most common lethal inherited
disorders among Caucasians.

   The National Institutes of Health researchers, who performed the studies on
rats, report in today's issue of the journal Science that they inserted the gene
for human lung proteins that are missing in the two disorders into a common cold
virus that has a strong attraction for lung cells.

   When the virus was sprayed into rats' lungs, it was taken up by lung cells,
which began producing the human protein.

   "This is a first step, and a very important step, if we're going to get to
the point where we can do gene therapy for cystic fibrosis in humans," said
Robert Beall of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "I feel that cystic fibrosis is
clearly now at the top of the ladder for candidate diseases that can be treated
by gene therapy."

   The proposed therapy must still undergo years of testing in monkeys and other
animals to show that it will cause no harm, said molecular biologist Ronald G.
Crystal of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, leader of the team that
conducted the research. Nonetheless, the therapy could be used in humans within
this decade, he added.

   About 33,000 Americans are known to have cystic fibrosis, with an additional
1,000 to 2,000 new cases -- one in every 1,800 births -- diagnosed each year.
The disease is marked by a buildup of mucus in the lungs that impairs breathing
and leaves the victim susceptible to respiratory infections. The disorder also
impedes absorption of fats from the diet.

   Most cystic fibrosis victims die before their 40th birthday.

   Inherited emphysema affects as many as 40,000 Americans. It is caused by the
lack of a protein, called alpha-one-antitrypsin or AAT, that protects the lungs
from destruction by an enzyme made by white blood cells. An inborn lack of AAT
accounts for about 2% of the 2 million U.S. cases of emphysema. The vast
majority of cases are caused by smoking and are not inherited.

   The defective gene in cystic fibrosis was discovered in August, 1989, and
researchers earlier this year demonstrated that putting a healthy form of the
gene into lung cells grown in a test tube could reverse the effects of the
disease.

   Gene therapy is highly experimental in humans. Only two groups of
researchers, both at NIH, have been given permission to attempt it in treating
melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer, and in a rare hereditary disease that
causes immune deficiency.

   The new approach is a departure from the two major techniques that are most
commonly proposed for human gene therapy. But neither of those techniques,
scientists believe, can be effectively used for treating lung cells.

   Crystal and his colleagues chose to work instead with adenoviruses, which
normally cause colds. "Adenoviruses love the lung. They go in very easily," he
said.

   Using the virus, the researchers removed the genes that produce cold symptoms
and those that allow the virus to reproduce, then added the gene for AAT. When
the lungs of rats were flushed with a solution containing the altered virus, it
was taken up by lung cells, which began producing the human protein.

   Although today's paper deals only with AAT, Crystal said they have repeated
the experiment with the CF gene and that the CF protein has been observed in the
rats' lungs for six weeks, the longest time they have studied it.

   Because no animals actually are stricken with either AAT deficiency or cystic
fibrosis, there is as yet no way to determine if the gene therapy will alleviate
symptoms of the disease. But, he said, the previous experiments with cells grown
in test tubes suggest that the therapy will be beneficial.

   The biggest obstacle facing the researchers is proving that the treatment is
safe. Potential problems include the possibility that the altered virus might
infect cells elsewhere in the body, that it might exchange genetic information
with other adenoviruses in the environment to produce adverse effects, and that
it might interfere with the body's immunity to adenoviruses.


                             1653 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 19, 1991, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 199 words

HEADLINE: Cold virus may help fix gene defect

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    New research that uses a cold virus to deliver genes to the lungs of animals
could lead to gene therapy for diseases that affect the lungs, such as emphysema
and cystic fibrosis, a study shows.

   Findings in today's Science, by Dr. Ronald Crystal, National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, show for the first time:

   - A cold virus can be made to act as a shuttle for transporting a normal copy
of the alpha-1-antitrypsin gene - defective in inherited emphysema - into the
lung cells of live rats.

   - Once delivered, the gene makes alpha-1-antitrypsin, functioning for about a
week.

   Cold viruses are a logical choice for delivering genes because they have the
machinery and tracking system for lung cells. Researchers removed the part of
the virus that creates cold symptoms and put the new gene in its place.

   ''We've got a shuttle here, but we still have to determine its safety,'' says
Robert Beall of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   Crystal says animal experiments are now being done with the cystic fibrosis
gene and ''results are encouraging.''

   If safety of the cold virus is proven, gene therapy for cystic fibrosis could
be under way in five years or less, Beall says.


                             1654 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 19, 1991, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A7

LENGTH: 773 words

HEADLINE: Nasal Gene Therapy May Repair Lung Disorders;
Scientists Seek Way to Produce Key Proteins Absent in Fatal Emphysema, Cystic
Fibrosis

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Curt Suplee, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Researchers have harnessed the infectious powers of a common cold virus to
devise a new gene therapy technique that may lead to cures for such lethal lung
disorders as hereditary emphysema and cystic fibrosis.

   The technique, which already has been tested on rats, might eventually be
used to deliver new genes to a patient's cells with a simple nasal spray.

   Victims of both afflictions, the two most common fatal inherited diseases
among whites, have lung cells that are deficient in critical substances that
ordinarily prevent damage to pulmonary tissues. For years, scientists have
puzzled over how lung tissue might be provided the needed chemicals.

   Now a team from the National Institutes of Health and two French research
centers report in today's issue of Science that they genetically altered a
common form of adenovirus -- one of the two main types of virus that cause colds
-- so that it carried the human gene for the protein that is lacking in patients
with a deadly form of inherited emphysema called alpha-1 antitrypsin (alpha-1AT)
deficiency. The virus, whose normal target is lung tissue, was dripped into the
lungs of laboratory rats. The virus then infected their lung cells, which soon
began producing the crucial protein.

   The next step, said Ronald Crystal, director of the pulmonary branch of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute at NIH, will be to see if the same
technique can be used for a gene that counteracts the effects of cystic
fibrosis. "We've already put the gene in an adenovirus," Crystal said, "and
research to date looks promising."

   "In the future," Crystal said, "if this process is found to work in humans
and turns out to be safe, we could put these recombinant viruses in aerosol
sprays and it might be possible for the first time to cure these diseases."

   Crystal cautioned, however, that it is still uncertain how or to what degree
the viruses actually alter the genes of the lung cells. Moreover, he said, "we
just don't know about safety. Retroviruses [a different kind of virus already
used in gene therapy experiments] appear to be quite safe, and are designed so
that they can't reproduce themselves" after doing their gene-delivering work.
"We designed our adenoviruses to be similarly safe," he said. "But it's not
proved yet, and may turn out be a problem" if and when human studies are begun.

   Other forms of human gene therapy so far are still experimental. They have
consisted of taking blood cells out of patients, introducing new genes into
those cells and then injecting them back into the patient's bloodstream.

    Such an approach will not work for these lung diseases because the new gene
must do its work in lung cells, which occupy an area inside the lung about the
size of a tennis court if all the convoluted folds could be stretched out.
Another problem is that the cells that line the lungs' airways reproduce very
slowly, between 1 and 2 percent per day -- much too slow for conventional
retroviruses, which need rapidly proliferating tissues to function best.

   Adenoviruses, however, are ideally suited to the job. They do not require
that the target cell be dividing, they preferentially attack the cells lining
the lung and they can be collected in high concentrations. The NIH researchers,
in conjunction with the Institute Gustave Roussy and the Transgene company in
France, modified an adenovirus, giving it a human gene that produces alpha-1AT.

   Some 20,000 to 40,000 Americans suffer from a genetic defect that causes the
liver to produce too little of this key protein, without which the lung tissue
is unprotected from a naturally occurring enzyme called elastase, produced by
white blood cells. Elastase destroys the structure of the air sacs, leading to
emphysema and death, usually in patients age 30 to 40.

   When the rats inhaled the virus spray, however, their lung cells soon began
producing alpha-1AT. The researchers believe that the virus entered the cells
through receptor sites on the cells' outer surfaces. But "a big question mark,"
Crystal said, "is that we don't know whether the new gene actually integrates
into the genome, really gets into the chromosomes" of the host cell, or merely
produces the protein in another part of the cell body. Whatever the case, the
rats started secreting the missing protein, which remained in their lung fluid
for at least a week.

   This technique, Crystal said, may have repercussions for treating other
maladies. "Though some diseases are systemic," he said, "most of them are
organ-specific. In the future of gene therapy, it will be important to work out
approaches to specific organs."


                             1655 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1991 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                      April 8, 1991, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 181 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy patient improving;
SCIENCE BRIEFS

BYLINE: Compiled from wire services and other sources by Health & Science
researcher Jennifer Hartman.

BODY:

    Researchers say they are encouraged by the progress of a 4-year-old girl
whose immune system appears to be responding to historic gene-replacement
therapy.

   National Institutes of Health scientists said Friday the youngster has been
improving steadily and has had few side effects from the treatment.

   "I'm delighted at the way things are going," said Dr. R. Michael Blaese, a
National Cancer Institute scientist and co-researcher in the gene therapy
experiment. "The patient's immune system seems to be improving."

   The patient, who suffers from a severe immune disorder that leaves her
defenseless against infections and cancers, was given her sixth treatment on
Thursday at the institute, in Bethesda, Md. She began the treatments last
September, becoming the first person to undergo gene therapy. She will have two
more before researchers do an extensive evaluation of her condition, Blaese
said.

   Dr. W. French Anderson, co-researcher on the project, said the patient's
improvement "has gone on long enough" for him to be confident that it's due to
the gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1991


                             1656 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                      April 8, 1991, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: BRANDON TIMES; GUEST COLUMN; Pg. 2

DISTRIBUTION: BRANDON TIMES; TAMPA

LENGTH: 1056 words

HEADLINE: Longer lives provoke questions about how we'll live them

BYLINE: TOM OBERHOFER

BODY:


   He ne'er is crowned

    With immortality, who fears to follow

    Where airy voices lead.
 Keats
    Throughout history the major questions dealing with human mortality have
been "How will I die?" and "When will I die?" Death was the given, and the
issues we faced had to do with its details. The Spartan wondered if he would die
in battle, the medieval urban citizen wondered if the plague would take her,
Chinese peasants wondered if they would survive the famine.

    Today these basic questions dealing with human mortality are still with us,
but another floats around in the back of our consciousness.  This new question
has the promise, or hope, of making the earlier ones moot points in our
experience. It is a question that occurs to us as we see the technological
fruits of the last century cascading upon us at an accelerating rate. It is a
question that entices us because as a society we place such high expectations on
the promise of new developments to deliver us from whatever are our real (or
perceived) problems. It is a question that we ask because if we can answer it to
our satisfaction it stands to relieve us of one of the greatest uncertainties of
all what happens to us after we leave this mortal coil?

    The question, of course, is: Do we have to die?

    What leads us to ask this question, and what are its implications as we
grapple with its impact on the human psyche? We ask this question because we
have been awed by medical success in cheating death. In the 20th century, it
starts with the developments of antibiotics and the widespread use of
penicillin. It progresses through the remarkable, but now common, feat of
transplanting a human heart, and extends to transplanting organ clusters. It is
reinforced by the development of artificial organs. The pacemaker gives way to
the patented heart.

    We can replace joints damaged by injury or arthritis; we can graft veins
from one place in the body to another, and do the same with skin. We can replace
organs, catch disease at an earlier stage and are increasingly effective in
fighting illness. In other words, we can remake ourselves to live, function and
thrive for longer than we would have any right to expect a century ago.

    And we are just at the beginning of this remaking of the living entity.
These items we have already mentioned are the macro part of human
reconstruction. We are on the threshold of micro-manipulating the human body.
Gene therapy holds the promise of strengthening the immune system and
facilitating extended mental alertness. Medical scientists are hopeful that they
soon will make significant breakthroughs in the use of monoclonal antibodies to
combat cancers. A successful mapping of human DNA may hold the key to
understanding, and ultimately controlling, the aging process.

    We are pushing back the frontier of death. Our life expectancy has increased
from about 35 years at the time of the American Revolution to about 47 years in
1900 to 73 years in 1980. Much of this improvement is the result of a decrease
in infant mortality, but the share of the population living to old age also is
increasing dramatically. While there appears to be, at the moment, an ultimate
life span of about 120 years, it is easy to believe, with a probability greater
than zero, that this hypothetical barrier will yet fall.

    Even if this physical barrier turns out to be insurmountable, it is not
beyond the realm of possibility that our human consciousness might survive the
demise of our body. What makes us uniquely human? It is not our arms or our
legs, our heart or stomach. It is our mind, our ability to think, reason,
analyze, create. The U.S. Patent Office has issued patent No. 4,666,425 for a
machine that essentially uses existing technology to keep a severed human or
animal head alive. It uses heart-lung machines, nutrient processors and waste
eliminators to keep the brain alive and functioning. It builds on earlier
neurological research that successfully carried out such experiments with Rhesus
monkeys. The concept of the cyborg, which implies one type of immortality, takes
one step closer to reality.

    But let's think less radically. What will substantially longer lives mean
for us? For society? Substantially extended longevity is only attractive if it
is accompanied with a certain quality of life, of human experience that
continues to be enriching and socially useful. How will it make us greater
risk-takers, and how will it make us more conservative? Would we be greater
risk-takers in career and lifestyle choices, knowing that there is more time to
correct earlier mistakes? Would we become more creative because there would be
the potential for so much more stimulus over a life span, or would we end up
complacent and jaded? Westerners would have to learn how to constructively use
large blocks of unstructured time.  Immortality in front of the TV, America's
current favorite leisure-time activity, would be a shallow existence indeed. We
would have to learn to pace ourselves for the truly long run and live a life as,
metaphorically speaking, marathon runners rather than sprinters.

    As a society we would face the challenge of effectively using our citizens
over a longer period of time, and learn to adjust to new rhythms of personal
life cycles the ins and outs of the labor market, life-long learning and a
series of extended sabbaticals.

    More fundamentally, perhaps with a longer life we would be able to transcend
the acquisitiveness of the modern Westerner. Getting and keeping might lose some
appeal. Where does the concept of retirement enter into this longer life
picture, and what happens to the number of children we would want? Would the
process of sequential marriages we are experiencing give way to formal contracts
of limited duration?

    It is clear that as we hesitantly ask questions about mortality, we also
find ourselves confronted with a provocative universe of challenging issues. Do
we have to die?
 Tom Oberhofer teaches in the Department of Economics at Eckerd College. Anyone
interested in submitting a guest column for Tampa and Brandon Times should
contact Charrie Hazard at Barnett Plaza, Suite 1140, 101 E Kennedy Blvd., Tampa
33602.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992


                             1657 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                      April 5, 1991, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: CITY TIMES; MY VIEW; Pg. 2

DISTRIBUTION: CITY TIMES

LENGTH: 1062 words

HEADLINE: Longer lives provoke questions about how we'll live them

BYLINE: Tom Oberhofer

BODY:


   He ne'er is crowned

    With immortality, who fears to follow

    Where airy voices lead.
 Keats
 Throughout history the major questions dealing with human mortality have been
"How will I die?" and "When will I die?" Death was the given, and the issues we
faced had to do with its details. The Spartan wondered if he would die in
battle, the medieval urban citizen wondered if the plague would take her,
Chinese peasants wondered if they would survive the famine.

    Today these basic questions dealing with human mortality are still with us,
but another floats around in the back of our consciousness.  This new question
has the promise, or hope, of making the earlier ones moot points in our
experience. It is a question that occurs to us as we see the technological
fruits of the last century cascading upon us at an accelerating rate. It is a
question that entices us because as a society we place such high expectations on
the promise of new developments to deliver us from whatever are our real (or
perceived) problems. It is a question that we ask because if we can answer it to
our satisfaction it stands to relieve us of one of the greatest uncertainties of
all what happens to us after we leave this mortal coil?

    The question, of course, is: Do we have to die?     What leads us to ask
this question, and what are its implications as we grapple with its impact on
the human psyche? We ask this question because we have been awed by medical
success in cheating death. In the 20th century, it starts with such (now) simple
beginnings as the developments of antibiotics and the widespread use of
penicillin. It progresses through the remarkable, but now common, feat of
transplanting a human heart, and extends to transplanting organ clusters. It is
reinforced by the development of artificial organs. The pacemaker gives way to
the patented heart.

    We can replace joints damaged by injury or arthritis; we can graft veins
from one place in the body to another, and do the same with skin. We can replace
organs, catch disease at an earlier stage and are increasingly effective in
fighting illness. In other words, we can remake ourselves to live, function and
thrive for longer than we would have any right to expect a century ago.

    And we are just at the beginning of this remaking of the living entity.
These items we have already mentioned are the macro part of human
reconstruction. We are on the threshold of micro-manipulating the human body.
Gene therapy holds the promise of strengthening the immune system and
facilitating extended mental alertness. Medical scientists are hopeful that they
soon will make significant breakthroughs in the use of monoclonal antibodies to
combat cancers. A successful mapping of human DNA may hold the key to
understanding, and ultimately controlling, the aging process.

    We are pushing back the frontier of death. Our life expectancy has increased
from about 35 years at the time of the American Revolution to about 47 years in
1900 to 73 years in 1980. Much of this improvement is the result of a decrease
in infant mortality, but the share of the population living to old age also is
increasing dramatically. While there appears to be, at the moment, an ultimate
life span of about 120 years, it is easy to believe, with a probability greater
than zero, that this hypothetical barrier will yet fall.

    Even if this physical barrier turns out to be insurmountable, it is not
beyond the realm of possibility that our human consciousness might survive the
demise of our body. What makes us uniquely human? It is not our arms or our
legs, our heart or stomach. It is our mind, our ability to think, reason,
analyze, create. The U.S. Patent Office has issued patent No. 4,666,425 for a
machine that essentially uses existing technology to keep a severed human or
animal head alive. It uses heart-lung machines, nutrient processors and waste
eliminators to keep the brain alive and functioning. It builds on earlier
neurological research that successfully carried out such experiments with Rhesus
monkeys. The concept of the cyborg, which implies one type of immortality, takes
one step closer to reality.

    But let's think less radically. What will substantially longer lives mean
for us? For society? Substantially extended longevity is only attractive if it
is accompanied with a certain quality of life, of human experience that
continues to be enriching and socially useful. How will it make us greater
risk-takers, and how will it make us more conservative? Would we be greater
risk-takers in career and lifestyle choices, knowing that there is more time to
correct earlier mistakes? Would we become more creative because there would be
the potential for so much more stimulus over a life span, or would we end up
complacent and jaded? Westerners would have to learn how to constructively use
large blocks of unstructured time.  Immortality in front of the TV, America's
current favorite leisure-time activity, would be a shallow existence indeed. We
would have to learn to pace ourselves for the truly long run and live a life as,
metaphorically speaking, marathon runners rather than sprinters.

    As a society we would face the challenge of effectively using our citizens
over a longer period of time, and learn to adjust to new rhythms of personal
life cycles the ins and outs of the labor market, life-long learning and a
series of extended sabbaticals.

    More fundamentally, perhaps with a longer life we would be able to transcend
the acquisitiveness of the modern Westerner. Getting and keeping might lose some
appeal. Where does the concept of retirement enter into this longer life
picture, and what happens to the number of children we would want? Would the
process of sequential marriages we are experiencing give way to formal contracts
of limited duration?

    It is clear that as we hesitantly ask questions about mortality, we also
find ourselves confronted with a provocative universe of challenging issues. Do
we have to die?
 - Tom Oberhofer teaches in the Department of Economics at Eckerd College. My
View columnists, invited to contribute for a year on a regular basis, write
their own views on subjects they choose, which are not necessarily the opinions
of this newspaper.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992


                             1658 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  March 31, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

NAME: W. French Anderson

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5026 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Anderson's Gene Machine

BYLINE: BY ROBIN MARANTZ HENIG; Robin Marantz Henig is a Washington-based
medical writer at work on a book about new virus diseases.

BODY:

   "HOW ARE YOU DOING, KID?" THE DOCTOR ASKS HIS young patient, hugging and
tickling her and trying to make her giggle. The girl looks up at him with huge
dark eyes, but since a stranger is in the room today she is too shy to smile.
She is a quiet 4-year-old whose solemn gaze can be a bit unnerving. As she
drinks chocolate milk and zaps the hospital television with the remote-control
device, she seems oblivious to the fact that she is making medical history.

   It's a bright blue day, and the child is back at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., for another monthly infusion of genetically engineered
blood cells. She has adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, a rare inherited
condition that makes her unable to manufacture ADA, an enzyme crucial to the
immune system. Without ADA, she is as vulnerable to infection as a person with
AIDS.

    The Band-Aid on her left hand is the only sign that the child, whose family
has requested anonymity, is going through any medical procedure at all, much
less a trailblazing one. But the doctor hugging her is acutely aware of the
significance of every small gesture. Infusing this little girl with the genes
she is missing has made the physician, Dr. W. French Anderson, 54, one of the
world's first genetic surgeons.

   This Thursday, if all goes as planned, the child will be back in Bethesda for
her sixth transfusion of genetically engineered cells. The following day,
Anderson will give an update of her status before the Human Gene Therapy
Subcommittee at the National Institutes of Health, the official Government body
that oversees his research. After months of guarded optimism, the physicians
caring for her are finally ready to claim the child has been helped. Anderson,
chief of molecular hematology at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
will announce that "gene therapy has worked."

    THE ERA OF GENE THERAPY OFFICIALLY BEGAN ON Sept. 14, 1990. Droopy-eyed from
a night of worried wakefulness, Anderson joined two colleagues from the National
Cancer Institute, Drs. R. Michael Blaese and Kenneth W. Culver, in a medical
procedure that on the surface looked no more complicated than an ordinary blood
transfusion. Over the course of about 30 minutes, the 4-year-old received one
billion of her own white blood cells, which had been treated to contain the ADA
gene that she was missing -- the absence of which led to her rare condition. An
hour later she was wandering around the hospital playroom and eating M&M's.

   An important second step occurred on Jan. 29, when two dying patients -- a
29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man -- became the first to try gene therapy
as a way to fight cancer. (Another ADA deficiency patient, a 9-year-old girl,
began treatment two days later.) If genes prove useful for cancer treatment, the
potential applications for this technique will go far beyond those rare
disorders caused by a single defective gene -- disorders such as hemophilia,
sickle-cell anemia, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy -- to include conditions
that are not strictly genetic at all, such as heart disease and AIDS.

   How genes have been manipulated to help these first four patients is largely
a story of scientific ingenuity. After years of peering into cells and figuring
out how they work, scientists are now able to arrange and rearrange the basic
building blocks of life, to maneuver them into more functional configurations.
But it's also a story about politics and people. The technology of genetic
engineering has been subject to an unprecedented level of public scrutiny
because it involves tinkering with the chemicals that define us as human beings.
At each stage of a research plan, the molecular geneticist is called before
committees of ethicists, physicians and other scientists and forced to defend
his work. The scientist who masters this process is the one whose work will be
approved.

   That is why French Anderson has excelled -- not only because he knows the
science, but because he knows all the political players and all the regulatory
hoops. He spends all his time thinking about his next move; to Anderson, the
whole thing is like a gigantic game of chess. "This is what I do," he says. "I
eat and sleep and breathe gene therapy 24 hours a day."

   As the nation's leading genetic surgeon, Anderson has been called upon to
address many of the fears and uncertainties that surround this brave new
technology. Did he rush ahead too early with an experiment before it was fit for
humans, just so he could say he did it first? Did he start with the wrong
patient, since a less extreme drug therapy for the child's condition already
exists? Is he leading us down a slippery slope toward a new era of eugenics,
when scientists try to manipulate genes to create a disease-free Master Race?

   Anderson answers questions like these with a strained patience. "Of equal
importance to having the scientific community accept gene therapy," he says, "is
having the public accept it." Like any visionary with a radical new idea,
Anderson has applied mule-headed determination to force a sluggish society into
its rendezvous with the future. But in a field as technical as genetics, a
self-professed zealot like Anderson is not simply a catalyst for change. He is
also called upon to summarize for the rest of us its potential benefits and
risks.

   It's not an easy role. Try as he might to explain gene therapy
dispassionately to the people who must judge him now -- his peers reviewing his
proposals, the politicians considering laws to restrict genetic tinkering, the
patients on whom he wants to experiment -- Anderson's bias is obvious; he can
barely conceal his enthusiasm. When he talks about human gene therapy, the trim,
silver-haired scientist in the white lab coat starts bubbling over like a little
boy.

   The theory behind gene therapy is simple: treat a patient whose cells lack a
particular gene by giving the missing gene to the cells. But it's harder than it
sounds.

   The first problem is, how do you get the gene into the cell? The cell has an
elaborate defense mechanism, encased as it is in a cell membrane that is all but
impenetrable. Fifteen years ago, scientists tried altering the cell membrane
with chemicals, electricity, even brute force. Some reasoned that one way to get
genes into a cell nucleus would be by mimicking the methods used by nature's own
best invader, the virus. In the early 1980's, a young researcher named Richard
C. Mulligan, now at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, developed an efficient way to render a
virus noninfectious -- by removing most of its own genes -- and to splice into
it the genes he wanted to transport into human cells. The virus, although now
harmless, still retained its ability to get inside the cell and to integrate its
genetic cargo into the cell's genes.

   Mulligan started work on a class of viruses called retroviruses, which are
now the most popular tools in gene manipulation. All retroviruses -- the most
notorious of which is the AIDS virus -- have in common the ability to penetrate
the cell nucleus and insert retroviral DNA into the cell's own chromosomes. They
are smaller than most other viruses and, unlike most other viruses, they usually
do not kill the cells they infect.

   After years of lab manipulations -- in which the virus's inner workings were
stripped away bit by bit -- the retroviruses now used in gene therapy have been
reduced to shells for carrying foreign genes and getting them into the cell's
nucleus. They are called retroviral vectors, from the Latin "to carry." They are
little more than stripped-down conveyor belts for genes.

   The retroviral vector has the desired gene spliced directly into its nucleus.
Then begins the process known as transduction -- Anderson rejects the more
common term, infection, as "too emotive" -- in which the cells designated to
receive the gene are mixed with the gene-boosted vector in a laboratory culture
dish. For most of the cells that are the targets of the retroviral vector, such
as the white blood cells called lymphocytes, it takes no more than a few hours
for the viruses to get inside.

   The choice of target cell is an important one in gene therapy. For the
patients treated so far, only lymphocytes have been used. But for a long time,
scientists expected that the first target cells would be the stem cells, cells
of the bone marrow that mature into lymphocytes.

   Unlike lymphocytes, which have a life span of a few months, stem cells last
forever. They give rise not only to lymphocytes but to all the other cells of
the circulatory system: red blood cells, plasma cells, macrophages. It was
thought that insertion of a needed gene into a stem cell would guarantee that
all cells derived from that stem cell for the rest of the patient's life would
have the new gene, too.

   But stem cells turned out to be wily targets. During the mid-1980's, stem
cells proved to be all but impossible to find, much less to transduce. Less than
one bone marrow cell in 10,000 is a stem cell, and there was no good way to
separate stem cells from the others. In addition, transduction occurs only in
cells that are dividing, which stem cells rarely do. The odds against a
retroviral vector actually getting through to a stem cell seemed to be enormous.

   With the science at an impasse, Anderson decided to concentrate on politics.
Even though he had no precise plan for inserting a gene into a human being, he
wanted practice dealing with the regulatory machinery already in place to
oversee gene therapy once it became feasible. This is where the politics of
regulation comes in -- where French Anderson removes his lab coat and dons the
three-piece suit of the Government bureaucrat.

   On the wall of Anderson's cramped office at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute are six long rows of framed black-and-white glossy photographs,
signed the way celebrities' are, of the people who have worked in his laboratory
since 1968. (One framed photo is of a rhesus monkey; a student put it there
years ago as a joke.) The young men and women in the photographs came through
the lab as technicians, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, and have
risen over the years to senior positions in industry and academia.

   Other scientists decorate their offices with photos of themselves shaking
hands with famous people. Anderson could have done that, too. He has become a
familiar figure on Capitol Hill, on a first-name basis with the lawmakers who
will help determine the future of gene therapy. His Congressional appearances
are featured regularly on television news shows, and he's so hounded by
reporters that he recently asked his agency's press officer to stop granting
interviews for a while. Last October, after declining two previous invitations,
he and his wife finally went to their first state dinner at the White House.

   It is of symbolic importance that Anderson chooses to display photographs of
his lab workers rather than of himself rubbing shoulders with the rich and
famous. To him, science is a collective enterprise, and any of the success he's
had must be shared with those people in his photo gallery. But behind the
scenes, rubbing shoulders with powerful nonscientists is exactly what he has
learned to do. In fact, his ability to rub shoulders effectively might be why
gene therapy was ever able to get off the ground.

   "If there hadn't been someone as conscientious and cooperative as French
moving this along," says Dr. Henry Miller, director of the office of
biotechnology for the Food and Drug Administration, "this line of research might
not have taken place at all." Miller, whose agency must join the National
Institutes of Health in approving all federally funded human gene therapy
procedures, uses words like "saintly" and "fanatical" in describing Anderson.
Alexander Capron, a member of the Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee -- the first
of several national review bodies that now must approve every gene-transfer
experiment involving human beings -- agrees that Anderson almost single-handedly
moved gene therapy through the regulatory labyrinth to the point of
acceptability. "For a serious scientist to have mastered the bureaucratic review
process is extremely unusual," says Capron, co-director of the Pacific Center
for Health Policy and Ethics at the University of Southern California.

   To Anderson, though, there is nothing remarkable about this skill; it is all
part of the elaborate chess match. Since he was 16 years old, long before he or
anyone else really understood what genes do, Anderson was determined to become a
genetic surgeon. In high-school in Tulsa, Okla., he was such a brilliant student
that his teachers took his test scores off the grading curve so his classmates
wouldn't hate him. When he applied to Harvard in 1953 -- the same year that
James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the structure of DNA -- he already
knew what his life's work would be. "I want to understand disease at the
molecular level," he wrote on his application.

   Along the way, Anderson worked beside some leading lights in molecular
biology: with Francis Crick himself, and with Marshall Nirenberg, who helped
decipher the genetic code. Now Anderson sees his scientific role in part to
serve as a mentor for the next generation of molecular geneticists. The only
time he travels these days is to visit labs where scientists are preparing
research proposals that are headed for Federal review, trying to guide them
through the regulatory hurdles that he has already faced.

   At home, Anderson and his wife, Kathryn -- vice chairman of surgery at
Children's National Medical Center in Washington -- lead a quiet life. The last
play they saw together was in 1967; the last movie they saw was "Amadeus." They
have no children, having decided early on to devote themselves to their careers.
The only nonscience activity Anderson takes any pleasure in is tae kwon do, a
Korean martial art in which he holds a black belt. In 1976, he was the official
physician for the United States team at the Olympics in Seoul, and he still
teaches a weekly class on the N.I.H. campus.

   Dealing with people is a crucial part of Anderson's job, but it's not a skill
that comes naturally to him. He describes himself as a "weird" child, who at the
age of 8 or 9 preferred reading college textbooks to playing with other kids. "I
didn't see the point," he says. "Everyone else was stupid."

   When Anderson was in fifth grade, his parents and teachers insisted that he
try harder at making friends. So he did. He went into the project
wholeheartedly, even switching from his first name, William, to his middle,
French, as a way of reinventing himself. By the seventh grade, he was the most
popular boy in school and was elected the president of his class.

   The ability he cultivated to relate to people has had a political impact.
Some of his colleagues say it was his personal shepherding of his proposals
through the Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee of the National Institutes of Health
that allowed the nation's first experiments in this new field to proceed.
Anderson has been directly involved in all three of the experiments approved to
date: a gene-transfer experiment involving cancer patients, the gene therapy
experiment for ADA deficiency and the gene therapy experiment for malignant
melanoma.

   The political maneuvering began in March 1988, when Anderson and Michael
Blaese approached Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute with
an idea they thought would help them all -- and ultimately further the cause of
gene therapy. They wanted to piggyback gene-transfer technology onto Rosenberg's
successful anticancer techniques. They wanted, as Anderson puts it, "to start
with a target cell we knew we could hit" -- the cells that Rosenberg was working
with.

   Rosenberg's name was already a household word because of his widely
publicized success with "adoptive immunotherapy," a cancer treatment that
involves culturing huge quantities of a patient's own natural cancer-fighting
cells -- tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, or TIL cells. Anderson and Blaese's
idea was to add a genetically engineered virus to the TIL cells before giving
them back to patients. The project would begin by simply tacking on a gene that
would tag the TIL cells, to help trace their progress through the body. This
would be followed by insertion of a therapeutic anticancer gene.

   In the three years since then, just about everything has gone according to
plan, though sometimes at a slower pace than Anderson had anticipated. In May
1989, the three scientists treated the first of 10 cancer patients with
gene-engineered TIL cells -- the gene-tracing experiment. Then, in September
1990, Anderson, Blaese and Culver began the ADA deficiency experiment -- the
first time genes were transferred into a human being for a therapeutic, rather
than purely informational, purpose. And in January 1991, gene therapy was used
for the first time to treat cancer, when two melanoma patients received
immune-system cells that had been beefed up with the gene for a potent
anticancer substance called tumor necrosis factor. The same month, the
9-year-old girl with ADA deficiency also started treatment. On April 15, she is
scheduled to receive her third infusion, but it will be months before anyone
knows if it's worked.

   The treatment of human beings is, as Anderson is quick to acknowledge, the
ultimate test. "If we goof up now," he says, "all our critics will have a field
day."

    THOSE CRITICS HAVE been waiting in the wings for over a decade, ever since
early efforts at treatment -- conducted without official sanction -- erupted
into an international scandal.

   Dr. Martin Cline, at the time a leading molecular geneticist at the
University of California at Los Angeles, applied for permission to insert new
genes into patients with beta-thalassemia, a blood disorder whose exact genetic
origin was unknown at the time. U.C.L.A. denied permission, saying the animal
data were insufficient to justify trying it on human beings. Without informing
anyone, Cline went abroad to do the human experiments in Italy and Israel. When
his action came to light, Cline was sternly disciplined by the National
Institutes of Health and by U.C.L.A.

   After the Cline debacle, "people were gun-shy," Anderson recalls. That is why
elaborate Federal review procedures, concluding with review by the directors of
the National Institutes of Health and the Food and Drug Administration, were put
into place: to assure the public that it couldn't happen again.

   "The public concern over gene therapy has always been over the issue of
playing God," says Alexander Capron. "The fear was that you start by treating a
few genetic diseases, but once you have the technology you move on to altering
human capabilities and producing inheritable changes."

   As a result, almost everyone involved in gene therapy wants to limit its use
to the correction of genetic flaws -- and to prohibit experiments involving
insertion of new and supposedly better genetic traits. Anderson recoils at the
suggestion that this technology could be used for what is called "enhancement
engineering," making an individual taller or smarter or blonder. He thinks the
procedures now in place to limit which experiments can be done -- at least those
using Federal funds -- are sufficient to keep enhancement engineering at bay.

   Many critics, including some researchers, want to limit gene therapy even
more strictly, to the treatment only of the somatic (body) cells of individuals
currently suffering from genetic disease. They want to prohibit manipulations of
an individual's germ cells (eggs or sperm), including experiments designed to
prevent genetic disease in succeeding generations.

   Though germ-cell gene therapy might seem like the ultimate in preventive
medicine, critics focus on its darker side. It would permanently change the gene
pool of the species -- no doubt with some totally unpredictable results. "Are we
wise enough to ignore millions of years of evolution, which has brought us to
the point of having these recessive traits?" asks Jeremy Rifkin, president of
the Foundation on Economic Trends in Washington and the most visible critic of
gene therapy.

   By eliminating all problem genes, Rifkin says, scientists may unwittingly
eliminate some traits that are actually beneficial. The recessive gene for
sickle-cell anemia, for instance, is known to cause problems only for people who
inherit it from both parents. A single sickle-cell gene has a surprise benefit:
it conveys a resistance to malaria. Similar benefits may account for the
existence of other recessive genes as well, which to the untutored eye seem only
detrimental.

   A few critics think it's too early to begin gene therapy. Richard Mulligan of
the Whitehead Institute is the most prominent among them. Mulligan also sits on
the Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee, and is the only member to have voted
against Anderson's ADA deficiency experiment. He calls it "technically and
scientifically a bad idea."

   According to Mulligan, Anderson decided to transduce the patient's
lymphocytes instead of stem cells for primarily "tactical" reasons, because the
subcommittee had already approved a gene-transfer experiment using lymphocytes.
But, he says, the only real way to cure ADA deficiency is by transducing bone
marrow stem cells. By switching to lymphocytes, Mulligan says, Anderson
compromised his patient's chance of a cure. "There's no way they'll ever get the
results they say they'll get," he says.

   Anderson's supporters accuse Mulligan of professional jealousy. He works in
the same small field of research that Anderson does; maybe he wishes he had been
first. Mulligan laughs at the suggestion. "I don't feel as though I'm a
scientific competitor," he says. "The joke going around my laboratory is that
French isn't even the first to do gene therapy; Martin Cline was the first. To
be the second and to fail is no big deal. I'd rather be the fifth or sixth or
seventh, and be the first to succeed."

    CONTEMPORARY scientists not only have to deal with the gritty realities of
public debate and bureaucratic regulation, many of them are also getting
involved in a world that is even more alien to them than politics: the world of
business.

   Anderson is now negotiating that hazardous terrain. Two years ago, he entered
into a formal affiliation with a new biotechnology company, Genetic Therapy Inc.
-- familiarly known as G.T.I. -- that had been started by Wallace Steinberg, a
venture capitalist from Edison, N.J. This type of public-private partnership
between Government scientists and private corporations had been encouraged as
far back as 1986, when Congress passed the Technology Transfer Act to facilitate
the marketing of Government inventions. At the time, the feeling in Congress was
that many potentially useful discoveries were languishing in Government labs
because no one could make a profit from a Government-held patent. Without a
profit motive, what company would be willing to invest the millions usually
required to bring a new invention to the marketplace?

   The solution was the CRADA (an acronym for Cooperative Research and
Development Agreement), which allows companies to hold licensing rights to
patents held by Government agencies. Anderson was the first scientist at the
National Institutes of Health to have a major CRADA with a private company; now,
more than 150 others do as well.

   Genetic Therapy has its headquarters 15 minutes from Bethesda, in a newly
remodeled building with spacious laboratories housing 35 scientists. Anderson
spends every Wednesday there, meeting with G.T.I. scientists, executives and
board members. Someday this affiliation could make him, if not a rich man, at
least a more financially secure one. Government regulations prohibit him from
owning stock in the company, or from serving as a paid consultant or a corporate
officer. But under the CRADA, Anderson can receive 15 percent of the royalties
on patents he co-owns with Genetic Therapy, up to $100,000 a year.

   Such financial payoffs are all far in the future, though. To date, the
company has provided Anderson with little more than chocolate doughnuts and tea
for his Wednesday meetings. (Recently Anderson decided even that looked bad, and
started paying, retroactively, for his own doughnuts.) In November, the company
wrote its first check to the Government under the CRADA agreement, in the amount
of $10,000 for exclusive licensing rights on three patents the company will
co-own with the National Institutes of Health. Anderson's share on that payment
came to about $400.

   The company's value will no doubt increase enormously if it can meet the next
challenge to gene therapy: building a better vector. G.T.I. scientists are now
working to develop an injectable viral vector, a sort of "smart bomb" for gene
delivery that heads straight to the spot on the chromosome where the new gene
belongs.

   "When you have to remove cells and treat them in the lab and return them to
the patient," Anderson says, "you can only do gene therapy at a handful of
medical centers. The ideal will be when a nurse can grab a syringe down from the
shelf and inject genes into whoever needs them."

   Once an injectable vector is perfected, says Anderson, the possibilities for
gene therapy expand. He and other molecular geneticists are conducting
experiments that would broaden its use beyond the treatment of genetic diseases
to the treatment of some of the nation's leading killers. Among them:

    Cancer -- Anderson envisions a time when scientists will use a "suicide
gene" to make cancer cells more responsive to treatment. If a gene for drug
sensitivity can be inserted into tumor cells, then exposure to that drug may
cause the gene-engineered cells selectively to self-destruct.

    Cardiovascular disease -- Current surgical treatment of blocked blood
vessels may involve insertion of a tiny stent, a piece of metal that physically
holds the vessel open. An alternative treatment is bypass surgery, in which a
new vessel, known as a vascular graft, is inserted to replace a clogged one. But
in a significant number of both these implants, blood clots eventually develop.
Scientists in Anderson's lab are trying to coat both types of implants with
cells containing the gene for TPA, a natural clot dissolver, to avoid this
complication of surgery.

    High cholesterol -- Anderson's colleagues are also trying to develop
neo-organs, structures made of artificial material that can receive
gene-engineered cells. Among the most promising are neo-organs placed near the
liver, into which are inserted liver cells containing a gene that attracts
cholesterol. Connected to the liver by a network of new blood vessels, this
neo-organ could pull excess cholesterol from the bloodstream -- where it does
its cardiovascular damage -- into the liver for excretion.

    AIDS -- Anderson is collaborating with Dr. Robert C. Gallo of the National
Cancer Institute to treat AIDS patients with the gene for soluble CD4, a protein
that lies on the surface of the lymphocytes. The AIDS virus ordinarily attaches
to the CD4 protein as a first step in its destruction of the immune system
cells. If enough mock CD4 can be kept circulating in the bloodstream, these
decoys may snare the AIDS virus and keep it from getting to the lymphocytes at
all.

   It is too early to tell whether the first gene therapy patient is "cured."
Indeed, "cure" isn't even the goal of gene therapy for this child, or for the
other ADA deficiency patient. At best, Anderson expects to put them on the
schedule of gene-boosted infusions every few months. Since the experiments
began, both children have continued to receive standard care for ADA deficiency:
weekly injections of ADA itself, which generally keeps the immune system
functioning at about half its normal level. Ultimately, if all goes well, the
girls will be able to rely on gene therapy alone and eliminate the weekly shots.

   The first patient's father says she's smiling more. This winter, her whole
family came down with the flu -- and she was the first to recover. Immune
function test results are so encouraging that Anderson believes all these
improvements can be traced to the gene therapy. "She has developed antibodies
she never had before," Anderson says. "She now has normal, functioning immune
cells -- and they are producing human ADA." The number of such cells in the
child's bloodstream is far greater than the number of gene-corrected cells she
has been given in the last six months. In other words, the ADA-boosted
lymphocytes are producing more lymphocytes, and they are functioning normally.

   In the spring, Anderson's team will test the child's immune function by
giving her some ordinary vaccinations. She has received vaccines before, but her
immune system has failed to respond. As for the two cancer patients, they are
receiving only very low doses of TNF-producing cells, which are increased
incrementally in their twice-weekly infusions. Anderson had not expected to see
any improvement yet, and he has not.

    ON THE WALL IN FRENCH ANDERSON's all-purpose meeting room, crammed with a
photocopier, fax, computer, coffee maker, journal collection and conference
table, is a framed quotation of some lines from "Hamlet":

Diseases desperate grown
 By desperate appliance are reliev'd,
 Or not at all.

   The definition of "desperate" is a matter of opinion. One thing is sure:
Anderson has proved himself willing to devote every waking hour to figuring out
how to reverse genetic disease, no matter how "desperate" it seems.

   "Should we have waited?" he asks rhetorically about his ADA deficiency
experiment. He says it will be years before people can say, in hindsight,
whether this was the right time or the wrong time to begin. "If Sept. 14 marks
the beginning of successful gene therapy treatments, then we were right not to
delay. If patients are harmed and a public backlash occurs, then we were wrong.
I believe that we were right."

CORRECTION-DATE: March 31, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

   An article in The Times Magazine today about Dr. W. French Anderson, a
genetic surgeon, misstates the date of the Olympics in Seoul, South Korea. They
were held in 1988.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. W. French Anderson and his office gallery of former
laboratory aides. (pg. 30); French Anderson and his wife, Kathryn, in a
laboratory at N.I.H., one of Anderson's passions outside of science is Tae Kwon
Do. (pg. 32); Dr. R. Michael Blaese, left, and Anderson have been close
collaborators in the gene therapy research. (pg. 34)(Photographs by Paul Fetters
for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1991


                             1659 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 March 31, 1991, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: VIRUS IS USED TO CARRY GENE IN THERAPY

BODY:


   BETHESDA, Md. - Doctors take one of the smallest, infectious organisms - a
virus - and turn it into a harmless ''dump truck'' to carry a potentially
life-saving gene into fatally ill patients.  That's a shorthand way of
explaining the gene therapy experiment being conducted at the National
Institutes of Health.  The patient is a 4-year-old girl who is afflicted with an
invariably fatal illness called adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA). She lacks
a gene that makes the enzyme needed to keep her immune system working.  It is
the lowly virus that does the most elegant job of all in getting her the gene
she needs. The virus literally carries the missing genes into the millions of
special cells that lack them.  In the first step of her treatment, a few of her
white blood cells - called T cells - are removed from her bloodstream. None of
them carry the gene she needs to be healthy.  The first critical work is to use
hormones to help these cells multiply in large enough amounts to treat her. Once
an adequate batch of cells has been grown, the viruses carrying the missing
genes are added to the cell cultures.  These viruses are different from those
that cause colds and flu. They have undergone ''gene-splicing,'' or genetic
engineering that makes them serve as homes for the human gene.  Once the virus
is added to the cultures of white blood cells, it heads straight for a cell's
nucleus and nestles among the genes there. The gene the virus carries can
program the cell to make the enzyme that the child lacks. It seems to be doing
just that so far.  ''And there have been absolutely no untoward effects,'' says
her doctor, R.  Michael Blaese.  The virus' infective nature caused apprehension
when the gene therapy was announced last year. Some critics worried that the
virus might have harmful side effects, including the possibility that it might
interfere with the workings of other genes in a patient's cells.  Scientists say
these fears are unfounded. As Dr. William Paulvino of the National Institutes of
Health put it, ''The virus has been stripped of its innards and made into a
'dump truck' to help only in gene therapy.'' The virus is incapable of
reproducing itself, he said.  Blaese, the girl's doctor, doubts problems will
occur.  ''We used this technique on lots and lots of animals, including monkeys,
and we found no realistic problems as a consequence of the gene therapy
procedure,'' he says.  - Roger Signor

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993


                             1660 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 March 31, 1991, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 757 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY: TOT IS GIVEN HOPE

BYLINE: Roger Signor Post-Dispatch Science-Medicine Editor 1991, St. Louis
Post-Dispatch

BODY:


   BETHESDA, Md. - The medical world waits as a 4-year-old girl, name
undisclosed, stoically endures lengthy transfusions and tests in the first
authorized experiment with ''gene therapy.'' The youngster suffers from
adenosine deaminase deficiency, a hereditary ailment that keeps the body's
immune system from functioning and is usually fatal.  But this isn't a story
about new hope just for sufferers of adenosine deaminase deficiency, of which
there are relatively few. If the gene therapy admi nistered by Dr. R. Michael
Blaese saves the girl, variations of the treatment could be made available to
people with AIDS and many forms of cancer.  Experts say such an achievement
would be as revolutionary as the advent of antibiotics or the introduction of
organ transplants.  And so far, says Blaese, the treatment is working. Blaese,
the principal investigator in the gene therapy experiment, provided a progress
report recently in an exclusive interview. He and a team of researchers are
conducting the therapy at the Clinical Research Center of the National
Institutes of Health.  Blaese said the first evidence that the treatment might
be working surfaced with tests that showed that the girl had developed normal
levels of proteins formed in reaction to bacteria in her bowel. In addition,
she's been nearly infection-free this winter.  She began the first of five
infusions of gene-altered cells six months ago.  Her treatment will take about
another year, Blaese said.  Although increasingly optimistic, the doctors are
proceeding cautiously.  They want the first tests of gene therapy to be
definitive, so they're beginning it with children who have a fatal disease that
involves only one gene and in which the benefits of gene therapy can be clearly
demonstrated. Blaese's patient is among 10 children who are born each year in
the United States without the gene that makes an enzyme called adenosine
deaminase (ADA), Blaese said.  A cold virus or even a benign germ could kill the
girl because she lacks one gene that would give her normal immunity. Doctors are
hoping to save the child by infusing her with her own cells that carry a
genetically engineered version of her missing gene.  ''ADA-deficient'' children
are the first to get the gene therapy because their ailment is in some ways a
simple one. The children lack one gene and that makes them ill. The genes they
receive intravenously provide them with the one substance - an enzyme - they
need to get well. Other patients who may get experimental gene therapy will have
many factors that contribute to their illnesses.  But despite the little girl's
early progress, Blaese cautions that there's a long road ahead before he and his
colleagues can say gene therapy is an unqualified success.  Blaese reports other
additional heartening signs of progress: ''Before treatment, less than one
percent of her white blood cells were making ADA enzyme, but now blood tests
show that her ADA-production is at about 75 to 80 percent of normal.'' The
child's mother told Blaese: ''She's never had a better winter than this one.''
In other years, she was frequently treated aggressively with antibiotics to
fight off minor infections.  Blaese was so encouraged by the girl's progress
that in January, he began treating a 9-year-old girl with the same genetic
defect. He said it is too early after the 9-year-old's first cell infusion to
draw any conclusions.  For those suffering from ADA deficiency, AIDS and other
diseases related to the immune system, the investigative work cannot proceed
fast enough. But the Food and Drug Administraton is taking a careful approach as
this is the first time gene therapy has been tried on humans. The FDA requires
that the first doses of altered genes be given in low amounts, permitting higher
doses gradually.  Given such restrictions, Blaese admits that he is surprised to
see such promising results. Each phase of treatment will last about six months.
At the end of each period, exhaustive tests will measure every aspect of the
girl's immune system, Blaese said. Depending on those results, doctors will
decide how much to increase the amount of gene-corrected cells in her infusions.
Currently about 20 to 30 percent of the infused cells contain the new genes, he
said.  Even if the higher doses yield a normal immune response, Blaese said,
''it's unlikely there will be a cure in the sense that the immune system will
function fully without some help. The procedure will have to be repeated
throughout the patient's lifetime.''

GRAPHIC: Photo Graphic; PHOTO...Dr. R. Michael Blaese at the Clinical Research
Center of the National Institutes of Health. (This photo appeared in the 3*
Edition.) TABLE/CHART/SKETCH by Chuck Groth/Post-Dispatch...Gene Therapy For
Child...Source: National Institutes of Health.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993


                             1661 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    MARCH 27, 1991, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2; BUSINESS BRIEFS

LENGTH: 854 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFS

BODY:

   AT&T TIGHTENS TERMS ON CARD

   AT&T said yesterday that new applicants for its Universal Card, a combination
credit card and a telephone charge card, would receive less generous terms than
those who had signed up since the card was introduced a year ago. Starting
today, new applicants will be charged an annual fee of $ 20. Those who had
signed up in the first year and use the card at least once a year pay no fees.
New customers will not receive the 10 percent discount on long-distance calls
that existing card holders receive when charging calls on the Universal Card.
And new applicants will pay an interest rate that will be one percentage point
higher than the variable rate, currently 18.9 percent, that is charged to the
initial customers.

   JAPAN HOPES TO CALM

   ANGER OVER RICE BAN

   Government officials will visit the United States this week to try to soothe
American anger over the Japanese ban on rice imports. Agriculture Ministry
officials said that Japanese representatives would meet in Washington with
officials of the U.S. government and U.S. agriculture industry. The dispute over
Japan's rice policy flared two weeks ago when the government pressured U.S. rice
growers to stop displaying rice samples at an international food fair in Tokyo.
U.S. media reports said members of the USA Rice Council, an industry
organization, had been threatened with arrest, but Agriculture Ministry
officials deny any such threat was made.

   JUDGE OKS SETTLEMENT

   OF BOESKY LAWSUITS

   A federal judge approved a $ 46.8 million settlement of lawsuits against Ivan
Boesky to repay investors who were cheated by the fallen speculator's securities
fraud. The money is likely to be spread among thousands of investors with claims
against Boesky, who was at the center of Wall Street's most sensational insider
trading scandal. Stanley Nemser, attorney for the investors, said some 80,000
investors had been notified of the settlement, but it's unclear how many will
have valid claims. The bulk of the money comes from a fund set up by the
Securities and Exchange Commission as part of Boesky's plea agreement.

   SOMATIX THERAPY

   NAMES NEW CHAIRMAN

   Somatix Therapy Corp., an Alameda-based gene-therapy company, named David
Carter to the post of chairman, which had been vacant. Carter is a member of the
company's board and president of Northfield Laboratories, an Evanston,
Ill.-based biotechnology company. Somatix Therapy was recently formed by the
merger of Hana Biologics Inc. and Somatix Corp. The company also said that Eric
Tomlinson, who had served as chief executive officer and a director of Somatix
Corp. before the merger, has resigned. Tomlinson was unable to reach an
employment agreement with the company, Somatix Therapy said. Tomlinson could not
be reached for comment.

   SILICONIX TO LAY OFF

   UP TO 290 IN WALES

   Siliconix, a Santa Clara-based semiconductor maker, said that up to 290
workers will lose their jobs as a result of the company's decision to close a
22-year-old plant in Swansea, Wales. The company attributed the closing to its
need to trim operating costs. Siliconix said that a small number of employees
from Swansea may transfer to other operations in England and Santa Clara.
Siliconix, which emerged from Chapter 11 reorganization proceedings in December,
had 1,793 employees before the move. It lost $ 35 million on sales of $ 131.2
million last year.

   IN OTHER NEWS

   * Helian Health Group Inc., a Monterey health-care company, said it has
finalized an agreement with 70 physician partners to develop the Northridge
Surgery Center near Los Angeles. Helian will own 39.3 percent of the limited
partnership and manage it.

   * Failure Group Inc., a Menlo Park-based accident-analysis consulting firm,
posted a net profit of $ 1.5 million (19 cents per share) for its fiscal third
quarter ended March 1, compared with a profit of $ 537 million (9 cents) for the
year-earlier quarter. Revenues rose to $ 16.9 million from $ 14.2 million.

   * HK Microwave Inc., a privately held maker of microwave components in Santa
Clara, has been acquired by Dynatech Corp., a diversified electronics company in
Burlington, Mass. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.

   * Monitek Technologies Inc., a Hayward-based instruments supplier, said that
Kenneth Anderson has resigned as president and chief executive officer. Chairman
Morton Cohen will serve as CEO.

   * Directors of San Diego Gas & Electric Co.  approved a one-year extension of
the utility's merger agreement with Southern California Edison, an SDG&E
spokesman said. The extension expires March 31, 1992. It requires Edison to
reimburse SDG&E $ 15 million for merger-related expenses it has incurred if the
deal is not completed unless SDG&E defaults on the agreement.

   * Sybase Inc., an Emeryville-based supplier of database software, has
acquired Deft Inc., a Toronto-based supplier of engineering software. Terms of
the deal were not disclosed.

   * Flextronics Inc., a Fremont-based electronics company, said that its stock
has been dropped from the NASDAQ listings because of its failure to meet certain
capital and surplus requirements.


                             1662 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                    March 27, 1991, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; HEALTH FITNESS; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 3728 words

HEADLINE: Back in control . . .

BYLINE: JIM MELVIN; JEANNE MALGREN; BARBARA HIJEK

BODY:


   Rick Weil of Seminole, a former world bench-press champion, could be used as
a microcosmic example of how attitudes toward exercise and fitness have changed
in the 1990s.

    During the early- and mid-1980s, Weil was able to bench-press as much as 600
pounds while weighing well under 200 pounds. In fact, he was the first man in
the history of competition to push triple bodyweight from his chest to straight
arms' length, lifting 551 pounds while weighing 181. He set several world
records, enjoyed the fame of a champion and made lots of money.

    But Weil paid a price. He began to lose control of his emotions and of his
life. He alienated family and friends. There was something terribly wrong.

    From 1982-86, Weil was an abuser of steroids, using and selling huge amounts
of the drugs. They affected his body and his mind; he was erratic, angry and
forgetful. He was addicted and it was killing him.

     "My doctor said, "You've got to stop; you're going to die,' ' says Weil,
32, who was twice divorced during the time he used steroids. "I was ready to
have a stroke or a heart attack or who knows? So I quit."

    That was in November 1986, and Weil has been recovering ever since. He no
longer makes the big money from competitions and drug sales and he no longer
lives a glamorous lifestyle, but what he accomplishes now comes drug-free. He is
a psychiatric counselor at Medfield Hospital in Largo, and he has plans one day
to complete his medical degree in psychiatry.

    He still works out and retains dreams of setting more world records in the
bench press, but he relies on healthful eating, supplementation and a positive
mental approach for his strength.

    "I'm sticking my neck out by admitting to the world that here's how I used
to do it (by using steroids)," says Weil, who has written two books, including
the just-released Right Brain Bench Press: The Forgotten Ingredient. "But goals
can still be accomplished (without steroids), and even better, you'll end up
healthy."

     Exercise and fitness have gone through similar, if not as dramatic,
transitions. The days of "high-intensity" and "no pain, no gain" are fading.
Moderation and common sense are in vogue. Even in the ultra-competitive world of
power-lifting, steroid use appears on the verge of decline.

    Weil can tell you steroids aren't worth it, and he can tell you he's a
better person for admitting it.
 A new "movement'


   You pick up a shovel, stab it into the earth, jam it in deep with your foot.
You fling a load of soil and grass into a wheelbarrow. You do it again and again
until you clear a nice, crumbly patch. You get on your hands and knees and plant
some seeds. You pound in some stakes, string off the area and rake up the
debris. You walk in the house, clean your fingernails and take a shower.

  What have you just done? Well, besides start a garden, you've exercised 1990s
style.

  In fact, the word "exercise" should be replaced with "movement," says Kathy
Smith of Los Angeles, who is the fitness correspondent for the Today show.

  The University of Louisville's Bryant Stamford agrees: "The new message is
that all physical activity is beneficial and that once people integrate that
message into their lives, they're naturally going to gravitate to becoming more
healthy," says Stamford, author of Fitness Without Exercise. "I think that the
no-pain, no-gain era is long gone.

     "People will seek out activities such as climbing stairs and other simple
ways to burn calories. A lot more people will walk, not speed-walking or great
distances, but just casual walks."
 Making a splash


    We all know how popular walking has become. More than 30-million Americans
walk for exercise at least twice a week. But what else is big?

    Swimming and water aerobics are both on the rise. Exercising in water gives
you a great workout in a short period of time with little risk of injury.

  "Thirty minutes in a pool are equal to 45 minutes on dry land," says exercise
physiologist Glenn McWaters, who is president of Bioenergetics Inc. in Pelham,
Ala.

  "You burn more calories faster because the increased resistance of the water
increases the intensity of the workout without risk of injury. And you don't
wake up the next day with sore muscles."

  Fitness specialist Debra Sepsi holds water aerobics workouts at the Long
Center in Clearwater. Her co-ed, hour-long classes are designed to tone and
build muscle, increase cardiovascular fitness and burn calories.

  "You won't even get your hair wet," says Sepsi, who holds morning and
lunchtime classes as well as working with individual clients (call 393-1141 for
information).

  "But it's a full-body workout. You'll work all the major muscle groups, and
it's also a good beginning for people who'd like to learn how to swim." Sepsi's
classes are performed in 4-4 feet of 82-degree water and are effective for
children, senior citizens and everyone in between, she says.

     Other popular exercise routines include aerobics and weight lifting. And,
of course, sports such as tennis, basketball, softball and golf never seem to
lose much ground.
 A balanced approach


   Thin is in? Not for the next few years, at least. Physiatrist David Baras,
the medical director of the Bayfront Rehabilitation Center in St. Petersburg,
says that fitness will be the new craze of the '90s and that being a few pounds
overweight will no longer be undesirable.

    "What is going to happen is that we will accept a certain amount of
overweight," says Baras. "I think we're going to get away from being lean and
mean to being in good health. I would say if someone is 15-20 pounds overweight,
it will probably be accepted.

     "There's a difference between health and fitness. A doctor will examine
your heart and lungs and say that you're in good health.  But the same doctor
will ask you to run up a flight of stairs and you'll be out of breath. Most
people are in good health but are in poor fitness. The way I see it, people will
be in good health, a little overweight, but the focus will be on good fitness
increased cardiovascular, overall flexibility and endurance."

     "We're seeing a backlash in the physique department," says Louisville's
Stamford. "The whole notion of looking like Twiggy is no longer seen as healthy.
Having some extra fat can be just fine."

     "In the future, we will focus more on balance," says Baras.  "People will
exercise, have a proper food intake, reduce stress levels and work on relaxation
techniques. We won't have the big extremes anymore."
 Nutritional habits


   According to Liz Marr Diemand, there are three major demographic forces that
will shape America's nutritional habits in the '90s: 1) our aging population; 2)
changes in our family structure; and 3) an increase in the ethnic population.

    "By the year 2000, the average age in America will be 36," says Diemand, a
dietitian for the American Dietetic Association in Denver, "and the over-65 age
group is going to exceed the number of teen-agers in the United States."

    Diemand says that older people are more concerned with good nutrition and
will put an increased demand on producers to supply healthful foods.

    "Also, more families are being headed up by single parents, and there are
more families with dual incomes," says Diemand.  "Probably the single greatest
driving force in terms of change is the working woman. The number of working
women in the United States is already more than 50-million, and in 10 years 84
percent of women will be working outside of their homes.

      "Because of this, men and teen-agers are taking more responsibility for
food shopping and preparation. Some analysts indicate that as much as 30 percent
of food shopping done today is done by teen-agers. Younger children are also
becoming more responsible for making their own dinners children between the ages
of 6 and 11. All this influences the way food is and will be marketed. More
foods are going to be directly marketed toward children, in terms of taste and
ease of preparation."


    Deimand also foresees something she calls "fusion cooking," which combines
ethnic foods such as "Chinese and Italian, for example. I even read about a new
food called "burritskis,' which are burritos stuffed with Polish sausage."

     Deimand says that a healthy attitude will extend as far as the major
fast-food chains.    "We are already seeing changes with McDonald's and Burger
King adding a variety of different products that are lower in fat. But people
still need to learn to choose correctly. Good nutrition can still taste good.
That's something that we steered away from in the 1980s. If something doesn't
taste good, people aren't going to eat it. Good nutrition and good taste can be
found on the same plate."
 Oh, my aching ...


   The average American has some health problem such as a headache, constipation
or the sniffles every three days.
 In a zone of his own


   In a coming issue of Men's Health, major-league pitcher Nolan Ryan shares
some of his secrets for his longevity. Ryan, 44, began his career in the '60s.

     Ryan on avoiding injuries: "I don't play with pain. I learned that when I
was just breaking in with the New York Mets. Pain is a sign of an injury in the
making. You should never push yourself to the point of pain. If something hurts,
just stop."

     Ryan on stamina: "When I was younger, I noticed that many older players
deteriorated and fell out of shape, especially during the winter. That's why in
1972, I built my own workout facility over my barn and started lifting weights.
It has enabled me to prevent serious injuries and gives me more stamina for a
162-game baseball season."

     Ryan on diet: "I believe in moderation. For breakfast, usually a whole
grain cereal with whatever fruit is in season. For lunch and dinner on days when
I pitch, lots of carbohydrates such as pasta, bread, nuts, etc. The day after I
pitch, I try proteins like grilled chicken, steak or fish."
 Break out the sweats


   Experts say it's better to have exercised and stopped than never to have
exercised at all as long as you start up again.
 At a loss for cures


     One physical problem that just won't seem to go away is baldness.  The
elusive, all-encompassing cure for it just hasn't happened, and it's driving a
lot of men (and a small percentage of women) crazy.

    But there is some hope on the horizon as the '90s take shape. A prescription
drug called Rogaine, approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 1988,
has shown some promising results, especially for men in the early stages of hair
loss.

     Rogaine, a trade name for minoxidil, was first used to treat high blood
pressure, but when patients who took it in pill form experienced hair growth,
well you can guess the rest.

     It's not cheap $ 40 to $ 60 for a bottle that lasts four to eight weeks.
And many insurance programs don't cover it.

    Biochemists are probing the fine structures of hair and are gaining new
knowledge on hair growth that may someday show solid results.  Also, new drugs
are on the horizon, according to some reports, that show results similar to
Rogaine. And some men have been pleased with the results of hair implants, which
appear to be rising in popularity and success.
 Keep it up, keep it strong


   It's possible to maintain fit, toned muscle throughout your life, if you
continue to use it. While muscle strength and endurance decrease as you get
older, researchers now know this is due in part to inactivity.
 Focusing on prevention
  With Americans spending $ 540-billion a year for health care more than any
other nation the move in the United States is toward self care. People are
diagnosing and treating their health problems at home.

    It has gone far beyond just taking an aspirin for a headache and now
includes self-monitoring of chronic conditions such as arthritis and diabetes.

    "Self care, wellness and prevention are all tied in together and can go a
long way toward reducing health-care costs," Dr. William Jacott of Minneapolis
told USA Today.

    "People will focus more on prevention by following healthy diets and by
exercising," says Dr. Steven Kushner of Largo, a former health and nutrition
adviser to President George Bush. "That's not to say that you should never see a
doctor. When you do get sick, you need a doctor. But if you can catch one cold
each year instead of six, that's great. More and more, people in the future will
try to treat themselves."

    One evidence of this trend is a boom in home-testing kits, the sales of
which increased faster than any other drug products in the mid-1980s. These
at-home health tests can detect pregnancy; predict ovulation for couples seeking
to increase odds of conception; allow diabetics to monitor glucose levels;
detect blood in the feces as a possible sign of colon cancer; and detect urinary
tract infections.
 To supplement ... or not


   We all know that steroids build muscles; we all know that they do terrible
things to your health; we all know that you shouldn't take them. But what about
using supplements to increase size and strength? Such things as amino acids,
super vitamins, chromium, weight-on milkshakes and male hormone enhancers have
flooded the fitness market with claims ranging from the conservative to the
outlandish. So, what's the deal? Should we take supplements?  Should we even
take simple vitamins? Here's what some experts have to say:

    "Antioxidant supplements will become more and more popular.  These help to
protect your body from the ill effects of environmental toxins such as
pollution, radiation and cigarette smoke. Antioxidants help prevent these toxins
from destroying healthy cells. And foods high in antioxidants such as carrots,
green leafy vegetables, etc., should be eaten regularly." Dr. Steven Kushner,
nutritional expert, Largo.

      "If a person is eating a balanced diet, supplements shouldn't be
necessary. In the long run, they're not a good substitute for a healthy diet."
Marlene Kramer, registered dietitian, Citrus Memorial Hospital.

    "My feeling is that if a person is going to take a supplement, they need to
take one that is available to the cell and used by the cell.  Otherwise, they
are in fact a waste of money. The "bioavailability' of a supplement is very
important. Some specific supplements such as chromium picolinate or magnesium
aspartate have been tested and shown to be beneficial. But there certainly are
some supplements that have little effect." Dr. Gary Evans, nutritional
biochemist, Bemidji, Minn.

    "If you feel that you want to take a supplement such as an amino acid, for
example, then check the label and make an educated decision on whether or not
you really need it. A half cup of tuna will give you 1,526 milligrams of lysine.
The food you're eating may supply more of the supplement you're after than the
supplement itself." Shirley Raby, senior public health nutritionist, Pasco
County Health Department.
 When eating for two


   What about pregnant women? Should they take multivitamins?

    Several months ago, the National Academy of Sciences an 11-member panel of
medical and nutrition experts recommended that pregnant women should avoid
multivitamins and instead get the extra nutrients from a balanced diet. The
panel said that a carefully planned diet will achieve adequate nourishment for
mother and fetus.

    Dr. Ronald Chez of Tampa General Hospital and the University of South
Florida was a member of the academy panel. He says that some women with medical
problems or complications may need to take some form of supplement but that
healthy women in general do not. In fact, some vitamins in large doses can even
be dangerous.

    "Fat soluble vitamins accumulate and therefore should be taken only in
proper doses and never taken in megadoses," says Chez, who is professor of
obstetrics and gynecology at USF. "The fact that a little vitamins is good
doesn't mean that a lot of vitamins is better.  For normal, healthy women,
vitamin supplements are not necessary or required. With regards to minerals, we
recommend prophylactic (preventive) use of iron in small doses. We urge women to
gain an appropriate amount of weight during pregnancy and in so doing eat a
balanced diet with the appropriate food groups; that will take care of the
vitamin problem."
 The need for human touch
 Touch is perhaps the first mode of communication we learn as babies. But by
adulthood, many of us are speaking another language: stress. We notice the
telltale symptoms the aches and pains, the fatigue but we're simply too busy to
take care of ourselves. We ignore the basic human need for physical contact.

    Megatrends author John Naisbitt has predicted that "the more high technology
around us, the more the need for human touch." As usual, Naisbitt is on to
something. As natural health care becomes more acceptable, plenty of folks are
now seeking relief through massage therapy everyone from athletes to performing
artists to stressed-out CEOs.

    In the past decade, the demand for hands-on therapists has grown steadily.
The American Massage Therapy Association now claims almost 12,000 members.
Several states, Florida among them, now have licensure requirements for massage
therapists. Accredited massage schools are springing up all over the country.

 The systematic stroking and manipulation of the soft tissues does more than
just relax the muscles. Massage offers a wide range of temporary and long-range
health benefits: increased blood r r circulation and lymph drainage, greater
joint flexibility, reduced blood pressure, improved posture, interruption of
chronic pain patterns, faster healing time from muscle spasms and sprains,
strengthened immune system. Studies show that massage also stimulates the
release of endorphins, the body's natural pain killers.

     As a pain and stress reliever, chiropractic is also growing in popularity.
Dr. Robert Sheely of the Ohio State Chiropractic Association says it is the
fastest growing health-care profession, and some research has supported claims
that chiropractic is more effective than hospital outpatient management in the
treatment and relief of low back pain.

    The ancient art of acupuncture has also seen increases in popularity in the
United States, as well as disciplines such as yoga and meditation.
 For the right price . . .


    According to cosmetic surgeons, the perfect female face of the '90s combines
Paulina Porizkova's eyes, Jaclyn Smith's nose, Cher's cheekbones and Kim
Basinger's lips: large, hooded eyes, prominent cheekbones, a narrow nose and
pouty lips.

    Surgeons also say that the specific aspects of the perfect face are
relatively easy to attain with today's improved technologies.  Though there are
drawbacks:

    "When they bring in pictures of Paulina or Jaclyn Smith, I'm frank," Dr.
Walter Dishell of UCLA recently told the Los Angeles Times. "I tell them they've
brought in pictures of two of the most beautiful women in the world and that I
can only work with what they've got to begin with. That sobers them."

    Another fashionable trend in cosmetic surgery is a complete body overhaul.
For $ 25,000 or so, a person can undergo a face lift, tummy and buttocks lifts
and breast enlargement all in one fell swoop.

    "The patient only has to endure the stitches and bandages and remain out of
the public eye one time," Beverly Hills plastic surgeon Dr. John Grossman told
Gannett News Service.

    Plastic surgery, once reserved exclusively for the rich, has reached down
into the middle class. Up to 1.5-million cosmetic surgeries are performed each
year.
 The high cost of success


       The good news is that cures for everything from diabetes to chronic
ulcers to cancer may soon be within reach. Advances in human gene therapy, for
instance, promise that one day painless and simple treatments might wipe out
once-chronic illnesses with a single shot. Science is certainly on the move.

    So now you're asking: What possible bad news could come out of this? Well,
let's talk money/profits.

    "The real issue for all these technologies is, how are we going to pay for
them?" San Francisco accountant G. Steven Burrill told the Los Angeles Times.
"Where the biotech and pharmaceutical industries are naive is that they haven't
adequately thought out the pricing dynamics of the 1990s."

    For instance, anti-ulcer drugs Tagamet and Zantac are two of the most
profitable medicines in history, making millions of dollars.  Suppose that an
ulcer vaccine was created that would cost just pennies to make and that one shot
would keep a person from ever developing ulcers. What would happen to the
Tagamet/Zantac profits? And how much would drug companies charge for the single
shot of the new cure? A hundred? A thousand? Ten thousand dollars?

    The result may worsen in the health industry what is already a big problem
for consumers: Certain drugs may cost absurdly more to purchase than to
manufacture.
 Surprising side effects


    Two Ohio State University researchers reported last July that women who
undergo liposuction on their hips, thighs and/or stomachs may end up with bigger
breasts. Sixteen of 30 patients studied reported larger breasts, with five
increasing a full cup size.  According to Dwight Scarborough and Emil Bisaccis,
the phenomenon may be the body's way of compensating for lost reserves of fat.

    "There may be a metabolic shift of sorts that deflects fatty lipids to
different areas of the body" after fat is removed by suction, Scarborough told
the Washington Post.
 Research by Times librarian Barbara Hijek and information from Times wire
services were used in this report. Information was also provided by Staff Writer
Jeanne Malmgren.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, JOE WALLES, (2); COLOR PHOTO, STEVE HASEL; COLOR PHOTO;
COLOR DRAWING; COLOR DRAWING, ROSSIE NEWSON; Rick Weil; A man receiving a
massage; A water aerobics class; Nolan Ryan; Illustrates a man with back pain;
Illustrates what cosmetic surgeons consider to be the perfect female face

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992


                             1663 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      March 15, 1991, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 37; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 762 words

HEADLINE: GENE LINKED TO COLON CANCER IDENTIFIED;
MEDICINE: THE DISCOVERY OPENS THE WAY TO RECOGNIZE HIGH-RISK INDIVIDUALS AND
COULD LEAD TO NEW THERAPIES FOR THE DISEASE.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   A multinational team of researchers has discovered a gene that plays a key
role in the development of colon cancer, opening the way for tests to identify
high-risk individuals and for early detection of the disease.

   The discovery, reported today in the journal Science, may also lead to the
development of new therapies for colon cancer, which is the second most common
form of cancer in the United States. Last year, it struck 155,000 people and
killed 61,000.

   "That's a long-sought gene because it seems to play a role in (two different
types of colon cancer)," said oncologist J. Michael Bishop of UC San Francisco.
"If they've got it, that's quite important."

   "This is a very significant finding," added molecular biologist Robert
Weinberg of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. "This could represent the
first entree we have into understanding why many families have high rates of
colon carcinoma."

   The discovery is the most recent development in the explosive growth of the
field of cancer genetics. To date, researchers have identified at least five
dozen genes that are linked to the onset of malignancy in humans.

   But the tentatively identified gene -- which is also involved in the
development of colon polyps -- is one of the most exciting so far, experts said,
because colon cancer is so widespread and because the gene plays such a key role
in the onset of the disease. Many believe that developing the ability to
overcome the effects of the new gene, called MCC (for Mutated in Colon Cancer),
could halt colon cancer in its tracks.

   The team found MCC on the so-called long arm of chromosome 5, one of the 46
chromosomes that carry the genetic blueprint of a human.

   Much research over the last decade had shown that a defect in a specific
region of chromosome 5 is found in at least 50% of colon tumors. MCC, the
researchers report today, is most likely the single gene within that region that
suffers the damage.

   Bert Vogelstein of Johns Hopkins University, one of the lead authors on
today's report and his colleagues believe MCC causes the inherited disease
familial adenomatous polyposis, commonly called FAP. Members of FAP families are
born with a genetic defect in MCC that produces large numbers of benign polyps,
or growths, in their colons.

   These polyps often become tumors, although FAP is believed to account for
only a small fraction of colon cancers, perhaps 1%. But previous research had
suggested that damage to the same gene occurs in the bulk of those colon cancers
that seemingly strike the population at random.

   Vogelstein and his colleagues had previously identified three other genes
that are associated with colon cancer. They now believe that all four must be
damaged for malignancy to develop, and that the damage follows a precise
pattern.

   Damage to one gene, most likely MCC, they believe, gives rise to a benign
polyp. Damage to a second gene causes the polyp to expand in size and become
more irregular in shape. Changes in the third gene in at least one of the polyp
cells causes the benign tumor to become malignant. And finally, mutations in the
fourth cause cells in the tumor to metastasize -- break off and invade other
sites in the body.

   "By having all the pieces of the puzzle at our disposal, we can begin to put
together how these genes are interacting with each other . . . and try to turn
on and turn off cancer," said molecular biologist Carl Barrett of the National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences in Research Triangle Park, N.C.

   MCC's position at the beginning of this cascade makes it a particularly
appropriate target for such attempts, researchers agree. One way to do that
would be by gene therapy, replacing the defective MCC with a healthy form of the
gene. So far, however, researchers have been able to successfully introduce new
genes only into isolated cells, not into cells inside an animal's body.

   In the short term, therefore, scientists think they might be more successful
by designing drugs that would replace the cellular function lost when MCC is
defective. Although the researchers have not identified the precise function of
MCC yet, its structure suggests that it is the blueprint for a protein that
carries growth signals within a cell. Researchers may be able to find a simple
chemical that can do the same thing.

   Vogelstein has also predicted that it might be possible to find cells in the
urine containing one or more of the genetic defects. Screening for such cells
might reveal the presence of a tumor much earlier than tests now in use.


                             1664 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           March 13, 1991, Wednesday

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE:  Med school without all the headaches GREGG JONES:Features
Transplants. Implants. Wonder drugs.

BODY:

   .  Transplants. Implants. Wonder drugs. Artificial organs. Gene therapy.

    Sound mind-boggling? Want to learn more?

    If so, the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Mini Medical School
could be just what the doctor ordered.

    Beginning March 21 at 7 p.m., UAMS will offer a series of free weekly
sessions for the medical layman.

    The sessions are aimed at giving Arkansans a peek into the world of medical
school, as well as a better understanding of the revolutionary changes that are
reshaping the world of medicine and health care, said Dr. Jay Menna, assistant
dean for medical education at the UAMS College of Medicine and one of the Mini
Medical School planners.

    " Our philosophy is we'd like to attract people who have an interest in
biomedical sciences and who have an interest in health issues," Menna said. "
There are no admission requirements for this other than an interest in
biomedical sciences.<"

    UAMS has assembled a cast of the Little Rock medical school's most popular
and engaging teachers to present a range of health-related topics. The Thursday
evening sessions will be modeled after medical school classes, although with a
lighter touch.

    " It's not going to be a situation where we talk down to people," Menna
said. " We're going to discuss issues with them using the proper phraseology and
terminology. But our philosophy is that the information is going to be presented
in a way that the general public can understand and appreciate.<"

    Session topics will include " Gross Anatomy: Exploring the Foundation of
Medicine," " Viruses: Bad News Wrapped in a Protein Coat," " Self Defense: Your
Immune System" and " Cancer: The Wayward Cell.<"

    The UAMS Mini Medical School is being modeled after a successful program
established by the University of Colorado medical school in Denver, Menna said.
The UAMS program was the brainchild of Dr. I. Dodd Wilson, dean of the College
of Medicine, and has been five months in the planning.

    " They've had an outstanding response in Colorado," Menna said. So good, in
fact, that Wilson and other UAMS officials felt a similar effort in Arkansas
would be a good way to "educate the public as to what goes on in medical school,
as to what issues are taught.<"

    The sessions will explain not only the latest advances in medical
technology, but also how these developments occur and how they will affect the
lives of Arkansans.

    UAMS is hoping to make Mini Medical School an ongoing program, Menna said.
The first term will concentrate on the basic sciences; a fall term will offer
classes in such clinical sciences as obstetrics and pediatrics.

    The sessions, on the campus at 4301 W. Markham, are scheduled to last from 7
to 9 p.m., and will include a question-and-answer period and refreshments.
Medical school students will circulate among their Mini Medical School
counterparts, Menna said. Students who complete the program will receive an
honorary certificate of graduation.

    Enrollment in the Mini Medical School will be limited, on a first-come,
first-served basis, Menna said. Anyone interested should call 686-5261.<

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1996


                             1665 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 11, 1991, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: Technology fuels health-care inflation

BYLINE: Kevin Anderson

BODY:

    Every aspect of our health -care system seems designed to lock in high
inflation. But what are the main engines driving costs? Which features
contribute most to keeping health -care inflation a consistent 4 to 5 percentage
points above general inflation? USA TODAY asked a number of health economists
and policy experts. Their consensus:

   Technology: There's widespread agreement that technology is the largest
engine of health -care inflation. We spend vastly more on health care simply
because we have vastly more things to spend it on. Treatments and procedures
developed just since 1975 - total body scanners, transplants, implants, less-
invasive surgery, artificial enzymes, genetically engineered drugs - now account
for more than a third of the estimated $ 275 billion we'll spend on hospital
care this year and most of the $ 8 billion we'll spend on prescription
medicines.

   Developing and perfecting technology is hugely expensive. It's an expense the
USA shoulders for much of the planet by supporting more than half the world's
total medical research. And medical technology, by its very nature, expands the
overall health market - and thus overall health spending - even while making
things easier, cheaper and safer for each patient. Pinpointing a problem by a
magnetic resonance imaging scanner rather than exploratory surgery is fast,
painless, safe, more accurate and costs less per patient. But because of this,
hundreds more MRI scans are done than were exploratory operations.

   The technologies of the future - gene therapy, fetal surgery, tissue cloning
- promise to eclipse the boom of the past 15 years, both in miracle power and
cost. The dilemma: We still lack a way to measure the benefits of medical
technology against the overall cost. ''Not knowing exactly what we're getting
for what we spend is the conundrum that has frozen health policy,'' says William
Cutler, research chief for the Employee Benefit Research Institute.

   Workforce: Health care is hugely labor intensive. The payroll makes up more
than 70% of the average hospital's budget. Hospitals must raise wages to compete
with wages in non-health-care jobs. ''But non-health wages are being driven by
productivity gains that hospitals, by their very nature, have trouble
matching,'' says Henry J. Aaron, a senior Brookings Institution economist.
Machines can't give nursing care.

   Also, the machines hospitals do buy have a perverse effect on labor, compared
with other economic sectors: An expensive new machine going into a factory will
reduce labor needs; an expensive machine going into a hospital increases labor
needs. The more sophisticated the machine, the more schooling, skill - and pay -
its operators need.

   Another workforce-related engine of health -cost inflation is the makeup of
the medical profession. Two-thirds of the USA's 585,000 physicians practice a
medical subspecialty, twice the proportion of most Western countries.
Technological dominance accounts for part of that. But the health -insurance
system rewards doctors far more for doing the procedures of specialty medicine
than for the counseling, listening and preventive services of primary-care
medicine. There's a bitter chicken-or-egg dispute over whether the payment bias
evolved in response to the prestige and clout specialists wield or whether the
profession grew lopsided because of a biased reward system. But both factors
long ago knitted into a vicious cycle. Result: Average U.S. physician income, a
record $ 137,000 last year, is 65% higher than in the second-best paying
country, Canada.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC; b/w (Drawing, Chest x-ray); GRAPHIC; b/w (Drawing, Hospital
employees)


                             1666 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1991 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             March 7, 1991 Thursday
                                 SECOND Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 64 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC ENGINEERING TOPIC

BODY:

   Thursday, March 7, 1991 GENETIC ENGINEERING TOPIC

   Dr. Richard Goodman, director of the Vollum Institute for Advanced
Biomedical Research at Oregon Health Sciences University, will speak about
genetic engineering at 8 p.m. Thursday in the OHSU library auditorium.

   Goodman, a molecular neurobiologist, will discuss advances in genetics,
including the use of gene therapy to cure disease.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1667 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 5, 1991, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 3893 words

HEADLINE: ACROSS THE USA: NEWS FROM EVERY STATE

DATELINE: ALABAMA MONTGOMERY

BODY:

    Hearings on '92 budget begin today for
Joint Legislative Budget panel. Goal: balance spending requests with revenue.
Missed projections this year caused 3.5% education budget deficit. ...
TUSCALOOSA - Ballistic tests show links between '89 unsolved shooting deaths of
Robert and Kathryn McRae with deaths of A.C., Carolyn Worthy - whose bodies were
found Oct. 15 in their fire-gutted home here, police say. Probe continues.

    ALASKA
ANCHORAGE - Anyone suffering damages from '89 Exxon Valdez oil spill is urged to
file claims by March 25. U.S. Dist. Judge Russell Holland's notice is directed
at fishermen, businesses, shoreline natives. ... FAIRBANKS - University of
Alaska has narrowed chancellor field to 4: J. Wade Gilley, senior vice
president, George Mason University in Virginia; Melvyn Nathanson, provost,
Lehman College in New York; Jerry Schubel, dean of Marine Sciences, SUNY in
Stony Brook, N.Y.; Joan Wadlow, provost, University of Oklahoma in Norman.

    ARIZONA
PHOENIX - AT&T filed for $ 1.7 million rate reduction on interzonal long-
distance calls, reducing day, evening rates up to 5.5%. Cited: US West lowered
rates it charges AT&T to complete calls. State requires AT&T to pass savings to
customers. ... TUCSON - Police searched for 2 boys suspected of beating girl, 18
months, found naked Saturday in field behind apartment complex. Child remains in
intensive care.

    ARKANSAS
GENTRY - Family was notified of Thursday death of Pfc. David Wieczorek, 21 - 1
of 3 soldiers killed by dormant Allied cluster bombs in southern Iraq, officials
say. He had stepped on metal cylinder that exploded as he ran to vehicle. ...
BENTONVILLE - Bond hearing is today for James Guss, 19 - accused of hiring hit
man in Nov. 20 slaying of his mother, Joyce Blankenship, 37. Arraignment is
March 18.

    CALIFORNIA
SACRAMENTO - '90 primary election spending jumped 41%, despite contribution
limits set by state law, watchdog group says. Candidates for all offices raised
$ 81.1 million, spent $ 71.6 million for June vote. Legislative candidates paid
more heed to law, spending $ 30.5 million in '90 compared to $ 38.7 million in
'88 primary. ... FRESNO - January jobless rate reached 19.7% in Tulare County,
making it hardest hit by December freeze that destroyed state's navel orange
crop, report shows. ... CLAREMONT - City is converting patrol cars from gasoline
to propane, hoping to cut smog emissions by 40%, save $ 900 per month. San
Francisco police tried it in '71, but switched back in '87 due to sluggish
performance.

    COLORADO
LAKEWOOD - Proposal to turn Thunder Valley Park into shooting range for police,
public is before City Council. It would save Police Dept. $ 30,000, avoid
45-mile drive to pistol-practice range, backers say. Closing park will force
them back onto private land, motorcross bikers say. ...
DENVER - Plan for state residents to save toward kids' tuition, housing fees at
state colleges, universities was OK'd by state Senate.

    CONNECTICUT
BRIDGEPORT - State filed suit to force city to apply budget-balancing plan by
Bridgeport Financial Review Board - including 58 layoffs, tax hikes - to erase $
7.6 million deficit, state treasurer said. Mayor Mary Moran Friday said city
wouldn't implement it, had own plan. ... ROCKY HILL - Phaseout of basement bar
is part of reorganization being planned at Veterans Home and Hospital, official
said. Catalyst: criticism of management, client care.

    DELAWARE
WILMINGTON - Hearing is today for secretary Shirley Hanson, 26 - charged with
erasing law firm's computer records, taking backup tapes after she was fired
Feb. 8. J. R. Julian law firm has also filed suit seeking return of tapes said
to have confidential client data. ... DOVER - Bill to let parents pick public,
private school for kids; use $ 2,150 tuition voucher is before lawmakers. Plan
would force schools to improve to attact pupils, backers say.

    D.C.
City will get additional $ 100 million from Congress to help with $ 300 million
deficit, officials said. Mayor Dixon has been lobbying for funds for 2 months.
... D.C. delegate to Congress Eleanor Holmes Norton has filed for separation
from husband, Edward, records show. It comes 5 months after husband took blame
for not paying thousands of dollars in taxes; she said she never knew.

    FLORIDA
TALLAHASSEE - 60-day '91 legislative session starts today. On agenda: Gov.
Chiles' proposed $ 28.8 billion budget for fiscal 1991-92. ... PENSACOLA -
Visitors to revamped National Museum of Naval Aviation will have access to
information about aviation, pilots on computer screens by mid-March, officials
say. Admission: free. ... JUPITER - Ailing pygmy sperm whale that entered
Jupiter Inlet over weekend has been taken to Miami Seaquarium for treatment,
officials said. It had some scrapes, no other outward injuries.

    GEORGIA
SAVANNAH - '90 census figures that show blacks are majority here is sign black
candidate could win '91 mayor's race, black leaders say. Ex-state Rep. Bobby
Hill is sole black running against 5-term incumbent John Rousakis. ... AUGUSTA -
7 staffers were laid off at The Augusta Chronicle and Augusta Herald due to
budget woes. It's 3rd announced by newspapers owned by Augusta- based Morris
Communications Corp.

    HAWAII
HONOLULU - Bill abolishing state's loyalty oath is before Leg-
islature. It proves nothing, is unpopular, foes say. ''It's demeaning,'' says
world-renowed Japan scholar Edward Seidensticker - denied university post for
refusing to sign oath. ... AIEA - DUI, hit-run charges were pending against Ewa
Beach driver, who police said struck his victim twice Sunday before leaving
scene. Victim remained in guarded condition.

    IDAHO
BOISE - Bill allowing Land Dept. to reject some outside bids
if rancher who leases state grazing land is running it well goes before state
House this week. Affected: 1.9 million acres. Foes: Plan would make it even
harder for ranchers to win leases away from other ranchers. ... RUPERT - Drivers
should slow down when nearing all - marked or unmarked - 4-way rural crossings,
Minidoka County official says. 25 stop signs were vandalized or taken since
January.

    ILLINOIS
CHICAGO - Andrew Toll, 21/2, became world's 1st recipient of 2 living donor
liver transplants. Mother, uncle donated segments used in 3 transplant
operations in month at Wyler Children's Hospital at University of Chicago. He
was in critical condition, doctors said. ... LIVINGSTON - Some downstate drivers
are outraged over 2nd notices for Chicago parking tickets they didn't get. City
parking officials say 40,000 people get bogus notices out of 4 million tickets
per year due to computer, officer errors. ... SPRINGFIELD - Malpractice award
limits won't cut medical costs because they are only 1% of USA's medical bill,
says Coalition for Consumer Rights. Culprit: Inflation makes up 67% of medical
costs. Illinois State Medical Society chief: Figures are ''statistical tricks.''

    INDIANA
INDIANAPOLIS - Darryl Maxwell, 18, was arrested on attempted-murder charge after
being identified as attacker by cousin Gregory Smith, 19 - handcuffed, doused
with turpentine, set on fire. Smith was in critical condition with burns over
90% of his body. ... BLOOMINGTON - Indiana University Foundation got $ 43.8
million in gifts in '90 - 3rd highest total in its 55 years, president said.

    IOWA
UNDERWOOD - Gov. Branstad won't hold budget, tax increase talks today with
legislators. Cited: He's making appearance here. Lawmakers sought meeting after
arbitrator ordered pay raises for state in face of $ 250 million budget deficit
in '92. ... DES MOINES - 46% of 810 state residents over 18 say blood- alcohol
level for DUIs should be lowered to .08 from .10; 44% said current level is OK,
The Des Moines Register Iowa Poll shows.

    KANSAS
MANHATTAN - State reports today on war against 13 weeds
declared noxious at Noxious Weed Annual Conference. Most noxious: field bind
weed, which grows up plant stalk, pulls it down, makes harvest hard. ... TOPEKA
- State House holds final vote today on bill holding property taxes by cities,
counties, townships at '90 levels, allows 1% annual hike in 1992- 94.

    KENTUCKY
FRANKFORT - Gov. Wilkinson has decided to end $ 500,000 in federal dropout
prevention funding in Appalachian areas. He said he'll replace it with state
funds that don't limit use. ... LEXINGTON - Federal appeals court rebuffed
Lexington Herald-Leader Co.'s request for documents in '81 antitrust suit
against Kentucky Utilities Co. Case was sent back to federal judge; antitrust
case that spawned it was settled in '86.

    LOUISIANA
LAKE CHARLES - Citgo Petroleum Corp. fire burned itself
out 5 hours after refinery explosion Sunday killed Frank Burnette Jr., 59, 2
unnamed contract workers; injured 12. Probe continues. ... BATON ROUGE - 89% of
1,668 teachers passed mandatory evaluation program, official said. Lifetime
teaching certificates of those who didn't passcan't be revoked, judge has ruled.
State officials say they'll consider withholding state funds from those who
fail.

    MAINE
AUGUSTA - State agency today hears insurers' request to increase workers-
compensation insurance rates by 30%. Insurers - who sought 26% hike last year,
got 4% - cite more, costlier claims. ... CASTINE - Schooner Bowdoin will leave
June 30, sail 6,000 nautical miles to Disko Island, Greenland. It's ship's 1st
trip north of Arctic Circle since explorer Donald MacMillan sailed in '54,
official said. Ship, 10 Maine Maritime Academy cadets, 5 sailors will return
Sept. 4.

    MARYLAND
COLUMBIA - Hearing is Wednesday in support of keeping current level of funding
for Howard County police, officials say. Police union has sent letter urging
residents to back tax hike to avoid layoff of 38 officers. ... BEL AIR - Cash
donations may be sought for Harford County program - begun last fall with $
54,000, now bankrupt - that gives motel, meal vouchers to homeless, official
said.

    MASSACHUSETTS
MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA - Town today weighs returning guardrails to scenic parts
of Rte. 128. Catalyst: Jan. 4 death of Sharon Paskiewicz, 22, whose car crossed
median, flipped over. Barriers - removed in '83 after residents called them
unsightly - would have saved her, police say. ... LAWRENCE - 65,000-sq.-ft., $
4.9 million Prudential building in September will be campus for 1,300-student
Northern Essex Community College, Gov. Weld said.

    MICHIGAN
DETROIT - Ex-Gov. Blanchard, 48, has taken job with 2
law firms: Jaffe, Snider, Raitt and Heuer here; Verner, Liipfert, Bernard,
McPherson and Hand in Washington, D.C. Blanchard, who started new jobs Friday,
lost November election to Gov. Engler. ... MOUNT PLEASANT - Central Michigan
University basketball player Terrance Colbert faces court exam today on rape
charges in '89 assault of student. He was suspended from team after arrest.

    MINNESOTA
ELK RIVER - Gov. Carlson appears here, in Milaca today to outline $ 15.13
billion '91-'93 budget plan. Plan cuts back aid to local government in effort to
counter $ 1.2 million revenue gap. ... ELY - Explorer Will Steger, 46, said he
is planning 2,000-mile trip to North Pole in '94. Goal: draw attention to
ice-locked international science station that will send data to schools around
world.

    MISSISSIPPI
COLUMBUS - Felix Uithoven, 72, faces court-imposed eviction from his 162 acres
in Clay County Thursday. Corps of Engineers bought land in '78 for planned
campground; Uithoven says he accepted money under protest. Gov. Mabus on Feb. 26
asked Corps to let Uithoven buy land back; Corps is reviewing it. ... OCEAN
SPRINGS - Merchants are hanging signs this month warning truants they'll be
reported. Effort stems from pact with schools.

    MISSOURI
HILLSBORO - Patricia Stallings, 25 - convicted of murder in January in
antifreeze poisoning of infant son, Ryan - was sentenced to life in prison. ...
KANSAS CITY - Both Food Barn management, union workers claimed victory for day 1
of strike that began Sunday. Store says business was only ''slightly down.''
Union says only 10 crossed picket line at 1 store. Union opposes benefit cuts.

    MONTANA
BILLINGS - Total eradication of brucellosis from infected buffalo in Yellowstone
National Park would require killing all 3,000 animals - politically unthinkable,
says park biologist Mary Meagher. Also, immunizing all isn't feasible. Bill
letting state wardens - but not hunters - kill bison that stray from park is
before state Senate. ... ABSAROKEE - 113 Stillwater Mining Co. workers have lost
jobs. Blamed: weak metal prices.

    NEBRASKA
NORFOLK - Jury of 8 women, 4 men were picked for trial of Da-
vid Phelps, 26, charged with kidnapping Jill Cutshall, then 9, in '87. He was
charged after missing girl's mother got enough signatures on petition to force
grand jury probe. Girl has never been found. ... GRAND ISLAND - 3,055 students
in 4th-6th grades are expected to attend today's 3rd annual Children's
Groundwater Festival. Pupils are from 85 schools statewide.

    NEVADA
CARSON CITY - 50 police officers packed Assembly Judiciary Committee to oppose
bill to create 5-tier classification. Foes: System will cut powers, lead to
elitism in ranks. Bill goes to subcommittee for further review. ... RENO - Hot
line was established for Tahoe Basin landowners seeking 40 building permits to
be issued Friday. Old 1st-come, 1st-served process was scrapped so applicants
wouldn't camp out at agency.

    NEW HAMPSHIRE
NASHUA - Derek Annese, 8 - whose fight against bone marrow disease drew Gov.
Gregg's aid in securing Medicaid funding - was in critical condition in
Milwaukee hospital. Derek was hospitalized Feb. 23 with lung problem. ...
PORTSMOUTH - City will comment today at Air Force hearing on reuse plan for
defunct Pease AFB. Seacoast representatives had rejected plan's call for
shopping centers, 2nd runway, theme park.

    NEW JERSEY
JERSEY CITY - Moratorium on evictions - until June 1, '92 -
of tenants from buildings that are going condo was OK'd by Gov. Florio. Bill
protects those already served with expulsion notices; bill sponsor says he'll
work toward permanent safeguards for displaced tenants. ... SEA GIRT - Services
are Wednesday for Joseph DeCoster, 90 - treasurer for Middlesex County in
1960-72; mayor of Highland Park 1952-54 - who died Saturday, official said.

    NEW MEXICO
SANTA FE - Bill to ban cigarettes from vending machines in areas accessible to
minors was OK'd by state Senate, sent to House. Backers: It would be deterrent.
Plan would be unenforceable, foes say. ... QUESTA - $ 1 million loss on sale of
3 tracts of land at ''Top of the World'' farm, water rights was taken because it
was best offer, Public Service Co. of New Mexico says. Cited: Fall in state
farmland's value due to drop in crop value.

    NEW YORK
NEW YORK - City should sell LaGuardia, Kennedy airports to cut deficit, net
quick $ 1.29 billion, ex-mayoral hopeful Ronald Lauder said. Cited: Britain sold
its airports for $ 2.5 billion; Denmark, New Zealand are selling theirs. ...
Smith Barney, Morgan Stanley, Prudential Bache Securities top state's ''worry
list'' of firms weighing move out of here, official said. Cited: high taxes,
worsening quality of life. ... NORTH AMITYVILLE - Smoke, fire kept firefighters
from saving Donshia Morris, 2, who died in house fire. Mother - Ruby Holford, 21
- Holford's boyfriend tried to fight fire with water from sink, then fled.

    NORTH CAROLINA
BREVARD - Rev. Earl Wilson Jr. becomes 1st black minister appointed to all-
white Methodist congregation when he becomes head of First United Methodist
Church June 30, officials say. ... RALEIGH - Smoking ban in office buildings,
vehicles by Aug. 1 was OK'd by Wake County commissioners. Officials may consider
designating smoking areas.

    NORTH DAKOTA
MANDAN - Heartview Foundation eased smoking policy at drug, alcohol treatment
facility to allow smoking in 1 room inside. Last year's policy restricted
smoking to outdoors. Cited: Board didn't like sending smokers outside in winter.
... GRAND FORKS - Adrian Walker Sr. got 18 months probation after pleading
guilty to child neglect. Police found 5 children under 6 locked in 2 bedrooms in
November. Walker said he had to check on car, kids didn't have warm enough
clothing to go along.

    OHIO
CINCINNATI - Hamilton County commissioners tentatively agreed to lease private
jail downtown to ease crowding. Critics say jail threatens security, will drive
customers away. Final vote can't take place until zoning is OK'd. ... COLUMBUS -
Gov. Voinovich delivers 1st State of State speech today.

    OKLAHOMA
OKLAHOMA CITY - 5-year plan for more home-based, family-based services for
troubled youths - OK'd by Dept. of Human Services - needs state attorney
general's OK, officials say. Plan was response to '84 ruling in suit claiming
youths were mistreated in state institutions. ... TULSA - City will be only 1 in
USA to host both Philbrook Museum of Art's landscape exhibit April 14-19;
Gilcrease Museum's watercolor exhibit April 20-June 15, officials say.

    OREGON
PORTLAND - Recent gangstyle killings outside tong gambling houses prove
organized crime is moving into Chinatown, police say. Most recent: murder of
Thanh Xuan To, 16, last week. Police say Britain's turning Hong Kong over to
Chinese in '97 forced flood of Chinese immigrants to Portland area. ... KLAMATH
State's snowpack is 50% of 25-year average, meaning summer water supply will be
tight, officials say.

    PENNSYLVANIA
CONFLUENCE - D/R Hydro started 1-year, $ 350,000 study into why its power plant
at Youghiogheny Reservoir Dam has killed thousands of fish in past 15 months.
State Fish Commission chief says he may seek court order to end plant's
operations. ... WEST NEWTON - Dairy cow Trudy delivered female triplets Mandy,
Brandy, Sandy, beating 100,000 to 1 odds. Only 3 sets are born each year among
state's 700,000 dairy cattle, Penn State experts said.

    RHODE ISLAND
PROVIDENCE - Suit was filed to block Gov. Sundlun's plan to shut down state,
force workers to take unpaid furloughs by Friday, Health Dept. workers said.
Case will be heard Wednesday. ... CRANSTON - 21 students will get U.S. Rep. John
Reed's raise over next 4 years - in form of $ 250-per-year scholarships, he
said. Reed vowed to put $ 28,000 raise to use in district.

    SOUTH CAROLINA
CHARLESTON - Officials, business leaders criticized House panel's plan to use $
16 million in Education Improvement Act money for everyday school expenses.
Group urged statewide letter-writing campaign urging lawmakers to restore money.
... HILTON HEAD ISLAND - New Presbyterian Church study that advocates ordination
of gays, blesses extramarital sex contradicts scripture, foes say. Report will
be unveiled at June 5-12 church conference.

    SOUTH DAKOTA
STURGIS - Black Hills Motor Classic Board panel holds public meeting today at
City Hall. Group wants public input for setting ''standards of decency'' for
annual August bikers rally. '90 rally attracted 300,000 bikers to city of 5,200.
... SIOUX FALLS - State Medical Assn. council passed resolution opposing phone
health-information services run by hospitals. Charge: Programs are gimmicks to
lure patients to emergency rooms.

    TENNESSEE
NASHVILLE - Gays are planning national boycott of Cracker Barrel's 100
restaurants; 20 picketed store here Sunday. Catalyst: old hiring policy let
employers fire gays. Goal: change personnel policies. Cracker Barrel has
rescinded policy, saying it was mistake. ... MEMPHIS - St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital may be site of leukemia study. Focus: gene therapy on blood
producing cells of bone marrow. Needed: FDA OK.

    TEXAS
AUSTIN - Gov. Richards granted emergency status to bill that would give $
262,000 to state Agricultural Extension Service in Weslaco through August to
battle killer bees. Catalyst: Experts expect swarms in South Texas from Mexico
this month. ... Senate rejected nomination to Dept. of Commerce Board of
interim-member Jack Rains - GOP appointed by ex-Gov. Clements. Cited: Agency
needs new leadership. ... DALLAS - Swearing in could be this week for William
Rathburn, who replaces fired city Police Chief Mack Vines. ... AMARILLO - Sybil
Harrington was presented state's annual Lewis Award for Excellence in Cancer
Control by state Cancer Council. Award was named for House Speaker Gib Lewis,
who has backed cancer-fighting efforts.

    UTAH
SALT LAKE CITY - Shortening '91 grazing season or curtailing livestock on many
public range lands is being weighed by Forest Service, BLM. Aim: preserve for
fall aquifers, food for animals - depleted due to continued drought. ... OGDEN -
More people should be educated about earthquakes, disaster preparedness
officials in northern Utah say. Free brochures, seminars are available.

    VERMONT
BENNINGTON - 700 watched as Gov. Snelling, 2 great-great-great-great-great
grandsons of 1st Gov. Thomas Chittenden rang Old First Church bell to mark
state's bicentennial. Aug. 19 birthday party will include fireworks, parades.
... VERNON - NRC tests are too hard, Vermont Yankee complained to agency. Cited:
2 of 12 Yankee plant operators failed test in simulator. They'll have to pass
test before returning to work.

    VIRGINIA
FREDERICKSBURG - 6 firefighters were hurt battling blaze at Virginia Clay
Products warehouse - which exploded due to gas leak. Workers were evacuated. ...
ROANOKE - Prisons may collect inmates' blood for DNA data bank because this
helps solve crimes, federal judge ruled. He dismissed class-action suit that
said blood sampling violates constitutional privacy right; freedom from
unreasonable search, seizure.

    WASHINGTON
SPOKANE -Price to build 39-mile nature trail along Spokane River has jumped to $
16 million from $ 13 million. Cited: unexpected costs for archaeological
studies, bridge construction. ... SEATTLE - Jimmie Shumway, 59, pleaded innocent
to November slaying of her mother, Suzine Van Sickle, 79. Shumway's daughter,
Alexis Shumway, 38, will be arraigned Wednesday or Thursday in same slaying.
Daughter told police they drugged, smothered Sickle because she no longer
enjoyed life.

    WEST VIRGINIA
CLARKSBURG - Canadian Angeline Taillon, 26 - jailed after abandoning son, 2, in
church last month - was freed. Neglect charges have been dropped. Boy is with
foster parents; Taillon wants him back. ... CHARLESTON - West Virginia- American
Water Co. asked PSC for $ 4.4 million rate hike. Customers using 4,500 gals.
monthly would pay $ 1.94 more..

    WISCONSIN
STEVENS POINT - Plan to burn tires for fuel at University of Wisconsin campuses
here, Whitewater is on hold due to pollution, other concerns, state officials
said. Problem: separating steel belts from rubber. ... CHIPPEWA FALLS - Paul
Osborn, 31, got 7 years in prison for no-contest plea to beating niece to death.
He said he hit her once for crying while he tried to watch football on TV.

    WYOMING
LANDER - State will spend up to $ 30 million by '94 to improve living
conditions, programs at Training School for developmentally disabled in pact
announced by officials. Plaintiff agreed to drop suit. ... CHEYENNE - Full- day
kindergarten could help 1-third of state's pupils, officials say. Sought:
parental option to enroll ''at risk'' kids in full-day programs.


                             1668 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 3; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: Flawed 2-in-1 Protein Causes Cystic Fibrosis

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   THE protein that goes awry in cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal genetic
disease among whites, is a peculiar two-in-one molecule unlike anything
biologists have encountered before, scientists have reported.

   In independent papers appearing in the current issue of the journal Cell and
in a recent issue of Science, researchers described the function of the protein
in healthy cells and discussed how mutations in it could wreak progressive
destruction on the lungs, pancreas and other tissues known to be damaged in
cystic fibrosis.

    The new studies will allow scientists to begin testing scores of compounds
for their ability to correct the underlying biochemical defect of the disease.

   It may also quicken efforts now under way to use human gene therapy against
the illness by adding healthy copies of the cystic fibrosis gene to patients who
lack it.

   About 30,000 people in the United States currently suffer from cystic
fibrosis, and many of them die in adolescence or early adulthood, usually of
chronic lung infections.

   The latest research strongly suggests that the two-part protein works to
control the stream of chloride ions across the cell surface, a task critical to
keeping body tissues bathed in water. One part of the protein serves as a
channel, or a little pore in the cell membrane, through which the chloride ions
flow.

   The second part is a segment that determines whether the pore will open or
close.

Gate and Gatekeeper

    "It's both a gate, and a gatekeeper," said Dr. John R. Riordan of the
Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, an author of the report in Cell. "That's
what makes it so novel. We've seen ion channels, and we've seen regulators of
ion channels, but we've never observed them both in one protein before."

   Researchers said that a flawed version of the protein would fail to open and
shut properly, resulting in a progressive buildup of chloride within the cell.
The faulty chloride trafficking in turn impairs the body's sodium flow. Together
the imbalance of sodium and chloride destroys the pancreas and thickens the
body's mucus to something the consistency of jelly. As the mucus collects in the
lungs and windpipe, it becomes an inviting harbor for bacteria, resulting in the
gradual degradation of the fragile pulmonary tissue.

   Researchers said that the latest work on the cystic fibrosis protein
underscored the speed with which scientific understanding of the illness was
progressing.

   "I went to my first cystic fibrosis meeting five years ago," said Dr. Michael
J. Welsh of the University of Iowa College of Medicine in Iowa City, who wrote
the report in Science with Dr. Alan E. Smith of the Genzyme Corporation in
Framingham, Mass. "It's so exciting to see all the progress that's gone on since
then. You don't know until you get there whether you've really got a better
treatment or a cure, but there's a big sense that we're closing in fast."

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1991


                             1669 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           February 19, 1991, Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL NES; SECTION A; PAGE 06

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: Girl who got new genes bounces back from flu

BYLINE: By Jeff Nesmith Journal-Constitution Washington Bureaudisease; medicine;
research; public; health; technology

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - A few months after she became the first person in the world to
receive new genes as treatment for a disease, a 4-year-old girl with a rare
immune system disorder has shown tentative but hopeful signs of escaping from
her life-threatening condition.

   The unidentified child suffers from adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, a
disorder that destroys the immune system. The disease's best-known victim was
David, the Houston "bubble boy" who lived in a clear plastic capsule to protect
him from infection.

   Bolstered by genes scientists hope ultimately will repair her immune system,
the girl was the first to recover when she and her entire family recently came
down with influenza, Dr. Michael Blaese, a National Cancer Institute scientist,
said Monday.

   He cautioned that it is too early to say whether the therapy or drugs the
girl had been given were responsible for her quick recovery.

   But he said her parents had told him that, following the injection of genes
in September, she experienced the longest infection-free period of her life.

   Dr. Blaese and Dr. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute have been treating the child in an effort to test the effectiveness of
gene therapy. Genetic ADA deficiency is extremely rare, with only a few more
than a dozen victims worldwide.

   In the experiment, Dr. Blaese and Dr. Anderson took some of the girl's blood
and removed the white cells. The cells were infected with a harmless virus into
which the gene that causes ADA to be manufactured had been inserted.

   Dr. Blaese said the girl has received five separate infusions in the
procedure, which was approved last fall after a long and complicated series of
scientific and regulatory reviews.

   Since then, another victim of the same disease has received the first in a
similar series of infusions, and Dr. Steven Rosenberg, a National Cancer
Institute surgeon, has begun using another gene-insertion technique to see if he
can use gene implants to carry powerful tumor- destroying compounds to persons
terminally ill with melanoma.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992


                             1670 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    February 19, 1991, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 168 words

HEADLINE: PATIENT, 4, RESPONDS TO GENE INJECTIONS

BYLINE: By Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The first patient to be treated with gene therapy, a child suffering from an
immune deficiency, is responding and growing more healthy, a researcher said
Monday.

   The patient, identified only as a 4-year-old girl, was injected last
September with genetically altered cells designed to correct a deficiency of an
enzyme essential to the immune system.

   Dr. R. Michael Blaese, a National Institutes of Health scientist and a
co-researcher in the experiment, said at an American Assn. for the Advancement
of Science meeting that the child has received four infusions of cells altered
to contain a missing gene.

   The gene causes the secretion of an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, or
ADA. The child was born without this gene. Such children do not develop an
immune system and usually die of infection by age 2.

   The doctor said the child's ADA levels are now about 20% of normal and there
is a "striking increase" in isohemagglutinin, a component of the blood that is a
measure of the immune system.


                             1671 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 19, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 423 words

HEADLINE: Some Progress Is Reported In Test of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18

BODY:

   The first patient to be treated with gene therapy, a child suffering from an
immune deficiency, is responding, a researcher said today.

   The patient, identified only as a 4-year-old girl, was injected last
September with genetically altered cells designed to correct a deficiency of an
enzyme essential to the immune system.

    Dr. R. Michael Blaese, a National Institutes of Health scientist and a
co-researcher in the experimental trial, said at the annual meeting of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science that the child had received
four infusions of cells altered to contain a missing gene.

   The gene causes the secretion of an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, or
ADA. The child was born without this gene. Such children do not develop an
immune system and usually die of infection by the age of 2.

   Since the third injection, Dr. Blaese said, "We're starting to see improved
immune function."

   The doctor said that the child's ADA levels were now about 20 percent of
normal and that there was a "striking increase" in isohemagglutinin, a component
of the blood that is a measure of the immune system.

   A second child has now entered the experimental program and has received one
infusion, he said.

Another Experiment With Melanoma

    In another type of gene therapy, two adult patients have now received four
infusions of blood cells that carry an inserted gene designed to attack their
cancer tumors.

   Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, a NIH researcher conducting the therapy, said today
at the annual meeting that both patients, identified as a 29-year-old woman and
a 42-year-old man, are now home waiting to see if the therapy will reduce their
malignant melanoma tumors. He did not say if there was any indication that the
cancers were being affected by the therapy. He said recently that the results
will be withheld until they are published in a scientific journal.

   Dr. Rosenberg's study involves genetically altering a type of blood cell
called tumor infiltrating lymphocyte, or TIL. These cells, a part of the immune
system, naturally attack cancer and will migrate to tumor sites.

   To enhance their cancer-fighting ability, a gene was added to the TIL cells.
This gene causes the cells to make a substance called tumor necrosis factor, or
TNF, a powerful type of cancer fighter.

   It is hoped that the TIL cells will go to the tumor sites and then start
making TNF. In effect, said Dr. Rosenberg, this method should deliver a powerful
dose of the TNF only to sites where it would fight the cancer.


LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1991


                             1672 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 19, 1991 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 685 words

HEADLINE: First gene-replacement patient improving from disorder

BYLINE: From Tribune News Services

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- History's first patient to be treated by gene-replacement
therapy appears to be improving from a severe immune disorder, a National
Institutes of Health researcher reported yesterday. Dr. R. Michael Blaese,
co-researcher in the experimental gene therapy, said a 4-year-old girl being
treated for an immune deficiency is showing signs that a replacement gene first
injected last September is doing its job. "We're starting to see improved immune
function," Blaese said at a meeting of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. Blaese said he and his co-researcher, Dr. W. French
Anderson of NIH, are now treating a second child for the same genetic
deficiency. Both children were born without a gene that produces an enzyme
called adenosine deaminase, or ADA, which is essential for a healthy immune
system.

   Most children born with ADA deficiency die of infection by the age of 2. ADA
deficiency is similar to the immune problem that afflicted David, the famed
Texas "bubble boy." The disease affects no more than 20 children worldwide at
any given time. In the past, some affected youngsters lived in plastic bubbles
to guard against life-threatening infections, but now many can be helped by bone
marrow transplants or injections of enzyme replacement drugs. The NIH
researchers developed a technique in which the missing ADA gene is inserted into
the patient's blood cells and the blood is then returned to the patient. Once
they are in the patient's bloodstream, the genetically altered cells begin
secreting the missing ADA. Blaese said the first child has now received three
infusions of the treated cells, and her ADA levels are now about 20 percent of
normal. Tests found the girl had a "striking increase" in her ability to make
antibodies after her fourth treatment, Blaese said.

   Antibodies are proteins the immune system produces to fend off
disease-causing microbes and other foreign substances. Blaese also said there is
a "striking increase" in isohemagglutinin, a component of the blood that is a
measure of the immune system. "This child is showing an enhanced gene response
following this therapy," said Blaese. In another type of gene therapy, two
adults are being treated for advanced malignant melanoma, a usually fatal type
of skin cancer that causes tumors throughout the body. Dr. Steven Rosenberg,
also a co-researcher in the NIH gene therapy program, said the two adult
patients have received four infusions of blood cells that carry an inserted gene
designed to attack their cancer tumors. The patients, identified only as a
29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man, are at home waiting to see if the
therapy will reduce their tumors, he said. Rosenberg's study involves
genetically altering a type of blood cell called tumor infiltrating lymphocyte,
or TIL. These cells, a part of the immune system, naturally attack cancer and
will migrate to tumor sites. To enhance their cancer-fighting ability, a gene
was added to the TIL cells.

   This gene causes the cells to make a substance called tumor necrosis factor,
or TNF, a powerful type of cancer fighter. It's hoped the TIL cells will go to
the tumor sites and then start making TNF. In effect, said Rosenberg, this
method should deliver a powerful dose of the TNF only to sites where there is
cancer. Similar experiments in laboratory rodents showed tumors being wiped out
within a short time. Rosenberg did not say if there was any indication that the
cancers in the patients were being affected by the therapy. In another
presentation to the AAAS, Anderson said there was promising research into the
possibility of using gene therapy to treat acquired immune deficiency syndrome,
or AIDS, and heart disease. Anderson said it may be possible to insert genes
into blood cells that would block the AIDS virus from reproducing or from
attacking the body's lymphocytes. Another possible approach, he said, would be
to insert into lymphocytes a "suicide" gene that would cause the cells to die if
they are attacked by the AIDS virus.

   In this way, the virus would not be able to replicate and spread to other
cells.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1673 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: Gains Cited in Genetic Research on Diabetes

BYLINE: REUTERS

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Feb. 14

BODY:

   In the latest finding on the genetic basis of disease, researchers said today
that they had determined the general location of a gene that appears to cause a
common form of diabetes.

   The gene is believed to cause a form of Type II diabetes, a
non-insulin-dependent type of the disease that usually occurs after the age of
40. A more serious form of the disease, called Type I, frequently occurs in
childhood and requires insulin treatments.

    The American Diabetes Association says Type II diabetes affects 12 million
people in the United States. It is usually controlled by diet and exercise or
oralmedication rather than by insulin injections.

   The new finding is only the most preliminary step in isolating the actual
gene for diabetes, a process that could take years. Researchers also said that
the general location of the gene has been determined for only one family. In
other families, different genes that have yet to be identified may be involved
in the disease.

'We Now Know Where to Look'

    The search for the gene was conducted by researchers from the University of
Chicago, the University of Michigan and the University of Pennsylvania. Their
study is being published Friday in The Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

   "Thi finding confirms, first of all, that genetics play a role in the
development of diabetes," said Dr. Graeme Bell, a professor of medicine at the
University of Chicago. While the gene itself has not been isolated, "we now know
where to look," he said.

   "This is a crucial first step toward finding the gene responsible for the
disorder, unraveling the mechanisms controlling glucose regulation and
developing improved therapies to treat, prevent or even cure this and
possiblyother forms of diabetes," Dr. Bell said.

   Dr. Richard Kahn, chief scientific and medical officer for the diabetes
association, said: "It's a historic study. It will start to give us an
understanding of the genetics, which is essential if we're ever going to prevent
it by gene therapy."

Five Generations Studied

    Research by Dr. Stefan Fajans of the University of Michigan was credited
with making the investigation possible. Dr. Fajans spent 32 years studying a
single family with 275 members span ning five generations. More than 40 family
members had non-insulin-dependent diabetes.

   "This is the first family in which genetic techniques have been used to
identify a genetic abnormality as thecause of diabetes," Dr. Bell said.

   While heredity has long been recognized as playing an important role in the
disease, it has been difficult to gather large cross-generational families for
studies, he said.

   Victims of Type II diabetes cannot produce enough insulin or fail to respond
to the insulin that is produced by the body. Insufficient insulin prevents the
body's cells from absorbing glucose, a form of sugar, for use as fuel.

   When glucose accumulates in the blood stream it can damage the heart and
blood vessels, eyes, nerves and kidneys, leading to heart disease, blind ness,
kidney failure and even the amputation of limbs.

   Dr. Bell said the research found that the gene responsible for the disease
islinked to and physically located near a specific gene on the "long arm of
chromosome 20," and added, "This finding may be our introduction to a whole new
group of as yet unknown genes involved in the regulation of insulin production
and secretion."

   But Dr. Kahn of the diabetes association said: "The caveat is that they
studied it in a select population with a form of the disease. It may turn out to
have very little relationship to the more prevalent form of the disease. But
nevertheless, for the first time really, it gives us some clues as to the
genetic influence on Type II diabetes."

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1991


                             1674 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    February 15, 1991, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; PAGE D3; BOOK WORLD

LENGTH: 794 words

HEADLINE: Invasion of The Antibody Snatchers

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Marantz Henig

BODY:

   THE INVISIBLE INVADERS

   The Story of the Emerging Age of Viruses

   By Peter Radetsky

   Little, Brown. 415 pp. $ 22.95

   Viruses are so weird and wily that they fairly cry out for similes and
metaphors when you write about them. Viruses are like "minute, wayward, and
unruly parts of ourselves -- something like adventurous teenagers who have fled
the nest but just can't resist coming back home at every opportunity," writes
Peter Radetsky in a typical passage from "The Invisible Invaders." "[They come]
sometimes to overstay their welcome, sometimes to wreak absolute havoc,
sometimes to make us better through their mere presence. And, like loving
parents, for better or for worse, we almost always leave them a key to the front
door."

   But, as Radetsky himself acknowledges, sometimes metaphors simply get in the
way. After describing immune cells as "bodyguards" who dispose of "unwelcome
visitors" through defenses "coordinated as precisely as any modern task force,"
he stops -- just short of hanging himself on his own imagery. "It's clear that a
comparison to science fiction may not do justice to the disease-fighting
skirmishes that go on constantly inside our bodies," he admits. "These are Star
Wars with a vengeance."

   The ability to use a metaphor when it clarifies, and to refrain from using
one when it would merely confuse, is something that distinguishes a good science
writer. And Radetsky, a professor of science communication at the University of
California at Santa Cruz, is a good science writer. He understands his elusive
subject so thoroughly that his explanations usually sound downright
conversational.

   Over and over he brings to life the serendipitous nature of scientific
discovery. He plots each step of deductive reasoning that brings a scientist
from the first experiment to the second, the third, the 53rd. He demonstrates
how slowly science progresses, and shows us how maddening it is when it stalls.

   Often the tides of science depend on simply following up on a hunch. Louis
Pasteur, for instance, stumbled upon a way to weaken the chicken cholera
bacteria when he returned from a long vacation and found his cholera culture
sitting unattended in a flask. Rather than throw away the germs he knew were
dead, he injected a few chickens with the stuff -- and discovered that the birds
became mildly ill, recovered, and from then on were immune to virulent doses of
cholera germs. Pasteur had discovered the process of attenuation, which paved
the way for virtually every vaccine we now use.

   This is the kind of book in which juicy anecdotes are thrown in every now and
again. Late in his career, for instance, Pasteur saved the life of 9-year-old
Joseph Meister by giving him history's first rabies vaccine. The child grew up
to become the gatekeeper of the Pasteur Institute in Paris. In 1940, when
Meister was 65, the Nazis stormed the institute and ordered the gatekeeper to
open Pasteur's crypt. Rather than do so, Meister killed himself.

   Radetsky devotes many pages to the early work in virology, beginning with
Edward Jenner and his smallpox vaccine of 1796. But he spends time as well with
the discoveries and personalities making headlines now, including AIDS
researcher Robert Gallo, gene therapy pioneer W. French Anderson and Rockefeller
University president-designate David Baltimore, who made his mark as
co-discoverer of the mechanism by which retroviruses -- among them the AIDS
virus -- reproduce.

   Viruses are formidable foes. According to the author, they cause more than 80
percent of all acute illnesses known to man, including yellow fever, polio,
smallpox, hepatitis, rabies, herpes, some forms of cancer and of course AIDS.
And because most of them are so difficult to see, much less to disarm, viruses
have changed the very nature of man's relationship to infectious disease.

   A generation ago, when antibiotics and vaccines were first discovered and
used, scientists thought they were on the brink of eliminating acute (as opposed
to chronic) illnesses. Now they know better. In the face of viruses --
especially those that hide out in cells and may erupt years after the initial
infection -- scientists have become humble. Because of viruses, Radetsky writes,
"our earlier notions of conquering disease now seem naive and faraway."

   The only real drawback of this scrupulously researched, exhaustively detailed
book is that it might prove a bit daunting for the casual reader. But it is an
impressive feat of reporting for anyone interested in what viruses have done to
us in the past, what they might do in the future, and how scientists have
managed -- every step of the way -- to fight back. The reviewer, a Washington
medical writer, is working on a book about strange new viruses.



                             1675 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 11, 1991, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 246 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may aid heart ailments

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Gene therapy for preventing heart failure caused by muscular dystrophy - as
well as for growing new arteries to cure heart disease - could be under way in
two to five years, research suggests.

   The findings, from an animal study in today's issue of The New Biologist, are
the first to show that new genes:

   - Can be injected directly into heart muscle cells.

   - Will function normally there for several weeks.

   ''This is not ready for human studies yet, but it's encouraging for the near
future,'' says Dr. Jon Wolff, University of Wisconsin, Madison, who conducted
the preliminary study.

   Wolff tested only a ''marker gene'' to learn whether the genes were delivered
to the heart cells and how long they survived.- Next step: Wolff is repeating
the study with a gene that makes dystrophin, a vital protein missing in muscular
dystrophy. Its absence causes muscles to break down.

   Wolff says if animal studies are successful, trials could begin within five
years to prevent heart muscle deterioration in people with Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, the most severe form, which affects 1 in 3,500 boys. Heart failure is
a common cause of their death.

   For heart disease, other scientists will test genes that trigger the growth
of new blood vessels. Instead of bypass surgery for blocked heart arteries,
Wolff says genes may be injected into the muscle near the site of the blockages.

   ''This could be clinically useful more quickly, maybe just two years,'' Wolff
says.


                             1676 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   FEBRUARY 10, 1991, SUNDAY, SUNDAY EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: The Battle of the Bug

BYLINE: REVIEWED BY, ELAINE HERSCHER

BODY:

   THE INVISIBLE INVADERS

   The Story of the Emerging Age of Viruses

   By Peter Radetsky

   Little, Brown; 415 pages; $ 22.95

   Most of us don't want to know much about viruses until we end up at the
doctor's office with some awful bug that won't go away. Then the last thing we
want to hear is, ''It's probably a virus. Go home and rest; there's nothing we
can do.''

   In ''The Invisible Invaders,'' Peter Radetsky explains why our colds, flus
and other more serious ills so far can't be cured. In plain, accessible English
and using many illustrations, he explains what viruses are, how vaccines for
them are created, how they operate in the body and why it's especially important
today that we understand these sub-microscopic creators of misery.

   Viruses, Radetsky asserts, are to blame for almost 80 percent of all acute
illnesses. As he notes, a virus is responsible for the greatest pandemic of the
late 20th century. ''Because of AIDS, the word 'virus' is on our lips more
frequently than ever before, carrying with it an emotional jolt the like of
which has rarely, if ever, been experienced before.''

   Radetsky, a frequent contributor to Discover magazine and a teacher in the
science communication program at University of California at Santa Cruz,
carefully traces scientific awareness of viruses, beginning with the grotesque
death of France's King Louis XV from smallpox in 1774, to current work in the
developing field of gene therapy.

   The early crude smallpox vaccine, the first tentative treatment for rabies by
the famed chemist Louis Pasteur, and the frustrating hunt for proof of viruses
that was unsuccessful until the 20th century: All are as engrossing as a mystery
novel.

   Along the way, Radetsky's interviews with researchers yield insight into
common, annoying ills as well as inexplicable and deadly ones. He tells, for
example, how a person gets a cold -- how rhinovirus (which comes in 200
varieties) enters the nasal passage and, if it's fortunate, stays alive long
enough to find a cell to invade. After that, it's the body's immune system
attacking the cell that makes us feel so lousy. (Don't expect to find out how to
avoid getting a cold, however. The jury is still out on whether transmission is
mostly through the air or by touching infected surfaces.)

   Radetsky even throws in a bit of cold folklore, noting that in 1987
Kimberly-Clark test-marketed what Radetsky calls Killer Kleenexes, which
contained a virucidal mixture that was helpful in stopping cold viruses. But the
product never caught on.

   He also offers good reason to suspect that flu vaccines aren't terribly
helpful. By the time medical science develops a vaccine for the type of
influenza expected to hit in any particular season, the virus, extremely
changeable in nature, may have taken on a different character. The mutation
would require a completely different vaccine, created with great difficulty and
expense. Radetsky says the good news is that, in the future, there will be a
quick sputum test for influenza that will allow doctors to prescribe anti-viral
drugs to combat the disease.

   Radetsky's chapter on chronic fatigue syndrome explores the possible viral
cause of an illness believed to affect millions in the United States. Sufferers
of the disease -- for years called the yuppie flu until scientists began finding
viral evidence -- are likely to take issue with the author's assertion that
psychological factors could play a role in the disease.

   The book also offers a clear explanation of retroviruses, of which the human
immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, is the most feared. Along with a
recounting of the squabble over which scientist actually discovered HIV,
Radetsky explains why the virus is so incredibly complex to conquer (it can lie
dormant for years, even while changing the cell's genetic code). Genes
manipulated in the laboratory, he says, are the next best hope for an AIDS
vaccine.

   Radetsky does get a bit carried away in his homage to the intricacies of
viral invaders and his appreciation of what they've taught modern science. He
obviously loves the story he tells, and the book is an entertaining and helpful
resource to anyone who wants or needs to know about viruses. But people with
herpes, hepatitis or AIDS might find it hard to muster quite the same respect
and enthusiasm for the virus.


                             1677 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1991 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 5, 1991 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: In county first, she gets new lungs, life

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, Staff Writer

BODY:

   A month ago, 31-year-old Theresa Steveley was dying of cystic fibrosis, a
genetic disorder that claims more than 300 lives in the United States every
year. Today, she is looking forward to roller skating, gymnastics, and a full
and normal life. Steveley walked out of UCSD Medical Center yesterday with two
new lungs, San Diego's first double-lung transplant patient. "I used to have a
lot of infection, weakness, tiredness, and I was coughing all the time," said
Stevely, a former Hybritech lab assistant.

   "Now, I feel really terrific, ready to go on with my life." On Jan. 13, UCSD
became the first San Diego hospital to attempt the high-risk procedure that has
been performed on 63 patients nationwide since the first one in 1987. A few
hospitals in North America are equipped to do double-lung transplants. Dr.
Jolene Kriett, a member of Steveley's cardiothoracic surgery team, said about
one-third of the double-lung recipients have been patients with cystic fibrosis.

   The disease debilitates the function of the lungs. So far, Kriett said, one
out of six double-lung transplant patients doesn't survive the surgery.

   Many of those on the waiting list who have cystic fibrosis will die before
appropriate organs become available, she said. Steveley has been fortunate.

   Four months after her disease became life threatening, a two-lung donor was
found.

   The operation was done and Kriett said Steveley is "out of the woods."
Yesterday, Steveley, with her mother, Anne, her 6-year-old daughter, Jennifer,
and her sister, Melissa, 25, answered questions at a UCSD news conference to
announce the success of the operation and to celebrate the release from the
hospital. Carol Lockwood, of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation of San Diego and
Imperial counties, said the success with Steveley represents "a phenomenal
breakthrough that gives patients a real hope." Cystic fibrosis is the most
common of genetic defects and occurs in about one in every 2,000 Caucasians.

   It is less common in other races. The defect causes a malfunction in an
enzyme that affects the kinds of secretions in mucous produced by the lungs and
pancreas.

   Those born with the defect begin to experience thick abnormal secretions in
their lungs and have difficulty absorbing fats from the intestine, said Kriett.
Life expectancy for the average person with cystic fibrosis is about 30 years.

   Depending on the severity of illness, symptoms including digestive problems
and breathing difficulties can begin as early as weeks after birth. For now,
double-lung transplants are the only resource for the cystic fibrosis patient
who fails conventional antibiotic therapy, UCSD officials said. However, hope is
on the horizon.

   Last year, scientists identified the gene that carries the defect, giving
hope that gene therapy techniques may soon be discovered. Stevely said she hopes
to go roller skating and take gymnastics classes as soon as she fully recovers
from surgery. (Eds. 1,2,3,4)

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Double-lung transplant patient Theresa Steveley
appears with her daughter, Jennifer, 6, at news conference.; PHOTOBY: The San
Diego Union/J.T. MacMillan

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1678 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

HEADLINE: Corrections

BODY:

   A front-page article on Wednesday about the first use of gene therapy on
cancer patients misstated the number of cases of maligant melanoma in the United
States. It is expected to be 32,000 this year, not 8,000 to 10,000. The smaller
figures referred to the number in which the cancer has begun to spread
throughout the body.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1991


                             1679 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          January 30, 1991, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; SECTION C; PAGE 03

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: Health Watch; Cancer patients undergo gene therapy for first time

BYLINE: By Rebecca Perl Staff writergovernment; animals; alcohol; legislation;
law; drugs

BODY:

   A 29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man - both suffering from an unusually
fatal form of skin cancer - on Tuesday became the first patients to be treated
for cancer using genetically altered cells.

   The patients, who were not identified, "both tolerated the therapy well and
are resting easily now," said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, who is directing the
first use of gene therapy in cancer treatment at the National Institutes of
Health. It will be several months before doctors can tell whether the treatment
has had any effect, he said.

   The cells injected into the patients had been altered by the insertion of a
gene that causes the cells to produce tumor necrosis factor, or TNF, a powerful
natural anti-tumor toxin.

   The transfused cells are called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, or TILs, and
are a type of white blood cell that naturally moves into cancer sites and
attacks tumors. The cells were removed from the tumors, armed with the tumor
necrosis factor gene and then cultured until they numbered in the billions. Then
the cells were injected into the patients.

   Because of his success at using unaltered TIL cells in previous cancer
experiments, Dr. Rosenberg and his team have received approval by the Food and
Drug Administration to treat up to 50 patients with the gene therapy technique.
All of the patients are suffering from malignant melanoma, a particularly deadly
form of cancer.

   The only other form of gene therapy under experimentation in humans is for
the treatment of an extremely rare inherited immune system disorder called
adenosine deaminase deficiency disease. That study's first patient, a 4-year-old
girl, received a transfusion of her own white blood cells after a gene to
correct the disorder had been inserted into the cells.; Treatment goes to the
dogs

   A new health-care provider has been welcomed into hospitals in California,
Colorado and Tennessee.

   Nurses and doctors at Marin General Hospital in Marin County, Calif., have
found that dogs are particularly therapeutic for patients who have been
disfigured or disabled by accidents, amputations and strokes.

   Dogs give unbridled love and attention to any patient and don't seem to be
concerned - as many humans are - about looks or disabilities, said Barbara Jonas
Miller, who started the animal therapy program in Marin.

   Hospital workers have found that animals, chosen for their sweet
dispositions, can help patients overcome fear and depression and give them
something to think about other then their illnesses.

   To avoid animal-borne diseases - which are extremely rare anyway - the dogs
are meticulously groomed and immunized before they make their rounds.; U.S.
exporting bad habits to Japan

   Cancer rates in Japan are on the rise, and Western health habits are being
blamed.

   The Japanese are smoking, drinking alcohol and eating fatty foods at rates
that resemble - and in some cases surpass - those of the United States,
according to a report published this week in the journal Cancer.

   As a result, the incidence of lung, breast, ovarian, prostate, pancreatic and
colon cancers is climbing among Japanese men and women, the report said.

   The study found that almost 65 percent of Japanese men smoke, compared with
about 33 percent of American men. However, almost twice as many American women -
about 27 percent - smoke as do Japanese women.

   Eating habits of the two countries are becoming more similar, as well. In the
early 1950s, the average Japanese citizen ate 1,900 calories a day, two-thirds
fewer calories than Americans. By the late 1970s, the Japanese were consuming a
daily average of 2,900 calories.

GRAPHIC: Photo: A dog

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992


                             1680 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 4; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: GENES USED FOR 1ST TIME TO TREAT CANCER PATIENTS;
MEDICINE: TWO PEOPLE WITH MELANOMA RECEIVE SPECIAL CELLS CODED TO PRODUCE
POWERFUL ANTI-TUMOR TOXIN.

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers Tuesday began the first experiments using human gene therapy to
treat cancer, the National Institutes of Health announced.

   A 29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man with advanced melanoma, a
potentially lethal form of skin cancer, received transfusions of special
cancer-killing cells removed from their own tumors, along with a gene that has
been coded to produce a powerful anti-tumor toxin. The hope is that the mixture
will destroy the patients' cancers.

   "We're desperately trying to open a new door for cancer treatment, and this
is just the first small step," said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at
the National Cancer Institute and the lead researcher on the project. This is
the second attempt at human gene therapy but the first aimed at treating cancer,
a disease that afflicts millions of people.

   However, he noted that, if the experiment works, it will be a major
breakthrough.

   "If we can get it to work with melanoma, these kinds of approaches will be
applicable to patients with a lot of different kinds of cancers," he added. "I
hope it helps these patients. But, even if it doesn't, I'm optimistic that
eventually we can use the tool of gene therapy to develop better cancer
treatments."

   Researchers believe that the results of the treatment will be known within
months.

   Melanoma will strike an estimated 32,000 people this year and is expected to
kill about 6,500. Moreover, its frequency has been increasing at the rate of
about 4% a year, according to the American Cancer Society.

   If detected very early, melanoma can be cured by surgery. Advanced melanoma,
however, does not respond to any known treatment. Most patients in this stage
usually die within about four months.

   "It is very exciting to see gene therapy finally beginning to be used in the
management and research of patients with cancer," said Dr. John Laszlo, senior
vice president for research of the American Cancer Society.

   Rosenberg said that the Food and Drug Administration had given the National
Institutes of Health permission to perform the experimental treatment on up to
50 melanoma patients this year.

   The human body is made up of about 50 trillion cells. Genes direct each
cell's function. When a gene is destroyed or broken, the cell's function is
disrupted or eliminated -- and disease occurs.

   There are two basic approaches to human gene therapy. Scientists can
introduce a normal gene in an attempt to correct a defective gene or replace a
missing one. Alternatively, the genes can be used to enhance a cell's function
or to give it a new one.

   Rosenberg and his colleagues have attempted to design a kind of super-cell by
adding a new gene to the patient's own cancer-fighting cells, called tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes. The new gene has been coded to stimulate the
production of tumor necrosis factor, a potent hormone that kills tumors by
cutting off their blood supply.

   Tumor necrosis factor has shown dramatic effect on tumors in mice but thus
far has had no effect on cancer when injected into humans. This is probably
because humans cannot be treated with the hormone level given to mice, which can
tolerate 40 times as much tumor necrosis factor as humans. The hormone is
naturally produced by the body to fight bacterial infections but, if it is
active for too long or at too high a level, it can cause shock and body wasting.

   But, because the tumor infiltrating lymphocytes zero in only on the tumors,
scientists hope that they can deliver the cells directly to the cancer to
function as "factories," producing tumor necrosis factor directly where it is
needed -- and in doses high enough to kill the cancer but not high enough to
harm the patient.

   Since 1986, Rosenberg has been treating melanoma with tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes that have not been gene-altered and has seen improvement in about
40% of his patients. Rosenberg said that he hopes the gene-modified cells will
"enhance the ability of (tumor infiltrating lymphocytes) to destroy tumor
cells."

   Gene technology has been used in humans on two previous occasions.

   On Sept. 14, the National Institutes of Health performed the first human gene
therapy experiment. A 4-year-old girl with adenosine deaminase deficiency, an
inherited immune system disorder, was transfused with her own white blood cells
that had been altered in the laboratory by adding the human gene that stimulates
production of adenosine deaminase. The enzyme is crucial to the proper
functioning of the immune system.

   Adenosine deaminase deficiency afflicts only about 30 children worldwide.
Researchers will not know for about a year what effect the treatment is having
on the girl.

   Earlier, Rosenberg inserted gene-altered cells into melanoma patients, but
the genes had no therapeutic function. They were used only as "markers" to
identify cancer-fighting cells.


                             1681 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   War in the Gulf A8-11

   Iraqi warplanes that flew to Iran have been impounded for the duration of the
war, Iran insisted. And allied pilots flew more than 2,600 missions in one of
the heaviest days of the air war in the Persian Gulf, American officials said.
Page A1 President Bush addressed the nation and promised that the "indomitable"
American character would overcome Saddam Hussein abroad and economic troubles at
home. A1

   A slight decline in U.S. backing for war, poll shows A11

   Refugees fleeing Iraq and Kuwait streamed into Jordan, telling of bridges and
highways bombed in lands where food and hope are scarce. They said they feared
the perils of flight as much as they dreaded allied bombardment.  A1

   Iraq still has chemical weapons, vast stocks of nerve gas and germ agents,
though the allies have destroyed its ability to produce any more, U.S. military
officials say.  A9

   Reporter's Notebook: Desert fires signal a victory A8

   Baghdad says allied air raid killed P.O.W.  A8

   Radio voice heartens Kuwaitis A9

   Desert community becomes boom town A9

   Israel may have to attack soon in response to Iraq's missile attacks, Israeli
officials warned, in a sign that that the Government's patience is running
out.A10

   West Bank leader accused of spying A10

   P.L.O. fires rockets into northern Israel but falls short of targets A10

   French Defense Minister resigns A11

   Germany to give an additional $5.5 billion to war effort A11

   Turkish fundamentalists call for withdrawal from coalition A11

   India in uproar over refueling of U.S. aircraft A7

   The Pentagon has received a waiver for its projects to bypass environmental
impact assessments. The White House has waived the legal requirement, citing
concern that war preparations could otherwise be hampered. A14

International A2-7

   A breakthrough for black unity in South Africa occurred as the nation's two
largest black movements agreed to put an end to a bitter rivalry that, by their
consensus, has cost more than 8,000 lives. A1

   In Somalia, mass graves and vast devastation A2

   Ethiopian peace talks to resume, under U.S. leadership A2

   Spread of AIDS is worrying Uganda A6

   The Soviet opposition movement is considering whether it could conduct a
civil disobedience campaign to protest the Government's tough new military plan
for policing the nation. A3 Moscow and U.S. trade assurances on Baltics and
Kuwait 3

   Prices rise sharply in Czechoslovakia A5

   Warsaw Journal: The West's catchy music wins fans A4

   Quebec issued an ultimatum to Canada to agree to a new, broadly decentralized
constitution within two years or face a referendum that would seek Quebec
voters' approval for the province's independence. A3

   Canada will participate in talks between the United States and Mexico over
plans for a North American free-trade zone, diplomats said. D1

National A12-20

   Attempts to use gene therapy to fight cancer were tried for the first time
with two patients whose tumors have so far proved incurable. A1

   Wait for bed in public hospitals can be days A20

   The "Star Wars" military program to destroy enemy missiles has achieved its
first interception of a mock warhead in space, a Defense Deparment official
said. A1

   The Federal bank insurance plan should borrow from the Treasury andpay
taxpayers back later, the Congress's chief economist said.  D1

   New efforts against drunken driving are being initiated around the country to
try to attract public attention and break the national complacency over drunken
driving, especially the toll from repeat offenders. A16

   Ohio official challenges commuting of sentences A16

   New Hampshire Journal: A drama of love and murder A16

   Government halts corn reserve plan, sparking protest A16

Regional B1-5

   Real-estate taxes would rise considerably more than the Dinkins
administration has specified if the City Council approves the Mayor's budget
package for the coming fiscal year, city officials acknowledged.  A1

   Governor Cuomo invokes the image of the Great Depression to describe the
troubled times that the state government faces. If the strategy sparks memories
of Franklin D. Roosevelt, it may have its benefits.  B1

   New York State's budget crisis is forcing officials to confront anew one of
their least favorite questions: how much tax revenue should be squeezed from
citizens and companies? B2

   School districts may lose funds in Cuomo plan B3

   Governor Florio gave his budget for 1992 to the New Jersey State Legislature.
He said it would relieve property taxes, shrink government and aid education. B1

   A Kentucky meter service company is being investigated to determine how it
obtained tens of millions of dollars in water meter installation contracts in
New York and other cities, law enforcement officials said. B1

   A woman and her lawyer: parallel predicaments B1

   Giants' rally at City Hall fizzles with a fumble B4

   Times to seek arbitration on new plant B3

   Council given data on bridge safety, deputy Mayor saysB5

   Legal Aid lawyers picket for day to show frustration B4

   Dealer is found guilty of killing a crusader B4

Neediest Cases B5

Business Digest D1

The Living Section

   Food

   Wine Talk: A century of tastingsC1

   Look who's trading recipes now C1

   Living

   Sea changes for couture C1

Arts/Entertainment

   Hollywood may lose stars' hangout C9

   Four talent agents switch allegiance C9

   Music: ZZ Top at the GardenC9

   Word and Image: V. S. Naipaul, a traveler who writes C9

   "The Smile of the Lamb," a novel C13

   ABC leads ratings on war coverage C14

Education Pages

   Rebate in New Hampshire poses test for school-choice issue B6

   Schools try to help students with health problems...  B6

   Giving Soviets a lesson in thinking B7

Sports

   Basketball: King's dream come true D21

   Column: Berkow on Grange D21

   Football: Buccaneers interested in Belichick D21

   Giants deflect big question D21

Obituaries

   Ellis B. Haizlip, producer D18

   Dr. Alexander M. Schmidt, ex- Food and Drug Commissioner D20

   Christopher Jackman, longtime legislator in New Jersey D20

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

   Editorials A22

   Poland, pioneer of capitalism

   Backward from the summit

   Don't bash the messenger

   Narrowing the document gap

   Letters A22

   Tom Wicker: The key to unity A23

   Leslie H. Gelb: Gas, germs and nukes A23

   Frank Lorenzo: We'll miss you, Eastern A23

   Gary Hart: The military's new myths A23

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991


                             1682 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

HEADLINE: For First Time, Tests With Gene Therapy Begin on Cancer Patients

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   Two cancer patients yesterday became the first people to receive gene therapy
in an attempt to defeat otherwise incurable tumors.

   In a simple procedure that lasted barely 20 minutes, the patients, a
29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man, were each infused with about 100
million white blood cells. The cells enfolded a genetically engineered copy of a
gene that makes a potent anti-cancer enzyme.

    The extremely experimental method is intended to deliver the enzyme, tumor
necrosis factor, directly to colonies of tumors cells that have spread
throughout the body. Once at the tumor site, the enzyme, in theory, will
disintegrate the malignant tissue while leaving the rest of the body unscathed.

   Both patients suffer from metastatic melanoma, a lethal type of skin cancer,
and are not expected to live more than a few months without the new approach.
Conventional cancer treatments, like chemotherapy and radiation, are almost
always useless against advanced melanoma, and new therapies are desperately
needed.

   Malignant melanoma is among the most rapidly increasing cancers in the United
States, currently afflicting 8,000 to 10,000 people each year, many of whom die
in less than a year after the cancer has begun to spread.

Researchers Cautious

    Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.,
who heads the gene therapy project, refused to reveal details about the patients
beyond their age and sex. He cautioned that the gene therapy approach was in its
earliest stage of trials, and that researchers would not be able to judge for at
least several months whether it works.

   Should the technique be effective, it will offer a novel means for treating
malignant melanoma and other deadly metastatic cancers that have spread beyond
the reach of a surgeon's scalpel.

   "I've told the patients exactly how I feel," Dr. Rosenberg said, "and they
realize they're pioneers. This is a very experimental approach, but it
represents an attempt to open a new door to treating cancer."

   The start of the trial yesterday marked the second use of gene therapy
against human disease. In the first experiment, researchers treated a young girl
suffering from a rare hereditary immune disorder by giving her white blood cells
that contained the crucial gene she lacks. That trial is continuing, and the
researchers said they were happy with the child's progress.

Technical Difficulties

    Dr. Rosenberg's use of gene therapy against a common adult cancer is an
effort to dramatically broaden the usefulness of the difficult and expensive
technology.

   But the project has had technical difficulties that Dr. Rosenberg and his
colleagues are still ironing out. Dr. Kenneth Culver of the National Cancer
Institute in Bethesda, Md., who is working on the gene therapy project to treat
the hereditary immune disorder, said the researchers have had trouble inserting
the tumor necrosis gene into the white blood cells and trouble keeping it
producing enough enzyme to effectively attack tumors.

   "It's a difficult experiment, and there's a lot we don't know yet," said Dr.
Culver, who has intermittently collaborated with Dr. Rosenberg on the melanoma
experiment. "It's still a black box."

   Dr. Rosenberg said that the method was working well enough to have begun the
trials, and that the white blood cells definitely were generating measurable
levels of the powerful compound. But he acknowledged that the therapy was still
not perfected.

   "We're working round the clock," he said, "but this is state of the art, and
a lot of things have to work right. We're learning constantly and we're getting
much better at it."

Negotiations With the F.D.A.

    Beyond the technical snags, the Food and Drug Administration also introduced
complexities. It granted final approval for the project only on Jan. 8, months
after the National Institutes of Health had given its official blessing to the
venture. The F.D.A. was concerned about the potential dangers of giving patients
white blood cells that make large quantities of tumor necrosis factor, a highly
toxic compound. Previous efforts to treat cancer by injecting tumor necrosis
factor into the bloodstream failed, largely because scientists could not give
high enough doses of the compound to kill the cancer without risking the death
of the patient as well.

   To greatly diminish that risk, the Rosenberg team has inserted the gene for
tumor necrosis factor into a class of white blood cells that specifically home
in on tumors. Thus, the cells should not deliver the dangerous enzyme to
anything other than malignant tissue.

   But F.D.A. scientists were concerned that if a few of the engineered blood
cells got lodged in the kidney or another organ they might generate the
destructive enzyme in the wrong place.

   After lengthy negotiations with the agency, Dr. Rosenberg worked out a trial
procedure in which patients begin at very low doses of the engineered blood
cells and gradually increase to larger doses, until they are receiving about 300
billion cells for each infusion. In that process, Dr. Rosenberg hopes to be able
to monitor progress at every step.

   Other scientists familiar with the experiments are guardedly optimistic about
the chance of success. "I don't consider myself to be an advocate of the
technology, but I am optimistic," said Dr. Henry I. Miller, director of the Food
and Drug Administration's Office of Biotechnology. "I'm always eager to see
something new being tested, especially when the likelihood of injuring the
patient is very, very low."

CORRECTION-DATE: February 2, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:

   A front-page article on Wednesday about the first use of gene therapy on
cancer patients misstated the number of cases of maligant melanoma in the United
States. It is expected to be 32,000 this year, not 8,000 to 10,000. The smaller
figures referred to the number in which the cancer has begun to spread
throughout the body.


LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991


                             1683 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 January 30, 1991, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: EXPERIMENTAL THERAPY TRIED ON 2 WITH CANCER

BODY:


   WASHINGTON - Two melanoma victims who were deeme d likely to die in the near
future became the first cancer patients to undergo an experimental treatment
that uses genetically altered cells to attack their tumors, the National
Institutes of Health said Tuesday.  Dr. Steven Rosenberg, a National Cancer
Institute physician who developed the gene therapy technique, identified the
first patients only as a 29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man.  He said they
were transfused on Tuesday with tumor-fighting blood cells that had been removed
from their bodies, genetically altered and then reinjected.  ''They have
tolerated the treatment well and are doing fine,'' Rosenberg said. ''It's going
to be one to two months before we know if it is helping these patients.'' Both
of the patients are in advanced stages of melanoma, the so-called ''black mole
cancer.'' Melanoma starts on the skin, but can spread rapidly throughout the
body, causing tumors that grow without restraint. Rosenberg said that neither
patient has responded to other types of therapy and that they normally would
have only a short time to live.  The two patients are the first of 50 who will
receive trial gene therapy for advanced melanoma over the next year, said
Rosenberg. The technique was approved late last year after it was reviewed by
six committees at the National Institutes of Health and by the Food and Drug
Administration.  Use of genetically altered cells in patients was vigorously
opposed by several groups, and the FDA approval allows only 50 patients to
receive the experimental therapy. The results will then be reviewed before more
patients can be treated.  The gene therapy is designed to amplify the body's own
cancer-fighting ability. It uses natural cancer-fighting cells, called
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, or TIL, that have been removed from a patient's
tumor. These cells naturally migrate to the site of a tumor.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993


                             1684 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   January 30, 1991, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy trials start for cancer

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    The first two cancer patients to be given gene therapy were treated Tuesday
at the National Cancer Institute.

   If the experiment - approved for 50 patients with malignant melanoma - is
successful, gene therapy for cancer could be available to the public in two to
three years.

   ''We don't want to raise false hopes. This is an experimental treatment in
the early stages of development and this is the first attempt to use it for
cancer,'' says NCI's Dr. Steven Rosenberg, who heads the study.

   ''But ultimately, gene therapy may be applied to a wide range of diseases,''
he says.

   The new study builds on immunotherapy, another experimental cancer treatment
developed at NCI. This involves removing cancer-fighting immune cells from a
patient's tumor, growing them in huge numbers in the lab, then returning them to
the patient.

   In the test, the gene for a potent anti-cancer hormone is added to the immune
cells as they are multiplied in the lab. When put back, they pack a one-two
punch: As the army of immune cells attacks the tumor, the new gene makes the
cancer-fighting hormone.

   In Tuesday's experiment, the first two patients received the gene-modified
cells via a transfusion. Rosenberg says it will take about two months before
results are known.

   In the next year, 48 more patients will be treated. But only those who have
failed all other treatments for malignant melanoma are being considered.


                             1685 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A2

LENGTH: 651 words

HEADLINE: NIH Testing Gene Therapy On 2 Skin Cancer Patients

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Two patients with a lethal form of skin cancer yesterday began receiving an
unusual experimental treatment in which their own white blood cells were
injected back into their bodies after being grown and genetically modified in
the laboratory.

   A 29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man are the first cancer patients to be
treated with human gene therapy, an emerging technology in which extra genes are
put into body cells to either restore a function lost because of genetic damage
or to give the cell some helpful new characteristic. A 4-year-old girl with an
inherited immune deficiency became the first human to be treated with gene
therapy in September.

   In this latest case, researchers at the National Institutes of Health are
trying to supercharge the patients' white blood cells with a gene that produces
tumor necrosis factor, or TNF, a highly potent protein that kills cancer cells.
TNF itself cannot be directly injected into the body because effective doses
cause severe side effects in humans.

   Instead, the researchers hope the genetically engineered white blood cells
will act like molecular delivery trucks dumping tiny but concentrated doses of
TNF directly on the cancer cells while sparing the rest of the body. "This is an
attempt to open a new door for treating cancer patients and I am optimistic
about it," said Steven A. Rosenberg, NCI's chief of surgery and leader of the
team.

   Rosenberg said both patients tolerated the first treatment with about 100,000
gene-altered cells and were resting comfortably in the NIH clinical center. In
three to four days, they will receive another 300,000 cells, and early next
week, around 1 billion, he said. The final dose has yet to be determined.

   Yesterday's experiment piggybacks on previous trials in which white blood
cells alone have been used to attack the cancer. In earlier experiments, the NIH
team isolated white blood cells from inside the tumor, grew them in the
laboratory until there were billions, and then injected all of the cells into
the patient's body in hopes that they would kill the cancer. About half of the
time, the patients have improved. The disease disappeared in only a few.

   Rosenberg, in collaboration with W. French Anderson of the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute, received approval to conduct the TNF experiments last
year.

   Although this procedure is initially designed to test the safety of the
treatment in humans, Rosenberg said the patients ultimately will be receiving as
many white blood cells as patients in the earlier studies. The question is
whether the addition of the TNF gene will make the treatment more effective, and
that, Rosenberg said, will take months to determine.

   Although there had been some initial difficulty getting the gene-altered
cells to produce TNF, Rosenberg said the white blood cells from these two
patients now are making enough TNF to begin the experiment. Two companies,
Genetic Therapy Inc. (GTI) of Gaithersburg, and Cetus Corp. of Emeryville,
Calif., have been making the gene-transfer systems used in these experiments.
The first study was done with the GTI material.

   Meanwhile, the 4-year-old girl born with a gene defect that destroyed her
immune system continues to do well, said R. Michael Blaese, also at NCI.

   While her disease is very rare, affecting only a few dozen children a year,
the experiment on skin cancer patients may open the use of gene therapy to
thousands of Americans who suffer from the disease annually.

   "She has had no side effects from the treatment and her [blood] count is
normal for the first time in her life," he said.

   A second immune-deficient child, an 8-year-old girl, will be started on gene
therapy either later this week or next week, Blaese said. Rosenberg's team is
growing and genetically altering the cells of a half-dozen other skin cancer
patients who he expects to treat over the next few weeks.


                             1686 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     January 29, 1991, Tuesday, P.M. Final

SECTION: Part P; Page 2; Column 1; Late Final Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH;
GENE INSERTED TO FIGHT CANCER

BYLINE: From Times Wire Services

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Two patients suffering from a deadly type of skin cancer today underwent the
first attempt to use gene therapy to fight cancer, federal researchers said.

   In what could usher in a new era in cancer treatment, a 29-year-old woman and
a 49-year-old man stricken with advanced melanoma underwent the therapy at the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   A team of surgeons led by Dr. Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer
Institute, inserted a gene that carries codes for the production of a
tumor-shrinking substance into special tumor-fighting immune cells removed from
the cancer patients, multiplied in the test tube and then returned to the
patients' bodies.

   It is hoped the genetically altered cells will migrate to the patients'
tumors and produce the tumor-shrinking factor in that area only.


                             1687 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 222 words

HEADLINE: Miniature Gene May Lead to Muscular Dystrophy Therapy

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson

BODY:

   For the first time, scientists have found a way to make a miniaturized
version of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene, increasing the chance that
doctors may one day be able to treat the inherited muscle disorder with gene
therapy, a method for introducing repair genes into diseased cells.

   Researchers at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston have inserted the
miniature gene inside muscle cells growing in the laboratory.

   The gene directs the production of a protein that has the same size and
weight as the normal muscular dystrophy protein, called dystrophin, the lack of
which leads to the disease.

   When the muscular dystrophy gene was first discovered five years ago,
physicians were skeptical that gene therapy for the disease that affects 20,000
American boys was possible because of the size and complexity of the gene.

   "The entire gene is 2.5 million base pairs [genetic subunits] long, but most
of it is junk DNA," said Baylor's Cheng Chi Lee, lead author of the report that
appeared in last week's issue of Nature. The Baylor team squeezed out the
extraneous material, leaving a functional gene that was considerably smaller and
more manageable.

   During the next year, Lee said his team plans to use the gene to reverse
muscular dystropy in mice. After that, they hope to begin testing it in people.


                             1688 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1991 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   January 27, 1991, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 28; Column 1; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 960 words

HEADLINE: GENERATION OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS SUFFERERS PIN HOPES ON RESEARCH;
SCIENCE: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS BRING TEMPERED OPTIMISM. THERE IS NO KNOWN CURE FOR
AILMENT AFFLICTING 30,000 CHILDREN AND YOUNG ADULTS IN THE UNITED STATES.

BYLINE: By A. J. DICKERSON, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: DETROIT

BODY:

   Advertising executive Jerry Varon was in a client's office the afternoon his
son's pediatrician called and asked to meet with him that evening.

   "He said, 'Bring a friend and bring tissue. Your son has cystic fibrosis.' I
had to ask him how to spell it," said Varon, tears stinging his eyes at the
memory of that spring day 25 years ago. The Varons hoped that a cure might come
in time to save their sons.

   Richie Varon, then almost 7, was getting over a second bout of pneumonia when
the suspicious pediatrician ordered CF testing. Because the disease is
inherited, the Varons' daughter and their other son also were checked. Linda, 3,
was fine, but 4-year-old Jimmy had CF too.

   Doctors offered little hope. There was -- and still is -- no cure for CF, one
of the most common hereditary diseases.

   The isolation of the CF-carrying gene in 1989 and then the 1990 test-tube
experiments that replaced the defective gene with a normal one give hope to
people such as Linda Stamey, who turned 30 on Jan. 17, and Wendy and Milton
Spokojny, whose 13-year-old son has the disease.

   Robert Beall, medical director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, said he
expects to see a life-saving therapy available in five years.

   CF affects 30,000 children and young adults in the United States. Their lungs
produce a sticky, thick mucus that leads to lung infections and damage that robs
them of breath. Elsewhere, the congestion interferes with digestion.

   Improved treatments and antibiotics mean that children live on average into
their 20s, a few beyond age 40.

   Twenty-five years ago, most CF patients died before age 13.

   "You know your child has a terminal illness, but you can't prepare. You're
never ready," Shaaron Varon said in a recent interview at their suburban Detroit
home, where Richie's 12-string guitar is lovingly mounted on the living room
wall. "These kids teach you how to live, about life. They lived every minute.
They had the best possible life."

   For three weeks after the diagnoses, the Varons, who own their advertising
agency, stayed in an Ohio hospital as specialists began treating the boys and
teaching their parents CF therapy: Thumping the boys' bodies to dislodge the
thick mucus.

   Richie got worse the year he entered Michigan State University. He died in
November, 1977, just 19 years old.

   Their younger son, Jimmy, lettered in swimming at Michigan State. As a
photographer for The Detroit News, he won a National Press Photographers Assn.
award for his coverage of the Palestinian uprising.

   Jimmy Varon married, and, 11 weeks before he died on Jan. 7 at age 28,
daughter Molly was born. Because the thick mucus of CF often affects male
fertility, Molly is a miracle to the Varons.

   "He cried when he looked at his daughter," Jerry Varon said.

   His parents believe that, increasingly weak and fearful of becoming an
invalid, Jimmy Varon gave up. "Quality of life was important to Jimmy," his
father said.

   Scott Spokojny was found to have CF the week Richie Varon died. His mother
had feared that her newborn son was ill because he failed to gain weight on
frequent feedings.

   "By nine weeks, I was hysterical," she said. CF testing was arranged. It was
positive.

   "It's hard to accept," said Spokojny, a lawyer.

   "It's like a death sentence," added his wife.

   Scott was hospitalized the night his parents received the test results. He
was treated with enzymes so that his 6-pound, 8-ounce body could absorb
nourishment.

   "He gained half a pound overnight with the three feedings," his mother said.

   Scott was lucky. He has not been hospitalized since then, and is well enough
to play baseball, basketball and football. He hates taking 40 pills daily,
vitamins and antibiotics his mother plucks from a kitchen cabinet stuffed with
medicines. He doesn't mind the twice-daily, hourlong rituals of beating the
mucus from his lungs and two types of inhalation therapy.

   "It's fun. I'm used to it," Scott said. Of his disease, he rolls his eyes and
says, "It's not that bad. I can pretty much do what I want. Maybe in the next 10
years they'll have a cure."

   Beall, of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, believes gene therapy will become
reality within a few years, as the discovery of the gene has prompted a flurry
of new CF research.

   "More people want to get into this field, now that we're past this
bottleneck," he said.

   But the gene's discoverers, Francis Collins of the University of Michigan and
Lap-chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, will say only that
they hope to see a cure within their lifetimes.

   Those scientists' labs and others are exploring gene therapy, wherein the
defective CF gene would be replaced with a normal copy. The first two human
gene-therapy trials were begun last fall. One to treat a rare immune disorder
and another to treat melanoma, a lethal skin cancer.

   Tsui said that studies on CF gene replacement in people are years away. "It
is impossible to make predictions on the time involved in making this a
treatment," Collins said.

   Linda Stamey, a revenue officer with the Internal Revenue Service in Pontiac,
about 20 miles north of Detroit, is so optimistic that she and her husband,
John, plan to start a family in a few years. Besides having undergone three
bowel operations necessitated by CF mucus, she is also diabetic.

   "In the general population I'm the sickly one, but in the CF and diabetes
community, I'm the healthy one," she said. "We don't dwell on it. You have to
get on with living your life."

   Jerry Varon remains on the Metro Detroit CF chapter's board of directors,
still raising money for research.

   "Children shouldn't die," he says.

   Even so, finding a cure would be a bittersweet victory.

   "I'll be real happy for everyone else," Shaaron Varon says.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Shaaron and Jerry Varon with photos of their sons, Jim (with his
wife and daughter), at left, and Richie. Both men died from cystic fibrosis.
Associated Press


                             1689 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                    January 24, 1991, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; HEALTH & MEDICINE; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 814 words

HEADLINE: Parental smoking may damage children

BODY:


   Fathers who smoke have an increased risk of having children with brain cancer
and leukemia, suggesting that smoking might have damaged the fathers' sperm,
researchers said Wednesday.  That conclusion is speculative, said one of the
study's authors, Dale P. Sandler of the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences in Research Triangle Park, N.C. But the study points to the
possibility of an effect on sperm, "and another study with bigger numbers ought
to look at it carefully," she said. In a separate study, doctors found that
children whose parents smoke are three to four times as likely as other children
to develop serious infectious diseases requiring hospitalization. The two new
studies appear in the current issue of the American Journal of Epidemiology.
Sandler, Esther M. John of the Stanford University School of Medicine and David
Savitz of the University of North Carolina studied 223 children with cancer and
196 children without cancer who were selected as a control group. The
researchers found that the risks of leukemia and lymphoma were 30 percent higher
in children whose mothers smoked during pregnancy.
 Dioxin risk seen lower than expected
 Dioxin, the chemical that has come to symbolize the dangers of industrial
pollution, appears to be less dangerous than previously thought, according to
one of the most comprehensive epidemiological studies of the contaminant ever
conducted. Using the health records of 5,000 chemical industry workers exposed
to the chemical over the past 40 years, government scientists were able to find
a "slight" excess cancer risk only among those workers with dioxin levels some
500 times higher than normal. The results suggest that public concern over the
levels of dioxin typically found in the environment may be largely unfounded. It
also appears to bolster the growing view of many scientists that U.S. policy
toward the chemical a common byproduct of industrial processes and notorious for
its presence in the defoliant Agent Orange are far too strict and that millions
of dollars are being wasted in unnecessary regulation of it.
 Scientists make muscular dystrophy gene
 Scientists have made a synthetic form of the gene linked to the most severe
kind of muscular dystrophy, a "milestone" step toward gene therapy for the
disease. The gene, made from mouse genetic material, was shown to work in
experimental cells. Scientists said the accomplishment boosts prospects for
treating Duchenne dystrophy, the most devastating and common form, by supplying
muscle cells with a functioning version of the gene. Duchenne appears when
people lack a functioning version. The work is presented in today's issue of the
British journal Nature by Cheng Chi Lee, C. Thomas Caskey and others at the
Baylor College of Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Houston. "It's
a milestone," said genetics researcher Ronald Worton of the Hospital for Sick
Children in Toronto and the University of Toronto. But creating the gene is
still "a long way from putting it into a patient," cautioned Louis Kunkel of
Children's Hospital in Boston, Harvard Medical School and the Hughes institute
there. Both men said the gene also will help other studies of the disease.
 AIDS-related pneumonia seen in elderly
 The once-rare form of pneumonia now commonly found in AIDS patients has been
discovered in a group of five elderly hospital patients, none of whom had AIDS
or any other medical condition that has been linked to the lung infection. All
five developed their pneumonia within a three month period, and three of them
died, according to a study in the New England Journal of Medicine.  Doctors at
the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center say "it is possible that these
patients were infected with a more virulent strain of pneumocystis carinii," the
organism responsible for AIDS-related pneumonia.
 New test finds incidence of genital warts & The virus that causes genital warts
and is often linked to cervical cancer has been detected in far higher numbers
of sexually active young women than earlier studies have shown, researchers
using a uniquely sensitive new test reported. In a study of 467 women at the
University of California at Berkeley's campus health service, scientists and
physicians found that the new test detected the human papilloma virus in 46
percent of the women, while a widely used conventional test method was able to
detect the virus in only 11 percent of them. The new test method is called the
polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, and was developed by scientists at the Cetus
Corp. in Emeryville, Calif. It can take extremely minute quantities of the
genetic material in viruses, bacteria or even human cells and amplify it a
billion-fold so it can be analyzed precisely.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992


                             1690 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1991 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   January 24, 1991, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 226 words

HEADLINE: Muscular dystrophy gene copied

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Scientists have made an exact copy of the muscular dystrophy gene in mice
for the first time, making human gene therapy studies possible by the end of the
year, experts say.

   ''Researchers now can introduce the normal genetic blueprint into diseased
muscle cells,'' says Dr. Lawrence Stern of the Muscular Dystrophy Association in
Tucson, Ariz.

   Copying the muscular dystrophy gene has been difficult because the gene is so
large. Scientists previously had to break it into 10 pieces and splice it
together.

   Dr. Thomas Caskey, who led the MDA-sponsored study appearing in today's
Nature, succeeded in making the gene copy via a new method in which the gene
only needs to be chopped into two pieces.

   The method should aid research involving other large genes such as the one
for cystic fibrosis.

   With an exact copy in hand, scientists were able to isolate the gene segment
that contains the genetic code for dystrophin, a key protein needed for muscle
function and missing in people with the disease.

   When human studies begin, scientists probably will remove fibers from a
patient's muscle, introduce the gene segment that makes dystrophin, and return
the modified fibers to the muscle. Animal studies already appear successful.

   But, even if the human experiments work, Stern says, it may take several
years for a treatment to be developed.


                             1691 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 20, 1991, Sunday, Final Edition

NAME: W. FRENCE ANDERSON

SECTION: WASHINGTON POST MAGAZINE; PAGE W23

LENGTH: 7639 words

HEADLINE: French Anderson's Genetic Destiny

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson

BODY:

   THE BROWN, GLEAMING EYES OF THE 4-year-old girl darted between "Sesame
Street" on the TV next to her bed and the bearded doctor with the 20-gauge
needle in his hand. When he inserted the needle, she made no sound. She did not
pull away. She stared down at her seemingly disconnected hand, watching the
doctor work. Abruptly, she shifted back to Cookie Monster.

   Kenneth Culver, her pediatrician, found the vein, but while trying to connect
the clear plastic tubing, he dragged the needle out. Culver stiffened, paused a
moment, then switched to her other hand.

   She did not seem to notice.

   They had both been there before: she sitting on a bed in the National
Institutes of Health's high-tech hospital, he with his necessary needles. Again
Culver pierced her skin, probing for a vein. This time a rush of crimson filled
the needle's clear plastic barrel. "Okay, this one looks like it is real good,"
Culver said, never taking his eyes off the needle. "Looks like this is the magic
hand."

   The child didn't smile or cry. She seemed unaware of the historic events
about to take place in her body.

   In the background, a thin, 53-year-old scientist with gray hair and a white
lab coat watched over the proceedings. W. French Anderson, chief of the
molecular hematology branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
managed the last-minute preparations -- observing Culver, giving orders on the
phone, consulting with R. Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute as
Blaese ran the final safety tests on white blood cells that would soon be given
to the girl through the newly installed needle.

   More than anyone else, Anderson was responsible for the events about to take
place in the room that Friday, September 14, 1990. This was the moment he had
worked toward for so long. He and a handful of colleagues were about to open the
door to human gene therapy, a radical new treatment that may one day cure
thousands of inherited illnesses and attack major killers such as cancer and
heart disease.

   Just to get to that moment, however, Anderson had waged a fierce public
battle with some of the most respected molecular biologists in the country,
defending his vision of gene therapy, even as he lobbied federal gene regulators
to allow him to proceed. Anderson knew all about winning and losing in
bare-knuckle science. When he first came to NIH in July 1965, he'd gone to work
in the lab of Marshall Nirenberg. At the time, Nirenberg was racing to beat
several other high-powered laboratories to finish deciphering the genetic code
-- a three-letter alphabet that is used by genes to direct the production of
protein. Nirenberg won the race and the Nobel Prize; Anderson learned about
competition in science.  The higher the stakes, the meaner the fight.

   He knew the risks too. He was one of the few people who had gotten close to
the shy, stoic girl and he worried foremost that she might die as a result of
the treatment. But, as a researcher, he also knew that such a result could set
the field back for years. In addition, it would be a devastating defeat for
Anderson. For most of the last two decades, he had engaged in the highly
controversial and heady competition to make gene therapy a reality. He does not
like to lose.  The Threshold of a New Age

   The development of gene therapy has been a horse race with enormous stakes.
Whoever wins could end up with a Nobel Prize. And if gene therapy becomes as
essential as penicillin -- as many biologists believe it will -- some
enterprising private researcher could make millions. Already, biotechnology
companies are lining up to market it.

   French Anderson's gene therapy experiment is pretty simple. The girl was born
with an inherited illness, a single broken gene, that robbed her of a normal
immune system. She suffered from constant infections, severe colds, earaches,
fevers and pneumonia; without some kind of treatment, eventually one of the
maladies would kill her.

   Anderson's team wanted to give her a normal copy of the damaged gene in hopes
of restoring her tattered defenses. To give her the new gene, the researchers
took some of the genetically defective white blood cells from her body and began
growing them in the laboratory. As the cells grew, Anderson's team intentionally
introduced into them a crippled virus that could not reproduce itself or cause
an infection. Genetic engineering had turned the virus into a molecular ferry
that could carry a normal copy of the girl's broken gene. When each virus
infiltrated a white blood cell, it would deposit one copy of the gene into the
cell, healing it.

   At 12:52 p.m. on September 14, Ken Culver pushed the plunger of a needle that
squirted a test sample of a few million gene-treated cells into the girl's
intravenous line.

   They waited.

   Nothing happened; that was good.

   The girl's heart monitor beeped a steady pulse of 101 beats per minute.
Culver smiled, hugged his patient and walked away. Anderson stood by the bed,
smiling down at the 4-year-old pioneer. She looked back, unsmiling. At first, no
one spoke. "That's it," Anderson said to her. "What did you think of that? All
this buildup, and that's it. All that will happen now is we will watch you for a
while, and then tomorrow, you will go home. That's it."

   With the start of the six-month experimental treatment, Anderson and his gene
team had taken a tentative step across the threshold into a new age of genetic
medicine. They were now the first to try using genes to relieve a human
patient's symptoms -- true genetic therapy.

   After 10 minutes, the researchers hooked up a bag with a billion of the
girl's treated white blood cells to the intravenous tube and turned on the flow.
Then Anderson decreased the speed at which the gene-altered cells poured into
the girl's body. The action was cautious and notably out of character. Anderson
almost never slows things down.  'The Most Unpopular Boy In School' Ever since
he first thought about attacking human ills at the genetic level nearly 40 years
ago, Anderson has been impatient to begin. The urgency intensified in the last
decade as the technical means became available and as scientific competition
increased. "There is no question that I am driven," he says.

   His drive, which borders on compulsion, seems for the most part to come from
within, from a childhood characterized by precocious intelligence and social
awkwardness. Achievement was always expected of this Tulsa boy, born in the
heart of the Bible Belt on New Year's Eve 1936. His parents were well educated;
his father was an engineer, his mother a journalist. With their help, he learned
to read and write, add and subtract before he entered kindergarten. His ability
to focus -- some would say obsess -- on whatever goal he set would become a
personality trait that haunted him even as it drove him.  "People used to call
me a preacher's son," Anderson says, "because I didn't curse. I didn't smoke. I
didn't drink. I wasn't interested in sex. I was only interested in science."

   From a very early age, he excelled. But Anderson's outstanding academic
achievement led to arrogance. He says that even in elementary school, he looked
down on classmates who could not keep up. That earned him enemies. "I remember
Mary Dunn, we were walking from school in fourth or fifth grade," Anderson
recalls. "She said, 'You are the most unpopular boy in school.' " At the time,
he says, he didn't care, but today the memory pains him.

   Anderson says that during the fifth grade he had so much trouble with other
kids that the school psychologist was called in, and, though he pronounced
Anderson normal, it was clear the boy needed help with socialization. "I
realized I really had to change my life," Anderson says today. "If I was ever
going to be successful in life, I had to get along with people."

   Typically, he did something dramatic. He changed his name. He stopped using
his first name, William, and -- in hopes that it would change the way people
treated him -- began going by "W. French." To this day the alteration still
means a great deal to him. "I will not speak to anyone who accidentally calls me
Bill," Anderson says. "Any letter that comes to William or Bill, I throw it
away. I don't even open it. It's absolutely irrational."

   Eventually, however, Anderson learned to get along with his peers. By seventh
grade, he was popular enough to be voted class president.

   In 1951, the Anderson family moved to Muskogee, Okla., for a year. At
Muskogee Central High School, Anderson decided he had to do something about
another problem: He stuttered. He already had tried talking with stones in his
mouth like the Greek orator Demosthenes, but that didn't help much. So he joined
the debate team.

   Debate didn't cure him -- Anderson's stammer still shows up when he gets
excited -- but it did hone his competitive skills. So did several summers at
camp, where he learned he could run faster than almost anyone. "When I learned
that I could outrun people, track became the single most important thing in my
life," he says. "I put training for track above everything else, including
school."

   After his family moved back to Tulsa in 1953, Anderson began winning
cross-country races, and even started setting records for shorter events,
according to newspaper accounts of the meets. "At my peak I was only a second
off the world record in the 440," he says.

   Still, track never really made him one of the guys. Larry Oliver, a high
school chum who is now a Tulsa criminal lawyer, remembers that while the rest of
the high school track team would be roughhousing in the bus on the way to a
meet, Anderson would sit in the back, alone, reading.

   In 1954 he entered Harvard, and it was there that he became fascinated by
biochemical research. Upon graduation in 1958, he delayed entering Harvard
Medical School to study genetics at England's Cambridge University. He worked in
the laboratory of Francis H.C. Crick, the physicist who just five years earlier
had codiscovered the structure of the DNA double helix with American biologist
James D. Watson. "It was just an extraordinary time," Anderson says. "The first
model of a molecule [hemoglobin] was being built atom by atom. Three of the four
people in that little Quonset hut won Nobel Prizes for what they were doing."

   During his two years at Cambridge, Anderson started medical school and, over
a head and neck dissection in anatomy class, met Kathryn Duncan, who was also a
medical student and now is vice chairman of surgery at Children's Hospital. The
two married and transferred to Harvard to finish medical school.

   From Boston, Anderson moved into Nirenberg's laboratory at NIH and, three
years later, set up an independent lab to study diseases of hemoglobin, the
protein that carries oxygen throughout the body and makes blood red.  And he
began searching for ways to fix blood diseases at the genes.  'Two Steps Short
of Bizarre' French Anderson's office is a long, narrow room on the seventh floor
of the clinical center at NIH. Pink phone message slips litter the side table
beneath the wall phone. The blinds are drawn, the fluorescent lights are
glaring. All about are photos of his laboratory assistants, his disciples. On
the far wall near the corner is a very unusual calendar. For want of a better
name, let's call it French Anderson's Personal Scientific Progress Chart.

   The chart is really nothing more than a daily calendar that Anderson uses to
keep himself on track: Each half-day, he rates his scientific productivity. If
he has spent several hours doing science, he colors in that half-day green for
"good." If he has done only a little science, he marks the half-day yellow for
"caution." If he hasn't done any science, the half-day is colored red for
"danger." He condenses the half-days into monthly colored calendars and even
plots his level of scientific activity on a graph. But day in, day out, the
calendar is there as a scoreboard.

   Above the office door hangs another kind of scoreboard: a photograph of a
brother and sister in their teens. They are young and smiling. The young man is
wearing a graduation cap and gown, his sister is in a red dress.

   Nick and Judy Lambis were Anderson's first patients at the 500-bed NIH
clinical center. The siblings suffered from an inherited illness called
beta-thalassemia, a lethal form of anemia that occurs when a defective
hemoglobin gene is inherited. In the early 1970s, Anderson's blood research
group used a number of innovative treatments to keep the Lambises alive for a
dozen years, longer than similar patients had survived in the past.

   Ultimately Nick and Judy died, unable to tolerate the accumulation of iron in
their bodies caused by repeated transfusions. Anderson was not able to save them
from their underlying problem, the defective gene.  "If we could have done gene
therapy in those days, Nick and Judy would be alive and healthy today," Anderson
says.

   But the techniques for shooting genes into the body didn't exist then, and
the frustration of Nick's and Judy's deaths helped spur on the notions of gene
therapy already crystallizing in Anderson's mind. He decided it was time to
intensify his search for a way to fix diseases at their molecular roots.

   Though no one could repair genes in people until the mid-1980s, there were
several earlier discoveries that pointed the way. In the late 1950s, Stanfield
Rogers, a physician and biochemist working at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
in Tennessee, had discovered that the Shope papilloma virus, which causes warts,
carried a gene for producing an enzyme called arginase. When the virus infected
skin cells, it turned the cells into tiny enzyme factories, and the enzyme
lowered an infected person's blood levels of arginine, an amino acid.

   In 1969, Rogers learned of two German sisters with extremely high blood
levels of arginine that caused them to be retarded and suffer convulsions. He
and the family's German doctors infected the children with the Shope virus in
hopes of bringing down their arginine levels, but to no avail. Rogers was
severely criticized by other physicians who felt his crude attempts at a gene
therapy were premature, even unethical. He abandoned the effort, but his
experience foreshadowed the use of viruses to transfer genes into human cells by
about 15 years.

   In the early 1970s, as Anderson began to consider molecular cures, no one had
yet figured out how to engineer a virus to carry a specific gene. The gene
engineering revolution was just getting started, and Anderson realized "that all
the things we were doing [with hemoglobin research] were not relevant to gene
therapy."

   But he'd made up his mind what he wanted, and in 1974, in typical French
Anderson fashion, underlined his decision dramatically: He gave his blood
projects to his colleagues and surrendered most of his lab space so he could
refocus on gene therapy. "I was regarded as two steps short of bizarre,"
Anderson says. "Nobody gives away three-fourths of their program."

   And so began a quirky period for Anderson. Methodically, he went back to
basics, learning the new gene-manipulating techniques, searching for a way to
use them to treat sick patients. He would try an approach, learn it and then
rapidly abandon it when he concluded that it would not lead him to a genetic
cure.

   Eventually Anderson's personal calendar became a rainbow of yellows and reds.
For distraction, he turned his attention to tae kwon do, a Korean martial art in
which he has a fourth-degree black belt. He practiced longer and longer hours
and began entering competitions. Yet no amount of chops and kicks could
obliterate the truth: Because the technology was in its infancy, Anderson's
quest for a way to do gene therapy was at a standstill.

   In 1976, Anderson had discovered that Elaine Diacumakos, a lone researcher
working in the back labs of Rockefeller University, was injecting bits of
material directly into individual cells with extremely fine glass needles.
Struggling alone with a microscope on a rickety lab bench, Anderson adapted
Diacumakos's technique and injected an individual enzyme-producing gene into a
cell that lacked that enzyme. In 1979, for the first time, Anderson "cured" a
cell growing in the laboratory of its genetic defect by putting in a single copy
of the normal gene.

   The report caused a sensation, and the number of groups working with
microinjection, as the technique was called, rapidly increased. But as the
excitement of the initial discovery waned, Anderson realized he was no closer to
his goal of human gene therapy. It would not be possible to microinject by hand
the billions of cells that would be needed to treat a human patient.

   On June 25, 1980, Anderson's 19th wedding anniversary, he chaired a
scientific session on gene transfer and gene therapy at the Airlie Conference
Center near Warrenton, but his heart wasn't in it. "I was so depressed I could
hardly give my talk," Anderson says. "The technology was simply not available to
do clinical gene therapy." He tossed and turned in his bed for a couple of
hours, got up at 3 in the morning, went home and gave up on microinjection. But
there was nothing else to try. His calendar began to turn completely red.

   For the next two years, Anderson did little science at the lab bench.
Instead, he spent more time on tae kwon do and practiced sports medicine, often
acting as the official physician at international tae kwon do tournaments.  'I
Will Do WhateverI Have To' Despite his seeming disenchantment with the whole
process, Anderson kept one eye on the scientific literature for hints of new lab
procedures that might open a passageway to gene therapy. To many of the
biologists struggling to make these molecular tools, Anderson's approach was
opportunistic. He seemed to simply hang back, wait for new ideas to emerge and
then seize on them to advance his goal instead of plunging into the lab to do
the hard work of creating the tools himself.

   In the early 1980s, several scientists who had been working with an unusual
virus family called the retrovirus -- which includes the AIDS virus --
discovered that its genes could be scooped out and replaced with any other gene.
What's more, when the retrovirus infects a cell, it doesn't kill it. Instead,
the virus unpacks the genes it carries and permanently entwines them with the
genes of the host cell. Scientists realized that the retrovirus might be able to
carry genes into human cells for therapeutic purposes.

   The idea caught Anderson's imagination, and in 1984 he set up a collaboration
with Eli Gilboa, a retrovirus expert now at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center in New York City, who genetically engineered several of the now-classic
systems used to carry genes into cells. For Gilboa, it was an intoxicating time.
"I was a very junior faculty member at Princeton," he says. Anderson "was a
well-known researcher with a lot of resources who could help me survive in this
difficult, competitive profession."

   They had plenty of competition. A major group already had formed around
Theodore Friedmann at the University of California at San Diego, and another
around Stuart Orkin at Harvard and Richard Mulligan at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Both teams were well into the race to build better
viruses to put genes into mice and show that the systems worked.

   As Anderson started gearing up in 1984, he began working on a review article
for Science magazine and interviewed all of the leaders in the field. Since the
other scientists did not yet view Anderson as a competitor, they reported to him
their up-to-the-minute results. The discussions convinced Anderson that
retroviruses were the way to go and that, for a variety of technical reasons,
the first disease likely to be attacked with gene therapy was a rare disorder
often called ADA deficiency, a gene defect that damages the immune system. "I
was convinced it was ADA," Anderson says, "but I wasn't in the ADA field."

   Only three research teams in the world had isolated the ADA gene. Two of them
-- one led by Orkin and one led by Dinka Valerio at the Institute of Applied
Radiobiology and Immunology in Rijswijk, Netherlands -- refused to share their
copies of the gene. So Anderson called the third team, led by John Hutton, now
dean of the University of Cincinnati School of Medicine, to talk about Hutton's
work for the Science paper. Hutton told Anderson about his ADA gene and said he
didn't plan to use it for gene therapy.

   "So I said, 'Will you send it to us?' " Anderson recalls.

   Hutton said sure. A few days later, a white Styrofoam box packed with dry ice
arrived from Cincinnati with the ADA gene inside. Anderson was ecstatic.
continued on page 36 ANDERSON continued from page 26 "I couldn't believe that
Hutton would just sort of hand it over," Anderson says. After thanking Hutton
and offering a collaboration, Anderson knew that he had to call Orkin, who had
been feeding Anderson the latest results from his lab. Anderson explained that
Hutton had sent him the ADA gene and that Anderson was now going into direct
competition with Orkin in ADA gene therapy research and he wouldn't be asking
him any more questions.

   Anderson remembers Orkin as being upset. "He spent two years cloning the
gene," Anderson says, "and I got it in two days by making a phone call."

   Orkin remembers the episode a little differently. "It is sort of in character
for him to suggest that doing that [ADA gene therapy] experiment was so
important in our minds, which it never really was," Orkin says. Today Orkin's
group continues basic research with the ADA gene, and others, but concentrates
more on what turns genes on and off, rather than searching for ways to cure ADA
deficiency with gene therapy.

   But if Orkin didn't care about the way Anderson conducted himself, other
groups did. Anderson was accused of not doing his own work and merely taking
advantage of the work of others.

   "The opportunist charge is a valid charge," Anderson says. "Anything that
will help accomplish the goal, I will do it, within a fairly rigid personal and
ethical framework. I don't steal things. But whatever obstacle is in the way
scientifically, politically, I will do whatever I have to do to get around it."

   One of Anderson's more vocal critics, MIT's Richard Mulligan remains
unimpressed. "The key question," Mulligan says, "is looking at the track record
and the contributions to the field. If you look at his [Anderson's]
contributions, in technological development, there is nothing there."
Neutralizing the Critics Even with the ADA gene in hand and the virus revealed
as the way to get it into cells, Anderson and the other groups still had to
figure out how to put the two together and show that gene therapy could work.
But all the groups ran into technical problems while trying to get the
transplanted genes to function in mice.

   That is when Anderson decided to sidestep the mouse problem and shift his
focus to monkeys through a collaboration with Gilboa, Blaese, Richard O'Reilly,
chairman of pediatrics at Memorial Sloan-Kettering, and others. Some of the
initial results were disappointing, but in the end, his group reported that the
virus could carry the gene into the blood cells of monkeys.

   Other scientists looked at the same results and reached a different
conclusion. The gene's activity in the monkey's blood "was so small, so
transient and at so trivial a level that one could argue the opposite," Orkin
says. There were even disagreements among the collaborators. Says Gilboa: "We
considered those studies as failures."

   The problem was the stem cells. These are the bone marrow cells that give
rise to all other blood cells. Anderson had hoped to put the genes into the stem
cells, which would provide a permanent cure, but scientists have yet to find a
way to selectively identify stem cells, let alone selectively infect them with a
gene-carrying virus.

   Anderson, however, looked on the bright side. The monkey experiments had
problems, but they also showed the promise and the safety of the approach. None
of the monkeys were harmed by the gene-carrying virus.

   Even as the scientists haggled over the meanings of individual experiments,
Anderson looked down the road and saw a new hurdle, a regulatory obstacle called
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, or RAC, and its human gene therapy
subcommittee. The RAC is a group of experts that was first assembled by NIH in
the 1970s to allay the fears of Congress and the public about the emerging
techniques of genetic engineering. The gene therapy subcommittee was set up to
regulate the application of gene technology to people.

   The subcommittee was established after Martin Cline, a hematologist at the
University of California at Los Angeles, tried using a crude form of gene
therapy on two thalassemia patients in Israel and Italy. The treatment had no
effect on the patients, but because the experiment was conducted without peer
approval, Cline lost most of his federal research grants.

   The RAC subcommittee is chaired by a thoughtful bioethicist named LeRoy
Walters from Georgetown University's Kennedy Institute of Ethics. Walters, a
mild-mannered minister used to long-winded academic debates, recognized that
gene therapy would arrive sooner or later and that the best the subcommittee
could do was build a consensus about the review process so the work could
continue in a safe and orderly fashion. Walters and the group began by drafting
a list of questions scientists would have to answer to receive the
subcommittee's blessing.

   Anderson helped the process along, giving advice, answering technical
questions and, some say, positioning himself to put in the first application for
gene therapy. On April 24, 1987, he submitted a preclinical document about the
size of the D.C. phone book, basically a treatise stuffed with facts about how
his group would do gene therapy with sick children. Politicians call such
documents trial balloons.

   Anderson also sent the document to his competitors, almost daring them to
find something wrong. Mulligan and Orkin each got one. So did more sympathetic
gene researchers, such as UCSD's Theodore Friedmann and Dusty Miller of the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.

   The reviews were blistering: All but one concluded that an ADA experiment in
a sick child should not go forward. But Anderson proceeded unfazed.

   "One approach is to ignore critics," says Arthur Nienhuis, chief of clinical
hematology at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and a longtime
Anderson friend. "French draws them out. If you get people to commit to their
criticism, then eventually you are going to neutralize them."

   On November 20, 1987, Anderson sent a seven-page letter to the RAC and the
subcommittee. Even as he agreed with the criticisms, he offered the group a
middle course called a "limited protocol." In it, he argued, he would be
justified in trying the experimental therapy on children who had no chance of
recovery with emerging treatments, such as bone marrow transplantation or a new
drug treatment called PEG-ADA.

   In December 1987, the subcommittee met to go over Anderson's answers, and by
the end of the meeting, the limited protocol proposal convinced the regulators
that Anderson's idea was worth a try, though Mulligan and others still
disagreed. "Scientifically, there was just no data to suggest that it would
work," Mulligan says.

   Buoyed by the subcommittee's encouragement, Anderson agreed to file an ADA
proposal for the next meeting. But the proposal never came. Between the December
meeting and the next time Anderson would come before the RAC subcommittee in the
summer of 1988, the NCI's Blaese came up with a brand new idea.

   Blaese, an expert in the immune system, was still struggling with the
problems involved in getting the gene into the blood cells of monkeys. While
looking over the data one day, it occurred to him that it would be much easier
to put the ADA gene into T cells, the specific type of white blood cells that
were killed by the gene defect. What's more, the world's expert in growing T
cells, Steven A. Rosenberg, NCI's chief of surgery, was four floors below in
NIH's clinical center.

   Rosenberg was having troubles of his own. A novel experimental therapy he had
developed for melanoma, an especially deadly type of skin cancer, wasn't working
well enough to become a standard treatment. Rosenberg was surgically removing
clumps of a patient's cancer and then, in the lab, growing the white blood cells
found inside the tumor. Once there were billions of these white blood cells,
apparently primed to attack the tumor, he would give them back to the patient to
fight the cancer. About 10 percent of the time, the technique worked
spectacularly well. Half the time, it worked a little bit, and the rest of the
time the patient died. Rosenberg couldn't figure out what was going on because
he could not track the cancer-killing white blood cells through the body.

   Blaese realized that Anderson's team could put a bacterial gene into
Rosenberg's cancer-killing white blood cells, tagging them so they would be easy
to track in the body. This experiment had political as well as scientific
advantages: It would be carried out in dying cancer patients trying a last-ditch
experimental treatment instead of in children, and it wasn't actually therapy
since it was just a gene-tracking experiment -- all of which reduced the
pressure a little. It also put Rosenberg in the Anderson camp. Highly
intelligent and personally imposing, Rosenberg was not afraid to push for what
he wanted, even if it meant leaning on a federal committee.

   The debate before the gene therapy subcommittee opened in June 1988, but the
gene experts on the committee were not happy with the information initially
submitted by Anderson's team and deferred a decision. The review battle ebbed
and flowed until early 1989, when the NIH team won full approval.

   At 10:47 a.m. on May 22, 1989, the first genetically engineered cells flowed
into a 53-year-old man who had skin cancer. It wasn't gene therapy, but it was
gene transfer. The experiment went uneventfully, with the marker gene causing no
harm to the patient, though he eventually died from his disease.

   After the cancer trial was launched, Anderson returned to his original idea:
fixing the ADA gene in children. By February 1990, he had a plan in motion. The
ADA project would be a Blaese and Anderson collaboration. Rosenberg, who cared
only about cancer research, would apply for an experiment designed to use gene
therapy to turn the white blood cells into delivery trucks that dumped toxins on
the tumors.

   The review process for the two experiments began in March 1990 and proceeded
in parallel without the rancorous debate that characterized the first
gene-tracking experiment. The human gene therapy subcommittee, and then the RAC,
approved the experiments in July 1990.

   Unresolved questions remained about the ADA experiment, but most of the
experts concluded that Anderson and Blaese had reasonable answers. When the key
subcommittee finally voted, it was 15-1 in favor, with only Richard Mulligan
voting no.

   Mulligan says he did not consider the experiment well-designed. He voted
"no," he said, "to point out that the scientific standards were beginning to go
downhill." The Juggler Now that Anderson has pushed open the door on gene
therapy, more than a dozen research groups around the world are hot on his
heels, each seeking to test its own version of a genetic cure. Meanwhile, even
as the members of the NIH gene team plan to add more children to the ADA study,
they continue to give the 4-year-old girl monthly doses of gene-enhanced white
blood cells to see if they produce a permanent cure. A preliminary report to the
Food and Drug Administration in December was promising, but in mid-December
there was a contamination problem with the growing cells that caused Anderson's
team to skip a treatment.

   Still, Anderson says, "the odds are really strong in our favor that we are
helping this child."

   The girl, of course, doesn't understand the significance of the things
happening to her. "She just knows she is not well," says her father, "and that
she is being treated by Dr. Anderson."

   When she comes in for her next round of gene therapy, she will stay with her
family at the Children's Inn on the NIH campus. Probably first thing in the
morning, she and her parents will walk up the hill to the clinical center, where
they'll be greeted by gene team members. The little girl will walk into the
pediatric intensive care unit and lie down on a bed.

   If she is true to character, she probably won't be smiling. But at some
point, French Anderson will likely enter the room and, as he's done many times
before, begin to juggle three spongy yellow balls, the kind given to blood
donors to squeeze. "She is very shy," says her father. "He juggles balls to make
her smile. And she smiles for him, which she does not do for many people."

   It's an odd image, but an appropriate one. For if French Anderson can juggle
enough balls -- medical, ethical and political -- he may yet win the race of his
scientific life. ? Larry Thompson is the science editor of The Post's Health
section.  "I couldn't believe that Hutton would just sort of hand it over,"
Anderson says. After thanking Hutton and offering a collaboration, Anderson knew
that he had to call Orkin, who had been feeding Anderson the latest results from
his lab. Anderson explained that Hutton had sent him the ADA gene and that
Anderson was now going into direct competition with Orkin in ADA gene therapy
research and he wouldn't be asking him any more questions.

   Anderson remembers Orkin as being upset. "He spent two years cloning the
gene," Anderson says, "and I got it in two days by making a phone call."

   Orkin remembers the episode a little differently. "It is sort of in character
for him to suggest that doing that [ADA gene therapy] experiment was so
important in our minds, which it never really was," Orkin says. Today Orkin's
group continues basic research with the ADA gene, and others, but concentrates
more on what turns genes on and off, rather than searching for ways to cure ADA
deficiency with gene therapy.

   But if Orkin didn't care about the way Anderson conducted himself, other
groups did. Anderson was accused of not doing his own work and merely taking
advantage of the work of others.

   "The opportunist charge is a valid charge," Anderson says. "Anything that
will help accomplish the goal, I will do it, within a fairly rigid personal and
ethical framework. I don't steal things. But whatever obstacle is in the way
scientifically, politically, I will do whatever I have to do to get around it."

   One of Anderson's more vocal critics, MIT's Richard Mulligan remains
unimpressed. "The key question," Mulligan says, "is looking at the track record
and the contributions to the field. If you look at his [Anderson's]
contributions, in technological development, there is nothing there."
Neutralizing the Critics Even with the ADA gene in hand and the virus revealed
as the way to get it into cells, Anderson and the other groups still had to
figure out how to put the two together and show that gene therapy could work.
But all the groups ran into technical problems while trying to get the
transplanted genes to function in mice.

   That is when Anderson decided to sidestep the mouse problem and shift his
focus to monkeys through a collaboration with Gilboa, Blaese, Richard O'Reilly,
chairman of pediatrics at Memorial Sloan-Kettering, and others. Some of the
initial results were disappointing, but in the end, his group reported that the
virus could carry the gene into the blood cells of monkeys.

   Other scientists looked at the same results and reached a different
conclusion. The gene's activity in the monkey's blood "was so small, so
transient and at so trivial a level that one could argue the opposite," Orkin
says. There were even disagreements among the collaborators. Says Gilboa: "We
considered those studies as failures."

   The problem was the stem cells. These are the bone marrow cells that give
rise to all other blood cells. Anderson had hoped to put the genes into the stem
cells, which would provide a permanent cure, but scientists have yet to find a
way to selectively identify stem cells, let alone selectively infect them with a
gene-carrying virus.

   Anderson, however, looked on the bright side. The monkey experiments had
problems, but they also showed the promise and the safety of the approach. None
of the monkeys were harmed by the gene-carrying virus.

   Even as the scientists haggled over the meanings of individual experiments,
Anderson looked down the road and saw a new hurdle, a regulatory obstacle called
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, or RAC, and its human gene therapy
subcommittee. The RAC is a group of experts that was first assembled by NIH in
the 1970s to allay the fears of Congress and the public about the emerging
techniques of genetic engineering. The gene therapy subcommittee was set up to
regulate the application of gene technology to people.

   The subcommittee was established after Martin Cline, a hematologist at the
University of California at Los Angeles, tried using a crude form of gene
therapy on two thalassemia patients in Israel and Italy. The treatment had no
effect on the patients, but because the experiment was conducted without peer
approval, Cline lost most of his federal research grants.

   The RAC subcommittee is chaired by a thoughtful bioethicist named LeRoy
Walters from Georgetown University's Kennedy Institute of Ethics. Walters, a
mild-mannered minister used to long-winded academic debates, recognized that
gene therapy would arrive sooner or later and that the best the subcommittee
could do was build a consensus about the review process so the work could
continue in a safe and orderly fashion. Walters and the group began by drafting
a list of questions scientists would have to answer to receive the
subcommittee's blessing.

   Anderson helped the process along, giving advice, answering technical
questions and, some say, positioning himself to put in the first application for
gene therapy. On April 24, 1987, he submitted a preclinical document about the
size of the D.C. phone book, basically a treatise stuffed with facts about how
his group would do gene therapy with sick children. Politicians call such
documents trial balloons.

   Anderson also sent the document to his competitors, almost daring them to
find something wrong. Mulligan and Orkin each got one. So did more sympathetic
gene researchers, such as UCSD's Theodore Friedmann and Dusty Miller of the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.

   The reviews were blistering: All but one concluded that an ADA experiment in
a sick child should not go forward. But Anderson proceeded unfazed.

   "One approach is to ignore critics," says Arthur Nienhuis, chief of clinical
hematology at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and a longtime
Anderson friend. "French draws them out. If you get people to commit to their
criticism, then eventually you are going to neutralize them."

   On November 20, 1987, Anderson sent a seven-page letter to the RAC and the
subcommittee. Even as he agreed with the criticisms, he offered the group a
middle course called a "limited protocol." In it, he argued, he would be
justified in trying the experimental therapy on children who had no chance of
recovery with emerging treatments, such as bone marrow transplantation or a new
drug treatment called PEG-ADA.

   In December 1987, the subcommittee met to go over Anderson's answers, and by
the end of the meeting, the limited protocol proposal convinced the regulators
that Anderson's idea was worth a try, though Mulligan and others still
disagreed. "Scientifically, there was just no data to suggest that it would
work," Mulligan says.

   Buoyed by the subcommittee's encouragement, Anderson agreed to file an ADA
proposal for the next meeting. But the proposal never came. Between the December
meeting and the next time Anderson would come before the RAC subcommittee in the
summer of 1988, the NCI's Blaese came up with a brand new idea.

   Blaese, an expert in the immune system, was still struggling with the
problems involved in getting the gene into the blood cells of monkeys. While
looking over the data one day, it occurred to him that it would be much easier
to put the ADA gene into T cells, the specific type of white blood cells that
were killed by the gene defect. What's more, the world's expert in growing T
cells, Steven A. Rosenberg, NCI's chief of surgery, was four floors below in
NIH's clinical center.

   Rosenberg was having troubles of his own. A novel experimental therapy he had
developed for melanoma, an especially deadly type of skin cancer, wasn't working
well enough to become a standard treatment. Rosenberg was surgically removing
clumps of a patient's cancer and then, in the lab, growing the white blood cells
found inside the tumor. Once there were billions of these white blood cells,
apparently primed to attack the tumor, he would give them back to the patient to
fight the cancer. About 10 percent of the time, the technique worked
spectacularly well. Half the time, it worked a little bit, and the rest of the
time the patient died. Rosenberg couldn't figure out what was going on because
he could not track the cancer-killing white blood cells through the body.

   Blaese realized that Anderson's team could put a bacterial gene into
Rosenberg's cancer-killing white blood cells, tagging them so they would be easy
to track in the body. This experiment had political as well as scientific
advantages: It would be carried out in dying cancer patients trying a last-ditch
experimental treatment instead of in children, and it wasn't actually therapy
since it was just a gene-tracking experiment -- all of which reduced the
pressure a little. It also put Rosenberg in the Anderson camp. Highly
intelligent and personally imposing, Rosenberg was not afraid to push for what
he wanted, even if it meant leaning on a federal committee.

   The debate before the gene therapy subcommittee opened in June 1988, but the
gene experts on the committee were not happy with the information initially
submitted by Anderson's team and deferred a decision. The review battle ebbed
and flowed until early 1989, when the NIH team won full approval.

   At 10:47 a.m. on May 22, 1989, the first genetically engineered cells flowed
into a 53-year-old man who had skin cancer. It wasn't gene therapy, but it was
gene transfer. The experiment went uneventfully, with the marker gene causing no
harm to the patient, though he eventually died from his disease.

   After the cancer trial was launched, Anderson returned to his original idea:
fixing the ADA gene in children. By February 1990, he had a plan in motion. The
ADA project would be a Blaese and Anderson collaboration. Rosenberg, who cared
only about cancer research, would apply for an experiment designed to use gene
therapy to turn the white blood cells into delivery trucks that dumped toxins on
the tumors.

   The review process for the two experiments began in March 1990 and proceeded
in parallel without the rancorous debate that characterized the first
gene-tracking experiment. The human gene therapy subcommittee, and then the RAC,
approved the experiments in July 1990.

   Unresolved questions remained about the ADA experiment, but most of the
experts concluded that Anderson and Blaese had reasonable answers. When the key
subcommittee finally voted, it was 15-1 in favor, with only Richard Mulligan
voting no.

   Mulligan says he did not consider the experiment well-designed. He voted
"no," he said, "to point out that the scientific standards were beginning to go
downhill." The Juggler Now that Anderson has pushed open the door on gene
therapy, more than a dozen research groups around the world are hot on his
heels, each seeking to test its own version of a genetic cure. Meanwhile, even
as the members of the NIH gene team plan to add more children to the ADA study,
they continue to give the 4-year-old girl monthly doses of gene-enhanced white
blood cells to see if they produce a permanent cure. A preliminary report to the
Food and Drug Administration in December was promising, but in mid-December
there was a contamination problem with the growing cells that caused Anderson's
team to skip a treatment.

   Still, Anderson says, "the odds are really strong in our favor that we are
helping this child."

   The girl, of course, doesn't understand the significance of the things
happening to her. "She just knows she is not well," says her father, "and that
she is being treated by Dr. Anderson."

   When she comes in for her next round of gene therapy, she will stay with her
family at the Children's Inn on the NIH campus. Probably first thing in the
morning, she and her parents will walk up the hill to the clinical center, where
they'll be greeted by gene team members. The little girl will walk into the
pediatric intensive care unit and lie down on a bed.

   If she is true to character, she probably won't be smiling. But at some
point, French Anderson will likely enter the room and, as he's done many times
before, begin to juggle three spongy yellow balls, the kind given to blood
donors to squeeze. "She is very shy," says her father. "He juggles balls to make
her smile. And she smiles for him, which she does not do for many people."

   It's an odd image, but an appropriate one. For if French Anderson can juggle
enough balls -- medical, ethical and political -- he may yet win the race of his
scientific life.

   Larry Thompson is the science editor of The Post's Health section.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, THE FRENCH CONNECTION: ANDERSON AND A STEP-BY-STEP DIAGRAM OF
THE FIRST HUMAN GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENT., FRANK W. OCKENFELS


                             1692 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 8, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z7

LENGTH: 922 words

HEADLINE: Biological Therapies for Cancer;
Now Patients Can Be Treated With Normal Body Compounds Mass-Produced in the
Laboratory

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A novel approach to boosting the immune system's ability to attack tumors is
showing promise in children suffering from advanced bone cancer, and also may be
useful against other types of cancer that become resistant to traditional drugs.

   The treatment -- called biological therapy, or immunotherapy -- relies on
compounds that exist normally in the body, and which, in recent years, can be
manufactured in the laboratory. For an increasing number of stubborn cancers,
these agents are being used in combination with conventional chemotherapy or as
an alternative to help patients get rid of malignant cells that have spread from
the original tumor to other parts of the body.

   "In the last several years, people have developed an interest in combining
[the biological therapies] with more standard treatments," such as surgery and
chemotherapy, said Steven A. Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute.

   At the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston,
researchers are treating 30 children who have advanced bone cancer with a new
biological method that stimulates a key immune cell to wipe out wayward tumor
cells. In many bone cancer patients, tiny bits of tumor escape to the lungs
before the tumor is detected and surgically removed.

   The escaped cancer cells have a special marker that is recognized by immune
cells called macrophages, which patrol the body like garbage collectors
scavenging debris and destroying dead or diseased cells.  Cell biologist Isaiah
Fidler and colleagues at M.D. Anderson have found a way to enhance the
tumor-killing activity of these macrophages. Normally, it takes 10 to 20
macrophages to kill one cancer cell. But when millions of macrophages are in
their activated state, animal experiments show, they can shrink and even
eliminate tumors. Preliminary results with cancer patients suggest that the
approach is safe and ultimately may be effective against different types of
human cancers.

   The M.D. Anderson study will not be complete for another six months, but "the
initial results are very encouraging," Fidler said.

   Most of the children have responded to the treatment; their tumors have
shrunk or seemed to disappear after they underwent regular injections to
activate the macrophages over a six-month period, according to Eugenie
Kleinerman, a pediatrician at M.D. Anderson. In some children, however, tumors
began growing again when treatment was discontinued.

   Physicians have been actively experimenting with biological agents since the
late 1970s, when the American Cancer Society committed several million dollars
to test a crude preparation of the normal body protein, interferon, against
several types of cancer, including those of the breast, colon, kidney and skin.

   A protein produced by cells in response to a viral infection, interferon
inhibits cell division -- the reason cancer researchers believed it might be
useful against tumors. Interferon also activates some types of immune cells in
the body, including macrophages.

   But initial results were disappointing, although interferon did occasionally
shrink some types of tumors, such as cancers of the breast, but it did not
control the disease.  Today, interferon is used to treat a majority of the
patients with hairy cell leukemia, a rare form of blood cancer and is able to
control the disease in 80 to 90 percent of the patients, said Stephen P.
Creekmore, who oversees biological therapy research funded by NCI. It also is
used experimentally in combination with other drugs for kidney cancer and one
other form of leukemia.

   "Interferon got us into the game," said John Laszlo, the American Cancer
Society's senior vice president for research, "and it still has some very
practical applications. The drug is not dead."

   One form of the protein -- alpha-interferon -- in combination with other
drugs is now becoming part of standard treatment for Kaposi's sarcoma, an
unusual form of skin cancer that is commonly associated with AIDS.

   Interleukin-2, or IL-2, is another immune stimulating compound identified
about the same time as interferon. IL-2 stimulates the growth of T cells, a type
of white blood cell that is central to immunity.

   NCI's Rosenberg has developed a system of using interleukin-2 to mass produce
cancer-fighting T cells taken from individual patients with melanoma, a deadly
form of skin cancer. After billions of T cells were grown in the laboratory,
they were returned to the patient in hopes that they might attack the tumor. In
the most recent set of studies with some 90 patients, the treatment shrank the
tumors in 40 percent of the patients and caused them to disappear completely in
10 percent.

   In most of the patients with a partial response, the cancer ultimately began
growing again; half of the patients in the study did not respond to the
treatment and have died from their disease.

   Rosenberg recently received permission from the Food and Drug Administration
to use gene therapy techniques to transform T cells into a kind of genetic
Trojan horse. The NCI scientists want to put a gene for tumor necrosis factor,
or TNF, another biologically active compound, inside the T cells. TNF virtually
melts tumors in animals but causes severe side effects in humans, thus
curtailing its use in cancer patients.

   The idea is that the T cells will act like delivery trucks and deposit a
small, but potent amount of TNF on the cancer, killing the malignant cells but
sparing the patient the side effects usually associated with the toxic compound.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, NATURAL THERAPIES: ALTERNATIVES TO TRADITIONAL CANCER
TREATMENTS (DATA FROM CHART WAS UNAVAILABLE); CHART


                             1693 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 January 1, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: Transforming the Decade: 10 Critical Technologies;
Genetic Redesign A New Ark Of Beasts and Crops

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

BODY:

   In the 17 years since scientists first managed to splice genes from one
species of living organism into another, billions of dollars have been poured
into biotechnology research and development. Only a trickle of products emerged
during the 1980's; a steady stream is expected in the next decade.

   Only a small percentage of the more than 100,000 genes that define humans
have been definitively mapped. Work on plants and most other animals is not much
further along. Genetic engineers are also searching for more precise, reliable
and inexpensive methods to transfer genes between species.

    Besides technical barriers, biotechnologists must also overcome regulatory
and social problems, like resolving the conditions under which genetically
engineered crop plants or animals can be released into the environment. The new
technology will bring gain to some but pain to others. Some farmers fear that
the use of genetically engineered growth hormones to raise milk production will
simply drive small farmers out of business without providing long-term benefits
to consumers.

   Biotechnology's most conspicuous achievements to date have come in the
medical sector. Many diagnostic compounds have been produced by genetic
engineering, as have therapeutic products like human growth hormone, used to
combat dwarfism. In the coming years, experts expect genetic engineers will
create treatments for cancer, immune-system diseases, cardiovascular illnesses
and other maladies. In some cases, the human body will be stimulated to defend
or repair itself by gene therapy, the implantation of genetically altered cells.


Beyond the Dreams of Mendel

    While medical applications may seize most of the headlines, the technology
may have equally dramatic effects on agriculture. Until now, plant and animal
breeding have depended on choosing traits already present within a species'
natural gene pool. Genetic engineering puts that process on fast forward by
enabling gene splicers to induce valuable mutations instead of waiting for
nature to produce them.

   For example, Monsanto , a leading producer of agricultural chemicals, expects
to introduce genetically engineered plants that can resist certain diseases and
insects or tolerate weed-killing pesticides by the mid-1990's. Most experts say
that it will be longer before scientists can alter the productive traits of
plants, such as making them more nutritious.

   Genetic engineering may advance most rapidly where it is least visible to
consumers. Many industries are happy to use biotechnology to cut production
costs, and their suppliers have responded. For instance, Novo Nordisk has turned
to gene splicing to increase the productivity of the microorganisms that make
Termamyl, an enzyme that the Danish company sells to corn syrup producers and
textile companies for use in their production processes.

GRAPHIC: Drawings

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1991


                             1694 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1991 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 1, 1991, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z9

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: THE TOP HEALTH STORIES FOR 1991;
Gene Therapy Offers Hope for a Host of Inherited Disorders

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson

BODY:

   In a bold new form of treatment, government scientists last September
injected a missing gene into a 4-year-old girl with a rare inherited disorder
that left her without an immune system.

   Called human gene therapy, this radical approach seeks to cure patients by
replacing missing or defective genes with normal ones. Cells are taken from the
patient, genetically altered in the laboratory, and then re-injected into the
patient in hopes of changing the basic genetic structure of the body's cells.

   Instead of treating symptoms of disease, this therapy corrects the genetic
cause of the problem. Scientists expect that in the future, gene therapy may be
used to reverse inherited illnesses such as cystic fibrosis that are caused by a
single defect in the person's genetic makeup. Gene therapy may even play a role
in fighting such common killers as cancer and heart disease that have a genetic
component -- making this approach as important to medicine as the development of
antibiotics, some researchers say.

   The first experiment involved a child with a disease caused by a deficiency
of adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that eliminates a toxin that kills certain
white blood cells. Since she was born without a normal copy of the gene that
makes the enzyme, she did not have a normal immune system. Most children with
this disease die before age 2.

   The team of W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute and R. Michael Blaese and Kenneth Culver of the National Cancer
Institute developed a way to put the missing gene into the white blood cells
that make up her immune system.

   In a preliminary report to the Food and Drug Administration last month, the
NIH scientists said they were encouraged by the girl's progress. For the first
time in her life, she was producing normal numbers of white blood cells. It will
be at least a year before scientists know whether the treatment has cured her.

   In 1991, two or three more patients with this rare disorder will be treated
with gene therapy. In addition, NIH researchers will use this technique to treat
patients with advanced melanoma, an often fatal form of skin cancer. Scientists
plan to insert a gene into white blood cells that will make a protein called
tumor necrosis factor, which kills cancer cells.

   While the potential of gene therapy has generated much excitement in the
scientific community, its application is currently limited to a small number of
patients because gene-transfer techniques are so complex and labor-intensive.

   "The difficulties of delivering genes to cells is still a nagging problem,"
said Philip Leder, genetics chairman at Harvard Medical School.

   Alternative approaches are under development at several research centers.
James M. Wilson at the University of Michigan and George Wu at the University of
Connecticut have found a way to link genes to proteins so that the protein acts
like a guided missile to carry the gene to a specific cell within the body. In
animal experiments, they have used the carrier system to insert genes into liver
cells via the blood.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, TWP


                             1695 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 December 29, 1990, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1867 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC SCREENING: BLUEPRINT FOR DISASTER?

BYLINE: Anthony Gottlieb

BODY:


   BEWARE OF geneticists bearing discoveries. Their findings, perhaps more than
any others in science, are likely to be abused and harmfully misinterpreted in
the near future.  Danger usually comes from wherever you are not looking.
Everybody is ready for the mutant viruses, plants and two-headed chimpanzees to
crawl out of the ventilation shafts of biotechnology laboratories. That is not
where the problem will come from.  Everybody knows about the blue-eyed
''designer babies'' who will be born quoting Aristotle. But they are not the
real danger either. Look instead at insurance companies, personnel departments
and the health pages of women's magazines. That is where the trouble is brewing.
It may as well be called ''geneism'': unjust discrimination on the basis of
genes. As more stretches of DNA are decoded and genetic tests proliferate, more
people will be denied jobs and insurance because of their genes. And more
mothers will be frowned on for being selfish enough to give birth to genetically
''imperfect'' children.  Geneism is the all-too-real result of a mistakenly
narrow view of humans and their biology: the view that there is a perfect
blueprint for people that is written in their genes, and which man can decipher.
To be dangerous, a belief must be at least half-true. Some remarkable medical
successes attest to the power that knowledge of genes can bring.  Queen Victoria
had one bad gene and it tore through the royal families of Europe, leaving
hemophiliacs scattered along the branches of her family tree. Now, for many
inherited illnesses, parents can be tested and advised of the chances that any
mutual offspring will be affected.  If they decide to take the risk of the
testing, the embryo can be tested and the parents can be given the choice of an
abortion if a debilitating disease is certain. Thousands of severely handicapped
births have been avoided by such screening - what the parents wanted. Tay-Sachs
disease, for example, a fatal condition that used to affect about one in 3,600
Ashkenazi Jews, has been drastically reduced in this way.  Before long,
childlessness and abortion will not be the only remedies for genetic diseases.
The day is not far off when ''gene therapy'' will give some ill children better
genes after birth: Cells will be taken from them, new genes put in the cells,
and the cells returned to their bodies.  Yet genetic screening has already shown
the dangers of geneism. Consider sickle-cell anemia, a hereditary blood disorder
found almost exclusively among blacks.  Sickle-cell anemia is caused by a defect
in a single gene, but you need two copies of the gene to be affected by the
disease. Nevertheless, until the threat of a lawsuit made it change its ways,
the U.S. Air Force Academy screened applicants and barred those found to have a
single copy of the sickle-cell gene. They said it might affect the applicant's
performance in the air.  The Air Force was probably not being mischievous or
consciously racist, but it certainly jumped the gun: There never was any
evidence that having a single copy of the gene would make anybody a worse pilot.
Genetic screening invites such gun-jumping. Take another example to see why:
AAT-deficiency, a genetically caused shortage of an enzyme that detoxifies tar.
People with two copies of the relevant bad gene are more likely to get emphysema
and seem to be more vulnerable to air pollutants.  But doctors also classify
people with just one copy of the bad gene as having ''intermediate
AAT-deficiency,'' although there is no firm link between this condition and any
disease. That is a reasonable enough practice for medical science; to look for
possible links, doctors need to classify people.  But in the hands of an
employer, such classification can become something else.  Tests for the AAT
genes are already available commercially; nobody really knows how they are being
used. When a team of scientists says it has found a link between a pattern of
genes and some illness or psychological condition, it makes news. When they, or
another team, discover they were wrong, it does not.  A recent suggestion, for
example, that alcoholism can be traced to a few genes is very likely to dissolve
under closer scrutiny.  False leads, mistakes and hasty generalizations are not
the only problem of genetic analysis. The most widespread serious conditions -
from alcoholism to forms of cancer - are at most only partly due to genetic
defects.  Environment and behavior will nearly always play a large part in
determining who succumbs.  As Dr. David Suzuki and Peter Knudtson write in their
recent book, ''Genethics,'' ''The lives of genes are dazzlingly complex dances,
involving the simultaneous interactions of countless genes, enzymes, metabolic
processes and environmental factors.'' The success of genetics, among other
things, has made the pendulum of intellectual fashion swing from nurture
(environmental and personal factors) to nature (genes). But genes are not
everything.  Still, genetic tests can reveal who is at highest risk of
developing various diseases. As more and cheaper tests are developed and more
correlations between genes and diseases are found, employers and insurance
companies will have some powerful tools at their disposal.  Take employers
first. Would it not save medical bills and workdays to hire only people with a
completely clean genetic makeup? Yes, but would it be right to deny employment
to someone who is capable of doing the job, but just might get ill one day?  How
high does the probability of illness have to be to justify discrimination? There
seems to be a strong case for saying that people should be genetically screened
only at their own request, and should not be forced to disclose the results to
employers. On the other hand, no one would suggest that companies should not be
allowed to require a medical checkup of a potential new employees - most already
do.  So why should not genetic screening, as it gets more routine and cheaper,
just be part of that process? There will be plenty of work for employment
lawyers here.  The case of insurance presents different problems. An insurance
company's job is to spread risk. But risk implies uncertainty, and genetic
research will probably remove a fair bit of medicine's uncertainty.  If
insurance companies gain access to detailed genetic knowledge, health-insurance
premiums will become, in effect, medical bills paid in advance. Many people will
effectively be excluded from life and health insurance.  In countries like
America, where medical insurance is a prerequisite for good health care, wider
provision of medical care by the state, or a national health-insurance system,
will therefore probably come several steps closer.  Although genetic testing
will create plenty of practical problems - as well as advance medicine no end -
it should not be overrated as a source of knowledge. The most harmful idea about
genetic information is the misbelief that it leads to certain knowledge that can
dispel the biological mysteries of man. It cannot.  Anthony Gottlieb is science
and technology editor of The Economist and visiting fellow in public health at
Harvard University.  SOURCE: 1990, The Economist Publications Ltd.

GRAPHIC: Graphic; SKETCH (COLOR)....John Shew/Post-Dispatch Sketch....Sketch
shows medical chart with confidential stamped on front.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993


                             1696 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 18, 1990, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 157 words

HEADLINE: Inroads made with gene therapy

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    Buoyed by encouraging results from the first human gene therapy experiment,
researchers plan to move ahead with more trials early next month.

   Since beginning treatment Sept. 14, a 4-year-old girl with a rare immune
deficiency similar to ''Bubble Boy'' disease ''has no side effects at all
related to the treatment and is feeling and doing very well,'' says Dr. Michael
Blaese, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Md.

   Researchers hope to begin similar therapy in early January on an 8-year- old
girl with the same disorder.

   Also next month, researchers plan the first application of gene therapy to
malignant melanoma, a skin cancer affecting millions of people. Patients at the
Cancer Institute will be treated, Blaese says.

   Last week, he reported the first patient's progress to the Food and Drug
Administration. The girl has adenosine deaminase deficiency. Her white blood
cell level is normal for the first time in her life.


                             1697 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

              December 17, 1990, Monday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1733 words

HEADLINE: SALK INSTITUTE TURNS TO ETHICS OF BIOTECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: By LINDA ROACH MONROE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   When scientists unravel the genetic signature of Alzheimer's disease, will
women be advised to choose abortion rather than bearing a child who will acquire
the disease six decades or so after birth?

   If a child is an asymptomatic carrier of the cystic fibrosis gene, when
should his parents tell him so? Should his girlfriends all be screened to make
sure he doesn't end up marrying another carrier of the gene?

   If a person has a gene that increases the chance of heart disease or cancer,
should insurance companies nonetheless be required to sell him health or life
insurance?

   It is with such issues in mind that San Diego's Salk Institute -- which long
has focused its attention mainly on the laboratory -- has established a new
center to consider the real-world issues that Salk labs are helping to create.

   The center is unusual because bioethics centers generally are connected with
medical schools, not basic research institutes. The move is being applauded,
particularly since Salk labs are intimately involved in the massive federal
project to map the entire human genetic structure.

   "There are lots of arguments about whether (genetic) technology is
qualitatively different than other advances in technology, like the steam
engine, electricity or the computer. I think it is," said Robert Bohrer, a
professor at California Western School of Law who specializes in biotechnology
issues.

   "Each of those has caused us to change in a variety of ways and caused
widespread social changes. But it is difficult to argue that any of them allowed
for fundamental changes in the nature of humankind."

   That is just the world that genetic engineering is opening up, Bohrer
contends.

   "Right now there are cultures that deplorably practice sex selection, but we
will be able to go much, much further in what traits we select in our children,
with great consequences for what a definable human would be," he says.

   Already, parents can choose abortion for fetuses that have genes for
Tay-Sachs disease, cystic fibrosis and other birth defects.

   But if science discovers a gene that causes debilitating but not fatal
conditions such as schizophrenia or alcoholism, should parents be offered the
option of abortion then, too? What about the idea -- very far off, but not
unthinkable -- that babies could be genetically reprogrammed to grow up taller
or smarter?

   None of these questions is easily answered, but they need to be addressed
even while scientists continue to identify further genes, believes Nancy Wexler,
who led the successful search for the Huntington's disease gene.

   Wexler, of Columbia University, chairs the Ethics, Legal and Social Issues
Committee advising the U.S. Human Genome Project.

   "When we named the group, we very explicitly expanded its title, because I
think that people tend to think that all questions in genetics are ethical. And
they're not," she said. "Many of the difficulties that we're going to run into
with the information that's coming from the genome initiative is just how to get
information to people in a usable fashion that doesn't scare the life out of
them, and that doesn't subject them to discrimination."

   A bioethics center at a basic-science institute like Salk is an unusual but
not unexpected result of the growth of such centers over the last
quarter-century, said Ernle Young, co-director of the Stanford University Center
for Biomedical Ethics. The first was the Hastings Center in New York, which was
independent of a medical school, he said.

   "More recently, medical centers across the country have begun to establish
them," Young said. "It seems to me that for Salk to do the same represents a
logical extension of the idea. The idea is that each of us should build on our
strengths."

   So far, the Salk Center for Bioethics is more an idea than a reality.

   No faculty members have been hired, and its activities for the near future
will be confined to three seminars at which scientists, policy-makers and others
will discuss ethical issues in biological research.

   "We don't have anybody here sitting in a chair thinking about bioethics,"
admitted Renato Dulbecco, president of the institute. "The Center for Bioethics
at the moment is only the organization of a workshop, which we are doing now."

   Scheduled for today, the first Salk workshop will feature a panel of
scientists, policy-makers and journalists discussing the Human Genome Project.

   However, federal funding may soon be available to support the bioethics
center. James Watson, who helped find the structure of DNA and now directs the
genome project, has promised to spend 3% of the project's funds on grants to
consider its ethical and social implications. That would amount to about $3
million next year.

   The genome project is mapping out the molecular structure of all the DNA, or
deoxyribonucleic acid, in the genome. A DNA molecule consists of two long
strands that twist around each other in corkscrew fashion, joined together by
ladder-like rungs. DNA uses a few basic components, in varying sequences, to
direct the physical characteristics and chemistry of every living thing.

   If each chemical rung on the human DNA ladder were a page, the book would
have 3 billion pages and 50,000 to 100,000 different chapters -- each of them a
gene for a specific human trait.

   The more researchers find out about these genes, the closer comes the day
when society will have to figure what kind of restrictions, if any, to put on
the use of the information.

   For law professor Bohrer, the fundamental issue is one of how much genetic
diversity society will have -- from brilliant thinkers to the mentally retarded
or the mentally ill. He uses his own recent viewing of Shakespeare's "Twelfth
Night" as an example:

   "The point is that Shakespeare, prior to the machine age and computers and
everything, shared a vision and understanding of humanity that is as current and
accurate now as it was then," Bohrer said. "We can change all that with this
technology. Not immediately, but over the course of the next 30 years -- which
is certainly not too far away for us to start thinking about it."

   In San Diego, gene-based technologies are used in basic research being done
at institutions from UC San Diego to Scripps Research Institute, and in applied
research at a wide variety of private biotech firms. UC San Diego doctors hope
to do their first gene therapy experiment in the next two years.

   So far only one of these institutions has singled out bioethics as a
component in its molecular biology program. At UCSD, gene therapy researcher Dr.
Theodore Friedmann holds an endowed chair in bioethics established a year ago.
Friedmann will be a member of the Salk seminar panel Monday.

   Dr. Glen Evans, lead researcher in the Salk's $10-million portion of the
genome project, thinks the Salk Institute is in a unique position to shed light
on the subject.

   "We were founded based on a scientific discovery that has vast social
implications: Jonas Salk's creation of the polio vaccine. It changed the way we
lived," Evans said.

   "So the entire basis of this institute, as opposed to other places, has
always been the interaction of basic science and scientific principles with
human society. The institute recently has vastly emphasized the scientific
aspects as opposed to the social aspects, but I think now . . . we're perfectly
placed to be a center for the ethical aspects as well."

   Dulbecco agrees that ethical and social issues raised by basic biological
research need to be discussed. But he isn't so sure that anyone has figured out
the answers.

   "What the real dangers are is not so easy to say," Dulbecco said. "Because
one can make constructions of the imagination, but are they reality?"

   One concern that emerges quickly in these discussions is whether insurance
companies will use genetic tests eventually as criteria for denying insurance
policies or raising rates.

   Increasingly, it is becoming apparent that some people are predisposed to big
killers such as cancer or heart disease at the genetic level. How private will
the results of genetic tests be? Can people be forced to take the tests as a
condition of life or health insurance?

   The real question is not whether genetic techniques will help people -- they
will -- but whether they will also hurt them, suggested Dusty Miller, a gene
therapy researcher at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.

   For instance, he said, the boom in the last few years in drug testing by
employers and others is a direct result of science's ability to detect
vanishingly small amounts of illicit drugs in urine.

   No one considered at the time whether learning to do such analyses would have
implications for society, he said. Yet, after the fact, Miller and others came
to see the technology's impact as an invasion of privacy.

   Still, Miller thinks there's no way to stop scientific progress.

   "If you had said, 'No, we don't want to know how to detect low levels of
chemicals in fluid,' it probably wouldn't have made any difference," Miller
said.

   The solution, then, is for scientists at least to raise the issues and press
policy-makers to resolve them ethically, he said.

   The cost of new gene-based technologies also must be considered, Evans said.

   "In fact, I think that gene therapy is actually one example of high-tech that
probably will increase the cost of health care," he said.

   On the other hand, once the entire human genome is delineated, it will make
it much easier for scientists to find the genes responsible for specific
diseases, Evans said. Eventually, a physician might be able to do a single,
combination blood test for dozens of conditions that now take expensive
high-tech machinery to find.

   "So from the point of view of the practicing physician, even though I think
most people don't realize this, the kind of information the Human Genome Project
generates will decrease the cost of health care, I suspect, by orders of
magnitude," he said.

   "The Human Genome Project: Ethical and Social Issues" runs from 9 a.m. to 5
p.m. today at the Salk Institute. Because of limited space, most participants
are attending by invitation, but a few seats will be available to the public.

   Funding for the seminar and two other bioethics workshops within the next two
years will come from grants -- $30,000 from Volvo America Corp. and $10,000 from
a private, anonymous donor.


                             1698 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    December 16, 1990, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A6

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: Human Gene Therapy Test Working

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The first human gene therapy experiment, in which researchers are trying to
repair the defective immune system of a 4-year-old girl, seems to be working,
scientists told a Food and Drug Administration review panel last week.

   After three months of treatment, the girl's immune system has become
virtually normal for the first time in her life, said R. Michael Blaese of the
National Cancer Institute (NCI), one of the gene researchers. And, so far, there
have been no harmful side effects from the treatment.

   "These are just the first preliminary results, but we are certainly excited
about them," said W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, a leader in gene therapy research.

   Although the child's disorder is rare, human gene therapy, in which new genes
are inserted in the cells of human patients to perform functions missing in the
patient's genes, is expected one day to be a major new therapy for illnesses as
common as heart disease, cancer and even AIDS.

   The girl, whose family has not permitted release of her name, will continue
receiving infusions of genetically altered cells for another three months. Then
researchers will conduct a comprehensive evaluation of her immune system,
comparing it with how well her defenses worked before the experiment began.

   The child was born with a defective gene that prevented her body from making
an enzyme known as ADA. Without the enzyme, a toxin built up in her blood,
killing her T cells, a type of white blood cell that plays a central role in
orchestrating the body's defenses against infections. This is the same cell type
that is destroyed in AIDS.

   To correct the deficiency, the National Institutes of Health team removed
some of her white blood cells and grew them in the laboratory. They then exposed
the cells to a virus that had been designed to carry a normal copy of her
defective gene.

   When the virus infected her blood cells, it used its usual mechanisms to
splice the new gene into the cells' chromosomes. This gives the cells the
ability to make the normal enzyme and get rid of the toxin. With the toxin
eliminated, the researchers expected her immune system cells to grow normally.

   So far, that seems to be happening.

   Preliminary evidence suggests that the gene-treated cells are producing the
missing enzyme in her body. Kenneth W. Culver, an NCI researcher and member of
the gene therapy team, has isolated white blood cells from her body that produce
normal amounts of ADA. It also appears that the new supply of ADA is stimulating
the girl's untreated white blood cells to grow more normally, since the number
of such cells has risen higher than the number that were injected. This part of
the experiment is difficult to evaluate, however, because the girl continues to
receive injections of a synthetic form of ADA that she had been getting before
the experiment began.

   Whether the gene therapy treatment will restore normal functioning to the
girl's immune system has yet to be proved, but there are hints that she is now
able to fight off bacteria and viruses as they enter her body.

   "She has had only one cold [since treatment started]," Blaese said last
Thursday. Her parents are excited about this, he said, because her weakened
immune system had left her prey to every passing virus and she had been
constantly ill.

   "But," Blaese cautioned, "there is no way to know that that is because the
treatment is working. It is encouraging; everything is very encouraging.


                             1699 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 14, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 820 words

HEADLINE: GENE-TREATED GIRL IS RAISING HOPES

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   Three months after a 4-year-old girl became the first person in history to
receive new genes in an effort to cure her severe hereditary disease, the early
results of the radical therapy look extremely promising, researchers told a
Federal panel yesterday.

   Since mid-September, the girl, who suffers from a rare and often fatal immune
deficiency disorder, has been receiving monthly infusions of white blood cells
in which copies of a critical gene that she lacks have been inserted through
genetic engineering techniques. Her parents have requested anonymity until they
are sure the highly experimental treatment is working.

    That time may come sooner than they had been thought. Yesterday Dr. R.
Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute and Dr. W. French Anderson of
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute presented their first official
report of the preliminary results of the trial to the Food and Drug
Administration, which was mainly concerned that the therapy was proving safe.

   The researchers said not only that the treatment had no detectable side
effects, but that the initial clinical signs were also encouraging.

Researchers Are Optimistic

    "We're cautiously optimistic," Dr. Anderson said. "We don't want to claim
absolute success this early in the game, but the little girl is doing
beautifully."

   Many researchers believe that human gene therapy may usher in a medical
revolution, allowing them to treat previously intractable hereditary disorders
like cystic fibrosis and sickle-cell anemia, as well as adult illnesses like
cancer and AIDS.

   The Blaese-Anderson effort is viewed as a barometer of the new therapy's
potential.

   Dr. Blaese told the panel at the meeting in Rockville, Md., that for the
first time in the girl's life, her white blood cell count was within the normal
range. The result suggests that the injected cells harboring the vital gene are
not only thriving in her body, but are stimulating the growth of her own white
blood cells as well.

   Dr. Blaese also said his colleague, Dr. Kenneth W. Culver, could still find
evidence of the genetically engineered white blood cells circulating in the
child's body three weeks after the last cell infusion. More important, the new
genes within the cells were still performing their assigned task, generating a
crucial enzyme, adenosine deaminase, that is needed to prevent destruction of
the child's immune system.

   Researchers had feared that the engineered cells could have been flushed out
of the body immediately after injection. "But these cells seem to be really
hardy," Dr. Culver said.

Testing of Immune System

    Dr. Anderson also said the researchers had begun to test the girl's immune
system for signs that it could fight off infections and microbes that might once
have overwhelmed it.

   These results are especially preliminary, he cautioned, but he said that for
the first time in the girl's life, she seemed to be capable of mounting a normal
immune response against common bacteria like streptococci.

   The experimental therapy is so promising that the scientists plan to begin
treating next month another girl who has the disease.

   Fewer than 25 children worldwide are believed to suffer from adenosine
deaminase (ADA) deficiency, which is similar to the illness that killed David,
the "bubble boy" in Texas who lived in isolation to try to avoid infection. The
children are born without working copies of the ADA gene, a defect that destroys
most of the T cells and B cells of the immune system, leaving patients prey to
numerous infections.

   The disease is now treated with injections of a synthetic form of the missing
enzyme, PEG-ADA, but the treatment is only partly effective and some scientists
worry that children remain vulnerable to cancer and other diseases.

   Dr. Anderson and his colleagues view gene therapy as a potential cure, rather
than a palliative.

Technique of Inserting Genes

    In treating their first patient, the researchers installed copies of the
gene that makes ADA into a genetically altered virus. They then isolated some T
cells from the girl's immune system, grew them into large quantities in the
laboratory and infected them with the virus bearing the missing gene. Those
cells were then injected into the girl through a simple blood infusion. So far,
she has received three infusions, totaling about 230 billion T cells.

   But her T cell count is now an order of magnitude greater than that,
indicating that the engineered cells are helping her own white blood cells
thrive.

   The researchers were questioned at the meeting about safety concerns. One
panel member asked whether the packaging virus used to insert the gene, which is
supposed to be harmless, could become virulent again in the body. Dr. Anderson
replied that all animal tests indicated that the method was safe, but that the
girl would have to be monitored for the rest of her life.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1990


                             1700 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   DECEMBER 13, 1990, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 693 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Firm Drops Plan For Use of Fetal Tissue

BYLINE: Sabin Russell, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   Alameda-based Hana Biologics Inc., a small biotechnology company, has quietly
abandoned a controversial effort to produce treatments for chronic diseases
using tissues from aborted human fetuses.

   Its fetal-tissue research turned out to be studded with errors -- which may
have been reason enough to abandon it.

   In addition, the company faced opposition from anti-abortionists. ''Reliance
upon fetal tissue was a politically explosive issue,'' said Hana President John
Archer. ''We came to the conclusion that many companies were reluctant to work
with us because of the political climate surrounding abortion.''

   Hana had attracted hordes of securities analysts to its presentations, where
it outlined a bold attempt to cure diseases such as diabetes, Parkinson's
disease and hemophilia.

   In the case of diabetes, insulin-producing cells from the pancreas were to be
harvested from aborted fetuses, then grown in colonies and transplanted to
patients, relieving them of the need for a lifetime of insulin injections.

   The theory was that a patient's body will not reject the immature cells of a
fetus the way it will the mature cells of an adult donor. As the transplanted
fetal tissue matured, the cells would be readily accepted by the patient.

   Jan Carroll, associate western director for National Right-to-Life, an
anti-abortion organization, said that she was glad to hear of Hana's decision.
''We do not need to cannibalize our young for the benefit of our diseased,'' she
said. ''The ends do not justify the means.''

   Anti-abortionists staged a demonstration outside Hana's offices in January
1989, but the company didn't abandon the fetal research at that point.

   Shortly afterward, however, Hana discovered that the fetal pancreatic cells
it had been growing to produce transplants for diabetics were the wrong ones.
They didn't produce insulin.

   The discovery led to the resignation of Hana's president and chief executive,
Craig McMullen, and to a layoff of 25 percent of Hana's 120-person workforce.
Archer, who had served as chief financial officer, replaced McMullen.

   Hana's stock, which traded as high as 13 two years ago, currently trades
over-the-counter at around 1. Hana ended its fiscal year in June with an
operating loss of $ 8.4 million on revenues of $ 4.3 million.

   Hana has redirected its research to so-called barrier technologies, which
would shield tissues from adult human or animal donors from the destructive
attacks of the patient's immune system. Tissues from cadavers are encapsulated
in materials that allow nutrients and hormones to circulate but keep out blood
cells that attack foreign tissue.

   ''People are using a number of different materials -- both plastics and
naturally occurring substances -- to wall off tissues from the immune system,''
said John Monahan, Hana's vice president of research. Analysts, already burned
by their faith in Hana, are wary of the company's new research program. ''Their
decision is an understandable one, but I do not agree with it,'' said Jim
McCamant, editor of Medical Technology Stock Letter. McCamant said that barrier
technology has been tried before without much success.

   County NatWest analyst Denise Gilbert, once a fan of Hana, said: ''It's
disappointing that, because of political issues, a company decides to go away
from an area of research that is not only exciting, but revolutionary.''

   For the long-term, Hana hopes to maintain its credentials as a revolutionary
by developing the use of gene therapy. Last month, it agreed to merge with
Somatix Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., a young company attempting to commercialize
gene-therapy research originally conducted at the Whitehead Institute at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   In gene therapy, genes that cause cells to produce desired substances such as
insulin are grafted onto a patient's living cells and returned to the body.

   Archer says that the company has a lot of work cut out for it. ''We've had
very clear marching orders,'' he said. ''We have to clean up the science . . .
and find corporate partners to sponsor research. It's going to take a couple of
years to get fully on track.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Hana Biologics President John Archer and Vice President of
Research John Monahan (seated) at the firm's laboratory in Alameda , BY DEANNE
FITZMAURICE, THE CHRONICLE


                             1701 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

              December 11, 1990, Tuesday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 730 words

HEADLINE: UCSD PREPARES FOR BIG STEP INTO GENE THERAPY;
MEDICINE: SCHOOL PREPARES TO APPLY GENE TRANSPLANT RESEARCH AT THE BEDSIDE WHEN
ITS NEW HOSPITAL OPENS IN 1993.

BYLINE: By LINDA ROACH MONROE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UC San Diego's medical school is organizing a human gene therapy program, to
move its gene transplant research from the laboratory to the hospital bed by the
time the university's new La Jolla hospital opens in 1993.

   A search committee is seeking a director for the human genetics program, who
could be hired within the next few months, said Dr. Gerard Burrow, medical
school dean.

   In addition, a leading UCSD gene therapy researcher and advocate, Dr.
Theodore Friedman, is putting together a proposal for Burrow on how the gene
therapy program should be organized.

   "We have about 40 people on the campus who are interested in different
aspects of human genetics. It just hasn't been put together in a program,"
Burrow said Monday.

   Although human genetics programs have been established at other universities,
they have emphasized the basic research that needs to be done before gene
therapy can actually be tried in patients.

   UCSD's planned program is unusual because, with the university's basic
research in the field already well-established, it instead emphasizes turning
gene therapy ideas into actual experiments in humans.

   "The goal of course is to bring (gene therapy) to the bedside, and to do that
as expeditiously and well as we can. And in order to do that we need more than a
collection of individuals," Friedman said.

   Because of rapidly accumulating knowledge about the genetic basis for human
disease, gene therapy has been advocated for conditions ranging from cystic
fibrosis to atherosclerosis and cancer. Working with Friedman, neuroscientist
Fred Gage also is studying ways to use gene therapy against Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's diseases.

   UCSD's plan is the most ambitious in a San Diego field that is expected to
include non-academic efforts as well.

   A La Jolla biotechnology firm, Viagene, hopes to use gene therapy techniques
to treat AIDS patients next year. And the newly established San Diego Regional
Cancer Center, led by former UCSD researcher Dr. Ivor Royston, plans to try gene
therapy against cancer.

   The only clinical gene therapy experiments so far in the United States have
been developed since August of this year, by doctors at the National Institutes
of Health.

   In one, doctors are genetically altering skin cancer patients' own immune
system cells to try to stimulate them to more effectively battle the cancer. In
the other, children with crippled immune systems are being provided with cells
that can produce an essential immune protein they are lacking.

   These experiments have followed a decade in which human gene therapy has
moved very slowly despite early, glowing forecasts of its promise.

   The scientists who remain skeptical about how soon gene therapy may bear
clinical results include Paul Berg, director of the Center for Molecular and
Genetic Medicine at Stanford University. Berg said centers such as UCSD's are
inevitable, however, because the ideas raised by the genetic revolution need to
be tested.

   Friedman, widely recognized as a leader among the handful of U.S. researchers
racing towards gene therapy, sees the new unit an administrative structure to
support research.

   "Its function will be informational and sort of catalytic -- putting an
administrative face on much of the work that's already going on here," Friedman
said.

   He noted that a number of organizational questions will need to be answered
before the UCSD human genetics program can begin. Among them:

   * How will the Center for Molecular Genetics, in which Friedmann and other
molecular biologists hold their academic appointments, interact with the new
program?

   * Will researchers at the Salk Institute and Scripps Research Institute be
included in the efforts?

   * Since cancer is a key target of gene therapy techniques, will the program
require a rethinking of UCSD's cancer programs?

   Friedman said he hopes to get a proposal for the genetics program's
organization to Burrow within the next few days.

   Inder Verma, a noted Salk Institute molecular biologist, said he doesn't
expect UCSD's planned program to produce quick results in treating human
disease.

   "Unless they have something up their sleeve that I don't know about, I don't
think it will produce anything imminent," Verma said. "But I think it will focus
things. The biggest advantage I can see is that it might attract new people to
come and join this group."


                             1702 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: View; Part E; Page 1; Column 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 2002 words

HEADLINE: MIXED BLESSINGS;
THE DISCOVERY OF A GENE LINKED TO A DISEASE BRINGS JOY TO AFFLICTED PATIENTS AND
THEIR FAMILIES. BUT SOON AFTER COMES THE LETDOWN: THEY MAY NOT LIVE LONG ENOUGH
TO SEE THE CURE.

BYLINE: By SHARI ROAN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   Paul Motenko recalls the day last year when researchers announced they had
discovered the gene responsible for cystic fibrosis. The father of a 4-year-old
daughter with the fatal disease, Motenko was elated to hear that news, but he
didn't expect the event would also leave him feeling empty.

   "Believe it or not, it was almost a depressing day for me," Motenko said.
"All of a sudden, after hearing hype, you're hearing reality. You still really
don't know where you stand. The discovery happens and yet nothing changes. No
one has been cured."

   The roller-coaster ride between hope and pessimism is a common experience for
families touched by genetic disorders.

   The discovery of a gene, while thrilling to researchers, doesn't mean that a
cure or even improved therapy is immediately available to patients.

   Patients and their families are heartened to see progress, but the discovery
of a gene can set them on a nail-biting race against the clock, hoping that they
can outlast the disease until treatment or a cure is found. And, sometimes, the
discovery yields information that indicates a cure will be much more complicated
to achieve than expected.

   "It's a bittersweet time right now," says Francis Collins, a University of
Michigan researcher who co-discovered the cystic fibrosis gene last year.

   "On one hand, we are beginning to get a glimpse of how we might treat
(patients). But there are people who don't have much time left."

   In the past few years, the genes for debilitating, often fatal hereditary
disorders such as cystic fibrosis, Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Huntington's
disease have been identified within the body's complex hereditary code. And,
with 3,000 such disorders known, scientists are closing in on many more stunning
discoveries.

   A flawed gene ultimately gives rise to a disorder or allows it to be passed
on to subsequent generations. Identifying the gene is the icebreaker that gives
scientists an opportunity to learn what is going wrong in the body and how to
fix it.

   But the sudden windfall of long-hoped-for gene discoveries has heaped
unexpected emotional turmoil on patients and researchers.

   For example, the recent cystic fibrosis discovery pinpointed the gene in a
key protein that malfunctions in patients with the disease. However, scientists
were dismayed to uncover almost 50 mutations within the CF gene. The mutations
will make a potential prenatal screening test and treatment much more difficult
to construct.

   "They were more optimistic before they found the gene than afterward,"
Motenko says.

   For other hereditary disorders, a potentially lifesaving treatment is only a
few more experiments, perhaps one major clinical trial, away. Even the best hope
for curing genetic disorders -- gene therapy -- no longer seems like a fantasy.
In September, researchers initiated the first human gene therapy, inserting
copies of healthy genes in a boy stricken with adenosine deaminase deficiency,
an immune system disorder.

   But it will be many months before the success of that treatment is known. And
medical experts are still unable to say just how long it will be before patients
begin to benefit from gene discoveries and gene therapy.

   "That's the question that is the most frequently asked and is the most
difficult to respond to: How long will it be before there is a treatment?,"
Collins says. "I try not to list a number of years because I don't know, nor
does anyone without a crystal ball."

   Discovering just where a faulty gene lurks in the body is a major hurdle.
Making the leap from the gene discovery to understanding how the gene disrupts
or destroys can be just as challenging, says Harvard University pediatrician
Louis J. Kunkel. In 1987, Kunkel's research team discovered the gene that causes
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a disorder that causes muscle weakness and
eventually cripples.

   "It's very satisfying to accomplish what was so difficult and long and
arduous to do," Kunkel says. "But there is always a little bit of a letdown
after that discovery. You think, 'Where do you go from here?' We've known about
(the cause of) some other genetic diseases for many years, but we still don't
have treatment for them."

   When the Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene was discovered it was "like
Christmas" for Albert and Cindy Almada of Pomona and their three children. Four
years ago, they learned that their oldest child, Christopher, then 4, had the
disease and would probably not live beyond his teen-age years.

   The gene discovery gave the family hope that researchers would find a way to
help Christopher and others stricken with the disease. But Albert, a dentist,
and Cindy, a nurse, knew the discovery didn't mean that a cure was immediately
at hand.

   "Being in science, my wife and I know that it takes a while for things to
happen," Albert says. Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which strikes one in 3,500
people, usually males, causes a gradual weakening of the muscles, including
those in the heart and lungs.

   Last year, Albert heard about animal research in which healthy cells were
transferred to an animal with diseased muscle. He learned that doctors in San
Francisco would soon test the procedure, called myoblast transfer, in humans.
And, after several phone conversations with a researcher there, Albert was
invited to enter Christopher, now 8, in the trial.

   The therapy will consist of injecting Albert's healthy cells into
Christopher's muscles in the hope that the healthy cells will fuse with his
son's and cause them to make a protein that is missing in muscular dystrophy
patients.

   Because the therapy is experimental, father and son have spent the past year
making frequent trips to San Francisco so doctors could test the compatibility
of their tissues. Researchers also conducted tests to see if Christopher could
tolerate the powerful medication needed for treatment.

   Albert says Christopher remains a good candidate for the therapy, which they
hope will begin in 1991.

   The Almadas say they carefully weighed the risks of undertaking an
experimental therapy.

   "I don't feel my son is a guinea pig," Albert says. "We aren't sitting back.
As long as there is no harm to my son, we want to be part of the cure, part of
the breakthrough."

   For most genetic disorders, those patients most in need may be the last to
benefit, researchers acknowledge. Experts usually predict that before a cure
becomes available several other milestones will be reached, such as
identification of carriers of the gene, identification of affected fetuses
before birth, newborn screening and development of treatment to prolong life.

   Cure is a word that is still used with restraint among cystic fibrosis
patients, says Dr. Robert J. Beall, executive vice president of medical affairs
for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   Since the discovery of the CF gene, for example, researchers have focused on
the gene's normal function and what goes wrong. The hallmark of cystic fibrosis,
the leading hereditary cause of death in whites, is excessive buildup of mucus
in the respiratory and digestive tracts. Bacteria thrive in the mucus, causing
infection while digestive imbalances cause poor nutrition. These problems
usually result in the death of patients in their teens or 20s.

   "While gene therapy is a very exciting area, we have five to six other
(treatments) with CF that will be going to clinical trials within the next
year," he says. "In fact, some are already under way. So we're not putting all
of our eggs in one basket. We have a very large spectrum of options available to
(patients). Some will pan out, and we'll be able to keep these people alive for
gene therapy."

   Optimism can vary among the newly diagnosed and those who have lived with a
disorder for many years, says Prissi Shapiro, state coordinator for the National
Neurofibromatosis Foundation.

   Von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis, which is commonly called by the
misnomer Elephant Man's disease, affects one in every 3,500 people. The disorder
causes symptoms ranging from skin discoloration to mental abnormalities to tumor
growths around the body. The NF gene was discovered by Utah and Michigan
researchers in July.

   "For parents, for them to know the gene has been found means that in their
child's lifetime there may be a cure," Shapiro says.

   "For people who have the disease, it's much harder. It's what about me? I do
get calls from people who say, 'OK, the gene has been found, what does that mean
to me?' I tell them we're on the road in the right direction."

   Shapiro says it helps to remind patients and their families how far research
has progressed. Just four years ago, she says, few people knew what
neurofibromatosis was. Now, because of studies that show the NF gene belongs to
a family of genes that suppresses tumor formation -- a significant aspect of
cancer research -- interest among researchers has exploded.

   "Here was this disorder that no one had really taken a look at," Shapiro
says. "In 1987, the genetic markers were found and in 1990 the gene was
announced. So, for people who never had a hope, all of a sudden there was this
excitement."

   Patients and their families do find solace in the rapid pace of research.

   Motenko, an accountant who lives in Mission Viejo, says he and his wife,
Debbie, still cling to every bit of news from labs worldwide.

   When their daughter, Stacy, was born with an intestinal problem related to
cystic fibrosis, Motenko checked out a library book on the disorder that turned
out to be terribly outdated. The book listed the life expectancy of CF patients
at three to five years.

   Stacy's doctor reassured the Motenkos that the outlook had improved,
emphasizing that life spans can range into the 20s and that doctors are
constantly learning more about reducing infections and improving the quality of
life.

   "The doctors were very compassionate," Motenko says. "But no one gave us much
hope of a cure in my daughter's lifetime. That wasn't even talked about."

   With so much recent progress, and their loved ones demand frequent updates on
genetic research.

   "I have to know what's happening in research," says Motenko, who also has a
healthy older daughter, Lisa. "It gives me hope. And how can you keep going
along without hope?"

   Physicians say it is common for families dealing with genetic illness to be
highly knowledgeable about the disorder and the prospects for treatment.

   "My sense is they do want to hear about what's going on," says Michigan's
Collins, who also helped discover the gene for Von Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis. "I think they do want to hear about something that raises
hopes."

   Harvard's Kunkel says he is sometimes bothered that such discoveries receive
intense media coverage. He worries that patients' hopes will be unrealistically
inflated.

   "There is so much hype in the media that you think that a treatment is the
next thing around the corner," he says. But he acknowledges that the publicity
is good for morale and raising funds.

   "It's a good thing to anticipate a treatment or cure."

   Even though the Almadas are involved in research that could help their son as
early as next year, they try not to let their hopes soar too high. They
concentrate on daily challenges, such as helping Christopher, who can still move
about with the aid of a walker, maintain what little muscle strength he has
left. He undergoes frequent checkups at Rancho Los Amigos Medical Center, where
many muscular dystrophy patients are treated. The hardest part, they say, is
when Christopher asks his parents what the future holds for him.

   "I tell him they are working on (treatment) and it's important that we take
each day at a time, and that we have to pray," Cindy says.

   "We try to be honest with him," Albert says.

   Sometimes when they walk down halls at Rancho Los Amigos, Christopher sees
children with muscular dystrophy who are in wheelchairs or on respirators. He
knows how bad it can become, Albert says.

   "He says to me, 'Dad, I sure hope they find a cure.' "

GRAPHIC: Photo, Albert Almada with Christopher. "We want to be part of the cure,
part of the breakthrough," Albert says.  ROBERT GABRIEL / Los Angeles Times;
Photo, The Motenkos, from left, Debbie, Lisa, Paul and Stacy, cling to hope that
a cure will be found for cystic fibrosis.  PETER ROSS / Los Angeles Times


                             1703 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 19, 1990, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF:  SCIENCE / MEDICINE;
FDA OKS CELL THERAPY FOR CANCER

BYLINE: From Times staff and wire reports

BODY:

   The first cancer therapy using genetically altered living cells was approved
last week, and doctors at the National Institutes of Health said the first
patient should start treatment within a few weeks. Steven A. Rosenberg said his
team has been poised to start the revolutionary gene therapy in patients
critically ill with advanced melanoma, a deadly skin cancer, and was only
awaiting the final approval from the Food and Drug Administration.

   The still-experimental therapy amplifies the body's own cancer-fighting
ability. It uses natural cancer-fighting cells, called tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes, that have been removed from a patient's tumor and given extra genes
that should enhance their ability to attack the tumor. The technique has been
shown to be effective in laboratory animals.

   Earlier this fall, other NIH researchers were granted permission to use gene
therapy to treat children with an inborn defect in their immune systems that
renders them highly susceptible to infections. Those studies are already under
way.

   Rosenberg's team was given permission to treat up to 50 melanoma patients
using the new gene technique.


                             1704 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                    November 18, 1990, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; Pg. 3F

LENGTH: 2026 words

HEADLINE: AN UNDECLARED EPIDEMICSKIN CANCER

BYLINE: JIM MELVIN

BODY:


   About 93-million miles from the nearest beach, the sun burns within a black
abyss, hurling its fury throughout the solar system.  Our tiny planet stands
humbly in the way, absorbing great gobs of radiant energy into its atmosphere.

    On the surface of Earth, we humans go about our business, scampering in and
out of houses, office buildings, restaurants and automobiles. We shield our eyes
during the drive to work in the morning, stretch out on a blanket in our bathing
suits for an afternoon by the sea, sigh with quiet joy as the sun sets in a
blaze of evening red.

    So what if our cheeks are pink, our thighs tender, our shoulders peeling.
Small prices to pay for that healthy, attractive tan.

    So we catch some rays . . . and then some more . . . again and again.  Year
after year.
 Statistics don't lie
 But by now, just about anyone who hasn't been living in a cave knows that the
cumulative effects of too much sun are harmful to your skin. And if you don't
believe it, then read what the American Cancer Society has to say:

    The areas of the world closest to the equator including Florida have the
highest incidences of skin cancer. Florida has some of the highest rates of skin
cancer in the United States.

    Skin cancer is the most common of all cancers. More than 600,000 new cases
of skin malignancies will be recorded in the United States in 1990 and nearly
9,000 Americans will die from it.

    It is estimated that more than half of all people who live to age 65 in the
United States will have at least one skin cancer.

    About 27,600 cases of melanoma are expected this year in the U.S., with
6,300 deaths.

    Of the 600,000 cases, 540,000 could be prevented by protection from the
sun's rays.

     "A child born today who is repeatedly sunburned will have a greater chance
of developing skin cancer in the future," says St.  Petersburg dermatologist J.
Cedric Thornton. "And a child who is properly protected will have decreased
chances. You can get a lot of sun exposure just going from your house to your
car or from your car to the mall. You need to get into a habit of putting on
sunscreen."
 Often curable, sometimes deadly


    Skin cancers present a classic good news/bad news situation.

    The good news:

    1) When diagnosed early in their development, most skin cancers are curable.


    2) Unlike other cancers that lie hidden within the body, skin cancers
develop visibly on the surface of the skin and are more easily detected.

    3) Most modern medical treatments leave scars that are barely noticeable.

    4) The majority of skin cancer is not deadly, even if left untreated for
long periods of time.

    The bad news:

    1) Once certain skin cancers have spread to the internal organs, treatments
are limited and ineffective.

    2) Skin cancers are often small and difficult to recognize, especially for
people unaware of what to look for.

    3) When left untreated for long periods, skin cancers can disfigure even if
they don't kill.

    4) The incidences of melanoma, the most deadly variety of skin cancer,
doubled in the past 10 years. If current rates continue, one in every 100
Americans will get melanoma before the end of this century.
 Skin abuse


   "The skin is the largest organ in the body," says Port Richey dermatologist
Richard A. Miller. "Its basic function is to serve as a protective layer from
the elements and from disease. It reflects and absorbs sunlight. It covers the
entire body surface as far as being a protective layer from head to toe."

      But as marvelous an organ as the skin is, it can take only so much abuse
especially in the form of purposeful exposure to ultraviolet rays.

    Sunburns and suntans are the first results of bathing in the sun.  Cancer
comes later. Fair-skinned people, especially redheads and blonds, are at a
higher risk; people who tan readily or who have darker pigmentation, such as
Hispanics or Asians, seem to be at a lower risk. Black people rarely develop
sun-related forms of skin cancer.

    Sunburns result when sunlight penetrates the upper layers of the skin the
epidermis and reaches the lower layers the dermis.  Blood vessels near the
surface then dilate, causing a reddish look.  Also, the dead surface skin may
burn red.

    Suntans result when sustained doses of sunlight prompt certain skin cells to
make melanin, a skin pigment that helps to protect underlying tissues by forming
a reflective shield. The melanin moves toward the surface and darkens it.

    "The lighter your skin is, the more you absorb sunlight, the deeper it
penetrates, and the more cellular damage is caused by the sun," Miller says.
"Repeated sun exposure causes more damage to the deeper layers of the skin and
eventually can cause enough change to develop into a carcinoma.

     "There is no such thing as a healthy tan. People may look healthier when
they're tan it's a matter of opinion but I think it's more of a psychological
thing."
 Varieties of skin cancer


    There are three types of sun-related skin cancers because there are three
types of cells in the epidermis that are damaged by the sun: basal cells,
squamous cells and melanocytes.

    Basal cell cancer: According to the American Cancer Society, this is the
most common form of skin cancer, affecting more than 400,000 Americans every
year. In fact, one of every four new cancers is a basal cell carcinoma, and one
in eight Americans will develop this cancer some time in their lives. Basal cell
cancers appear mostly on the exposed parts of the body the face, ears, neck,
scalp, shoulders and back.

    Basal cell cancers (see graphic) rarely spread to other organs in the body
(metastasize) and are therefore not deadly, though they can be disfiguring when
left unattended.

    The Skin Cancer Foundation describes these five basal warning signs:

    1) "An open sore that bleeds, oozes or crusts and remains open for three or
more weeks."

    2) "A reddish patch or irritated area .  (that) sometimes itches or hurts."

    3) "A smooth growth with an elevated, rolled border and an indentation in
the center."

    4) "A shiny bump .  that is pearly or translucent and is often pink, red or
white."

    5) "A scar-like area white, yellow or waxy which often has poorly defined
borders."

    Squamous cell cancer: This is the second most common form of skin cancer,
affecting more than 100,000 Americans each year. It usually appears as a "rough,
red, slightly elevated lesion with varying degrees of scaling and crusting." It
also may ulcerate and bleed.

    Unlike basal cell cancer, squamous cell cancers (see graphic) can
metastasize, though not as frequently or with the ferocity of melanoma. Squamous
is found most often on the nose, face, hands and lips.

    Melanoma: This is the most dangerous form. Unlike basal and squamous cell
cancers, which tend to grow horizontally along the surface of the skin, melanoma
grows horizontally and vertically. As they enlarge and reproduce, the damaged
melanocytes start to grow abnormally fast, first on the surface, but eventually
reaching vital structures such as lymphatic vessels, nerves and arteries.

    The lymphatic system is one of the body's main defenses against disease.
When the cancer cells reach the fatty tissues beneath the skin, they are
absorbed by the lymphatic vessels and drained into the nearest set of lymph
nodes, which cluster in certain areas of the body, such as under the arm and in
the neck. Once in the lymph nodes, the cancer often grows furiously, finally
breaking off and invading vital organs such as the lungs, heart and brain. At
this point, cures are difficult and rare.

    The key to surviving melanoma is to detect it before its vertical spread
gets too deep. While still on the surface, melanoma is curable. Dermatologists
have devised a method of self-diagnosis called the ABCD rule (see graphic).
 Slowing the spread


   Dermatologists such as Miller and Thornton stress that education and
self-examination are the keys to slowing the spread of skin cancer.

    "The big thing is trying to educate young people about protection," says
Miller, who lectures at area high schools and who has had several free
screenings at his Port Richey office. "Skin cancer is one of the most easily
preventable types of cancer. We can eliminate the majority of skin cancers in
this country if you know how to protect yourself."

     Change is the key word when it comes to self-diagnosis. When moles or other
suspicious areas on the surface of the skin begin to change size, color or
texture, that can be a sign that skin cancer is present. "Ideally, you should do
a monthly examination," says Miller. "Look at your entire skin surface,
including the scalp. Look at your entire body and be aware of what's there so
that the next time you look you'll be able to tell if there are any changes
there. Be aware of any sore on your skin that isn't healing."

    Protection is the key word when it comes to preventing sun-related cancers.
Doctors recommend liberal use of sunscreens with a sun protective factor of at
least 15. (A person who uses a sunscreen with a SPF factor of 15 can stay in the
sun 15 times longer than without the sunscreen before sustaining significant
damage).

    Doctors say to stay indoors during peak sun hours (between 11 a.m. and 3
p.m.), to wear loose-fitting clothing that covers the arms and legs and to slip
on hats or caps. Also, they suggest avoiding tanning beds and sun reflectors.

    "It's never too late to change habit patterns," says Thornton, who
recommends that his patients wear sunscreen as part of a daily routine. "You
should have yearly skin checkups, get out of the habit of sitting out in the sun
and just staying there. Stopping doesn't guarantee that you won't develop skin
cancer, but it is certainly a good start."
 Facing facts


    Forms of treatment for skin cancer include surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy, cryotherapy (a form of freezing tissue using liquid nitrogen),
chemical creams and newly approved gene therapy. Some treatments leave tiny
scars; plastic surgery is available for larger defects. Frequent follow-ups with
your doctor are important because of the high recurrence of primary cancers.

     Living in the sunny Tampa Bay area increases your chances for developing
skin cancer. For instance, the high-tech Melanoma Treatment Center at the
Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa sees five to six new melanoma patients per week
and dozens suffering from some form of skin cancer. Elderly residents and people
who work outdoors are likely candidates.

    Why are incidences of skin cancer increasing so rapidly? Some experts think
that it's a combination of our nation's post-World War II affluence, making
Sunbelt and Caribbean vacations more affordable; as well as our culture's
attraction to sun-worshiping and skimpy clothing. It's also possible that the
depletion of the ozone layer, which helps to block the sun's ultraviolet
radiation, is a factor.  The cumulative effects of these changes are just being
seen.

     With every trip to the beach, every round of golf, every outdoor concert,
every walk in the park, new skin cancers are born, and the odds are steadily
increasing that they're being born on you.

    If that's an idea that makes you uncomfortable, then here's what you should
do: Protect yourself with shelter, sunscreen and clothing; examine your body
frequently; and see your doctor routinely.

    The sun may be 93-million miles away, but that doesn't stop it from killing
people.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, COLOR DRAWING, DON MORRIS, (2); an example of basal cell
carcinoma; example of squamous cell carcinoma; malignant melanoma detected by
asymmetry; melanoma detected by border irregularity, melanoma detected by color;
melanoma detected by diameter; Richard Miller; J. Cedric Thornton

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1992


                             1705 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   NOVEMBER 15, 1990, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2; BUSINESS BRIEFS

LENGTH: 1127 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFS

BODY:

   EX-BOESKY PAL GETS PRISON

   John A. Mulheren Jr., a flamboyant and successful stock trader convicted with
the help of Ivan F. Boesky, was sentenced yesterday to a year in prison and
ordered to pay $ 1.6 million for stock manipulation. Mulheren was the only
person implicated by Boesky to go to trial rather than strike a plea agreement.
The case marked the first time Boesky testified publicly since his 1986 plea
bargain to widespread civil and criminal charges related to insider trading.
Mulheren, 41, was convicted in July of charges that he helped ex-friend Boesky
drive up the price of Gulf & Western Inc. stock in 1985. He had faced a maximum
of five years in prison and a $ 250,000 fine on each of one count of conspiracy
and three counts of securities fraud at sentencing by U.S. District Judge Miriam
Goldman Cedarbaum.

   HANA JOINS FORCES

   WITH RESEARCH FIRM

   Hana Biologics Inc., an Alameda-based biotechnology company, has agreed to
merge with Somatix Corp., a privately held research company based in Cambridge,
Mass. As a first step in the merger, Hana is investing $ 3 million in exchange
for a 21 percent stake in Somatix. In January, Hana plans to acquire the
remaining Somatix shares for 11.3 million newly issued Hana shares. Hana also
will swap 13.2 million new shares of common stock for all Hana preferred shares.
The combined companies would operate in Alameda under the Hana name, but Somatix
President and chief executive Eric Tomlinson will become Hana's president and
CEO, and Somatix representatives will control the board. Hana President John
Archer will become executive vice president.

   CETUS VIRUS TO BE USED

   IN HUMAN CANCER TESTS

   Cetus Corp., an Emeryville-based biotechnology company, will supply a
genetically engineered virus to be used in the first human gene-therapy trials
aimed at cancer. The virus has been modified with a new gene that causes it to
produce tiny quantities of TNF, a potent tumor-fighting protein. The virus will
be used to infect cancer-fighting blood cells, known as TILs, which migrate
toward the site of malignant melanoma, a deadly skin cancer. Cetus said it has
filed ''numerous'' patent applications on its gene-therapy work. The U.S. Food
and Drug Administration on Tuesday gave the National Cancer Institute permission
to begin experimental tests on human subjects.

   MILKEN'S SENTENCING

   IS POSTPONED AGAIN

   Sentencing of former junk bond financier Michael Milken will take place next
week, a clerk for U.S. District Judge Kimba Wood said. The sentencing was
expected to take place this week. No reason for the delay was given. A specific
date and time for the sentencing was not announced. Milken, 44, the former head
of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s high-yield bond department, faces up to 28
years in prison for his guilty plea to six felony counts of conspiracy and fraud
related to illegal securities trading. Sentencing initially was scheduled for
October 1 but was delayed for a hearing into additional government allegations
against Milken.

   LAWYERS HUDDLE OVER

   CHEVRON LAWSUIT

   Attorneys representing both sides in a $ 700 million class-action lawsuit
against Chevron USA Corp. met in Houston to discuss a possible settlement.
Former employees of Gulf Oil claim they were denied pension benefits after Gulf,
then based in Pittsburgh, merged with Chevron Corp. -- known at the time as
Standard Oil Co. of California, or Socal -- in 1984. U.S. District Judge Sim
Lake ordered an interruption to the trial last week after nearly four weeks of
highly complex testimony. He called for the settlement conference in hopes of
resolving the dispute.

   TRADE GROUP UNVEILS

   COMPUTER DATA SYSTEM

   Any California company with a personal computer and a modem now can gain
instant access to detailed export information and trade opportunities through a
system introduced this week by the California State World Trade Commission. The
Automated Trade Library Service contains foreign market research, foreign trade
regulations, names and phone numbers of potential contacts and other
overseas-sales leads gathered by the U.S. Department of Commerce and the World
Trade Commission.

   IN OTHER NEWS

   * Williams-Sonoma Inc., the San Francisco-based housewares retailer, reported
that its earnings rose to $ 1.87 million (17 cents per share) in the third
quarter ended October 28 from $ 1.39 million (14 cents) in the year-earlier
quarter. Sales rose to $ 63.8 million from $ 53.9 million. Sales at stores open
a year or more rose 3.5 percent, while mail-order sales rose 15.6 percent.

   * Cadence Design Systems Inc., a San Jose-based software company, said that
its board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to 200,000 shares of the
company's common stock on the open market from time to time. The shares will be
used for the company's employee stock-purchase plan. Cadence, which is traded on
the New York Stock Exchange, has 30 million shares outstanding. The stock closed
yesterday at 19.

   * Autodesk Inc., a Sausalito-based software company, reported that earnings
for its third fiscal quarter ended October 31 grew to $ 15.6 million (63 cents
per share) on sales of $ 62.4 million from earnings of $ 11.9 million (49 cents)
on sales of $ 46.4 million in the year-earlier period.

   * PLM International Inc., a San Francisco-based transportation-equipment
lessor, said that its profits for the third quarter ended September 30 fell to $
2 million (20 cents per share) from $ 3.2 million (32 cents) in the year-earlier
period. Revenues fell to $ 20.3 million from $ 24.7 million.

   * Unleaded self-service gasoline prices are averaging $ 1.45 per gallon in
California -- down 0.6 cents since last month's survey -- according to the
California State Automobile Association.  This is the first time that prices
have declined month-to-month since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on August 2. The
current average retail gas price is still 24 cents a gallon higher than
end-of-July costs, the association indicated.

   * Levi Strauss & Co., the San Francisco-based apparel company, said that
Peter Jacobi has been named to the newly created position of president for
global sourcing. Jacobi, who joined Levi Strauss in 1970, will oversee Levi's
U.S. and overseas manufacturing operations. Jacobi's responsibilities as
president of Levi's European operations will be assumed by Michael Howard,
president of Levi's Asia Pacific operations.

   * Trans World Airlines Inc., suffering from sluggish travel demand and rising
jet fuel prices, said it will lay off almost 400 employees and trim its total
number of flights. TWA, which last month said it would reduce its systemwide
capacity by up to 10 percent, now will cut back a total of 14 percent from last
year's levels, said spokesman Don Morrison.

CORRECTION-DATE: NOVEMBER 16, 1990, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

CORRECTION:

   Hana Biologics Inc., an Alameda-based biotechnology company, plans to change
its name to Somatix after completion of its proposed merger with Somatix Corp.,
of Cambridge, Mass. An item in yesterday's Business Briefs section incorrectly
stated that the combined companies would retain the Hana name.


                             1706 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 844 words

HEADLINE: F.D.A. Approves Radical Gene Therapy for Advanced Cancer

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   After a lengthy review that proved far more rigorous than researchers had
expected, the Food and Drug Administration yesterday approved a highly
experimental treatment for advanced cancer.

   The decision swept away the final obstacle to the radical new therapy, an
attempt to treat patients by infusing them with genetically engineered blood
cells custom-designed to target and destroy tumors.

    The cells will harbor the gene for a potent enzyme, tumor necrosis factor,
that in animal tests has been shown to dissolve bulging tumors within hours
after application.

   The National Institutes of Health and its acting director, Dr. William Raub,
approved the therapy last summer.

Chomping at the Bit

    With the last regulatory hurdle cleared, Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg of the
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., the researcher in charge of the
project, plans to begin testing the therapy on three cancer patients in four to
six weeks. "I'm chomping at the bit to get started on this," he said.

   The patients are among 8,000 to 10,000 Americans who suffer from metastatic
melanoma, a deadly skin malignancy that has spread throughout their bodies. They
are not expected to live longer than two or three months without the new
treatment. Indeed, one reason that metastatic melanoma was chosen as the
candidate tumor for the experimental approach is that it resists virtually all
conventional forms of treatment, like chemotherapy or radiation.

   And with rates of melanoma soaring by 4 percent or 5 percent a year in the
United States, cancer specialists say they are desperate for creative battle
plans like the gene therapy method.

   "This is an exciting approach that is totally different than any used
before," said Dr. Darrell S. Rigel, a dermatologist and melanoma specialist at
New York University Medical Center in Manhattan. "As a practicing physician who
deals with advanced melanoma, it's been so frustrating to us that there is no
effective treatment for it. This one has a chance of working."

   Dr. Rosenberg and other researchers say that, in theory, gene therapy could
prove effective against many types of advanced cancer that have spread beyond
the simple solution of a surgeon's blade. But cancer specialists caution that
even if the therapy works -- and that is a big if -- it would take years before
the experimental method was commonly available.

Approval for 50 Patients

    "We're already getting 20 or 30 calls a day asking about this work," Dr.
Rosenberg said. "But we've only gotten approval to try it on 50 patients, and we
can only handle one or two a week."

   Scientists have known for several years that tumor necrosis factor, a
compound naturally produced by the body to fight bacterial infections and to
help modulate the immune system, can destroy tumors when injected into rodents
in high doses.

   But initial attempts to treat cancer patients with simple injections of the
purified factor failed. Researchers found that inoculations of the compound
strong enough to dissolve the cancer dangerously lowered blood pressure and came
close to killing the patients.

   Dr. Rosenberg reasoned that if extremely high doses of tumor necrosis factor
could be delivered to the tumor sites, but to nowhere else in the body, the
treatment might be both safe and effective.

   To ferry the compound to the cancer cells alone, Dr. Rosenberg and his
colleagues will package the gene for tumor necrosis factor in tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes, white blood cells that have been shown to home in on tumors.

   Those blood cells will be isolated from cancer patients and grown into large
quantities in the laboratory, a procedure that takes about four weeks. Using a
genetically engineered virus, the Rosenberg team will insert the necrosis factor
gene into the lymphocytes and then re-infuse the manipulated cells into the
patients.

Fighting Malignant Cells

    If the experiment works as conceived, the lymphocytes will immediately
ferret out even tiny pockets of malignant cells in the body, latch onto their
surfaces, and douse them with the powerful anti-tumor compound produced by the
gene, while sparing the rest of the body from any biochemical onslaught.

   In the first infusion, patients will be given injections of about 30 billion
engineered lymphocytes. That figure is somewhat less than Dr. Rosenberg
originally proposed, but the Food and Drug Administration demanded the reduction
for safety concerns.

   Patients will receive additional infusions every three weeks in gradually
escalating doses. Dr. Rosenberg has calculated that after a few months the
levels of tumor necrosis factor infiltrating the patients' tumors will be three
or four times what experiments have shown is necessary for complete cancer
regression. He predicts that if the procedure succeeds the malignancies should
begin to shrink within weeks of the first cell infusion.

   Lymphocytes not able to home in tumors are rapidly flushed from the body, he
says, suggesting that the potential harm from circulating tumor necrosis factor
is slight.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1990


                             1707 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL A3-15

   A special session of Congress on the Persian Gulf crisis was proposed by
lawmakers. Some said the meeting would focus on their concerns about war in the
Middle East, while others said it give the President support.  Page A1

   News analysis: Presidential power, recently hamstrung by the budget process,
is facing limits in foreign policy, too. The call for a special session of
Congress is one example of these new limits. A1

   The tattered Kuwaiti army regroups, learning how to fight against Iraqi
invaders from a team of American special warfare advisers. A15

   U.S. jobs at stake in Gulf, Baker says A14

   Suit challenges President's buildup in the Gulf A14

   Morocco's call for Arab meeting has diplomats astir A14

   Two Arab leaders jailed by Israel A5

   Eastern Europe's gas tank runs low. A region-wide energy crisis, felt
particularly in Bulgaria, is one painful aspect of the economic jolt that has
accompanied the breakup of the Soviet-led alliance. A12

   Anti-Soviet guerilla network found in West Europe A11

   The Rev. Moon's Unification Church, a ubiquitous proselytizer in the United
States, has begun paying for hundreds of Soviet students to visit America and
study the ways of the church. A1 Yeltsin proposes coalition with Gorbachev A13

   A split among British Conservatives became more likely after Sir Geoffrey
Howe, once Prime Minister Thatcher's deputy, sharply spoke against her in
Parliament. A3

   As Paris mends, students plan more protests A6

   U.S., dispite dispute, will go to trade talks D1

   A South African judicial commission investigating special units of the army
and police about charges of terrorism against opponents of apartheid said it
could not prove those claims. A3

   India's toppled Prime Minister, V. P Singh, said he is ready to lead a social
revolution to dismantle the country's caste system. Yet, it was his moves to
weaken the caste system that lost him vital support in Parliament. A7

   Singapore to allow greater U.S. military presence A9

   A ban on mining in Antarctica will be proposed by the United States at a
meeting with other nations about the continent's future, Adminstration officials
said, and the moratorium is expected to be approved. A10

   U.N. chief's choice for refugee commissioner withdraws A8

   Gros Islet Journal: The chips are down in casino battle A4

NATIONAL A16-23, A30, B6-7

   Hopes of private investors' help in the savings and loan rescue are fading,
because only a trickle of the $2 billion in private money that was pledged for
savings deals has actually been invested. A1

   Cranston to miss session on ethics A19

   News of a gain against AIDS was delayed for five months after a special panel
first recognized it. The treatment was found to prevent death from a pneumonia
that is the leading killer of people with AIDS.  A1

   A sugar caning town in Florida, Belle Glade, was once branded AIDS Capital of
the World. Today it is still fighting the disease, which is unusually
concentrated there, but also the stigma.  A16

   Aspirin and liquor can be a bad mix, study says A18

   F.D.A. approves radical gene therapy for cancer A23

   Type of Vitamin A found to cut heart disease B6

    An important free speech battle has emerged from CNN's decision to televise
tapes of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. A question thought settled has resurfaced:
Can the Government, in advance, stop the media from broadcasting? A1

   With his millions frozen, Noriega may be tried as pauper B6

   New hearing on forced medication for inmate A30

   Senate Democrats vote Ford new majority whip A20

   Man in the news: Wendell Hampton Ford A20

REGIONAL B1-4

   The crime plan of Mayor Dinkins is unlikely to be passed this year because,
state leaders say, the Mayor has been slow to devise an acceptable way to
finance the $1.8 billion program. A1

   The 8-year-old Brooklyn boy whose mother is accused of killing him had
aroused concern among his teachers, who suspected he was being abused. The
school alerted the city at least three times, the principal said.  B1

   An insolvent Harlem savings bank, the Freedom National, remained insolvent as
a group of business, political and religious leaders could not raise the money
needed to keep the bank in business.  B1

   New Jersey's disenchanted voters have encouraged four Democratic legislators
to talk openly about repealing parts of Gov. Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax
package. B1 Putting out the trash in Long Island is no longer a simple act.
Residents are confronting the fact that waste disposal is increasingly one of
their municipalities' top expenses. B1

   A Federal investigation of John Gotti is close to producing an indictment
aginst the man the F.B.I. has described as the nation's premier Mafia boss,
Federal officials say.  B3

   Unions at the Daily News asked Attorney General Robert Abrams to look into
charges that the paper's management has hired security guards to threaten
strikers.  B3

   28 New Yorkers held in faking of auto thefts B4

   Fan dies after fight at Meadowlands concertB2

   Credit unit warns Dinkins to prepare more budget cuts B4

   Messinger urges cutting jobs from central education staff B4

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

THE LIVING SECTION

   Food

   Modern Pilgrims who tote their own trimmingsC1

   Vidalia onions to sweeten winter C1

   Wine Talk C12

   Living

   An ancient skill, sewing, is revived C1

   Little need for warm socks, but a bear might be welcome C4

ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

   An impish coloratura in "Ballo" C19

   A new recording of "Girl Crazy" C19

   Theater: "The March on Russia" C24

   Music: The Pop Life C21

   Word and Image: "WIOU" spoofs TV news programs C19

   "Soviet Civilization" C25

   Book Notes C26

EDUCATION PAGE B8

   Drop-outs are starting younger, education experts have found. With even
elementary school students failing to attend classes for long periods of time,
truant officers are being pushed to their limit and beyond. A1

   State plan for choice of schools is voided B8 Sports

   Baseball: McReynolds plans to stay A27

   Basketball: Knicks win in overtime A25

   Boxing: Notebook A26

   Column: Moran on Virginia's bowl game A25

   Football: Giants' Landeta is top punter A25

   N.F.L. NotebookA26

   Hockey: Devils end slump A27

   Flyers tie Rangers A25

   Tennis: Graf defeats Capriati A25

OBITUARIES B9

   Yannis Ritsos, a poet

   Richard Lewis, a singer

   Balcomb Greene, a painter

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

   Editorials A28

   Desert Sword: Answers?

   Democracy fails in Guatemala

   A welcome defeat for death

   Brent Staples: New South?

   Letters A28

   Flora Lewis: Running scared A29

   Tom Wicker: The wrong strategy A29

   Germaine Greer: Our allies, the slaveholders A29

   Ken Jacobson: Editors wanted; English helpful A29

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1990


                             1708 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                   November 14, 1990, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; HEALTH & MEDICINE ROUNDUP; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 1830 words

HEADLINE: Excessive TV watching linked to high cholesterol in children

SOURCE: Compiled from Wire Reports; Associated Press; New York Times; Washington
Post; Reuters

BODY:


   Young people who sit in front of the television for more than two hours a day
may be setting themselves up for later heart trouble.

    Dr. Kurt Gold, a resident in pediatrics at the University of
California-Irvine, found that children who spent two or more hours a day
watching programs or playing video games had twice the risk of high blood levels
of cholesterol as those who watched for fewer than two hours daily.

    "Watching two hours or more of TV daily turned out to be a stronger
predictor of elevated cholesterol in children than any other factor we looked
at," Gold said.

    Gold studied the television habits of 1,066 children and young adults
between the ages of 2 and 20. The findings, reported Tuesday at an American
Heart Association conference in Dallas, suggest that children who watch a lot of
television are less likely to be physically active.

    Families that spend much time in front of the television may have a
sedentary lifestyle associated with obesity, high cholesterol, poor physical
fitness and increased heart disease, Gold said.

    The children in the study were screened for cholesterol by pediatricians in
one California county. Researchers found 21 percent of the children had
cholesterol levels above 175, the level considered high enough to warrant
dietary therapy in children.

    "Since cholesterol levels tend to rise somewhat when a child reaches
adulthood, many of these children could have dangerously high levels in later
life," Gold said.
 Afterthoughts on salt


    When the government warned people a decade ago to eat less salt, the advice
clearly seemed to be a sensible way to lower the risk of high blood pressure.
Almost instantly, salt became a four-letter word.

    In the years since, millions of dollars have been spent on dozens of
research studies. But the issue has never been murkier.

    In fact, there is no convincing proof that eating salt is an important cause
of high blood pressure.

    Here's what is known: About 60-million Americans have high blood pressure.
About half of them are sensitive to salt, which means that eating more salt
makes their blood pressure go up, and eating less makes it go down. Virtually
everyone agrees that these people need to watch their salt intake.

  What about the 90 percent of the population who do not have salt-sensitive
high blood pressure?

    Dr. Myron Weinberger of Indiana University said researchers are on "less
solid ground" recommending reducing salt intake for people with normal blood
pressure. "The evidence is not available and probably never will be," he said.

    Dr. John Vanderveen, director of nutrition for the Food and Drug
Administration, agrees. "There is no conclusive evidence that salt consumption
causes hypertension. It's only a hypothesis," he said.

    Probably the most important salt study of the past decade is Intersalt, a
comparison of 52 groups of people in 32 countries around the world. The results,
released two years ago, are used by people on both sides of the salt
controversy.

    Essentially, the study found that salt doesn't matter much. Among four
primitive groups with low salt consumption, blood pressure was indeed low. But
for the rest of the industrialized world, there was no relationship between how
much salt people ate and their blood pressure.

    An editorial published with the report in the British Medical Journal
carried the headline: "Salt has only small importance in hypertension."

    But no one is suggesting that people load up on salt. Moderation makes
sense. People need only about half a gram of salt a day; the typical American
eats between 10 and 15 grams.

    Indeed, some researchers favor keeping the current low-salt recommendations.
Others believe dire no-salt warnings can be taken with, well, a grain of salt.
Still others shy away from making  pronouncements of any kind.

    "We ought to be confused," conceded Dr. William Bennett, editor of the
Harvard Health Letter. "The data are not clear."
 Aspirin and alcohol don't mix


   Aspirin, a longtime antidote for the side effects of drinking, may actually
enhance alcohol's effect, researchers say.

    In a report on a study being published in today's issue of the Journal of
the American Medical Association, researchers at the Bronx Veterans Affairs
Medical Center said they found that aspirin significantly lowered the body's
ability to break down alcohol in the stomach.     As a result, volunteers who
took two extra-strength aspirin tablets an hour before drinking had blood
alcohol levels 30 percent higher than when they drank alcohol alone. Each
volunteer consumed the equivalent of a glass and a half of wine.

    That 30 percent could make the difference between sobriety and impairment,
said Dr. Charles Lieber, medical director of the Alcohol Research and Treatment
Center at the Bronx center.

    Lieber said the newly discovered interaction had many implications for the
millions of people who take these two commonly used substances in tandem.

    "If they know from past experience that a small amount of alcohol doesn't
interfere with their ability to drive or operate machinery, they may be in
danger if they have taken aspirin as well," he said.

    The results also suggest that the common strategy of taking aspirin before
parties to ward drunk-induced headaches and hangovers is bound to backfire. But
taking aspirin the next morning may still help relieve a hangover.
 FDA advocates stimulant


   After 12 years of debate, officials of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
say they will soon recommend continued use of a controversial stimulant
contained in non-prescription cold  medications and diet pills.

    The stimulant, phenylpropanolamine hydrochloride (PPA), is a chemical cousin
of drugs such as adrenalin and amphetamines.  Some obesity experts and consumer
advocates have argued that it should be banned in over-the-counter drugs because
it can raise blood pressure and has the potential for misuse.

    The ingredient is found in more than 75 non-prescription medicines,
including the diet pills Acutrim, Appedrine, Control and Dexatrim.

    PPA also works as a decongestant and is found in cold and cough remedies
such as Bayer Children's Cough Syrup, Comtrex Multi-Symptom Cold Reliever and
Triaminic.
 Cancer treatment approved


   After a lengthy review, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on Tuesday
approved a highly experimental treatment for advanced skin cancer.

    Doctors at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., plan to begin
testing the therapy on three cancer patients in four to six weeks.

    The patients are among 8,000 to 10,000 Americans who suffer from metastatic
melanoma, a deadly skin malignancy that has spread throughout their bodies. They
are not expected to live longer than two or three months without the new
treatment.

    One reason metastatic melanoma has been chosen as the candidate tumor for
the experimental approach is that it resists virtually all conventional forms of
cancer treatment, like chemotherapy or radiation.

    And with rates of melanoma soaring by 4 or 5 percent a year in the United
States, cancer specialists say they are desperate for creative battle plans like
the gene therapy method.

    The FDA decision swept away the final obstacle to the radical new therapy,
an attempt to treat patients by infusing them with genetically engineered blood
cells custom-designed to target and destroy tumors.

    The cells will harbor the gene for tumor necrosis factor, a potent enzyme
that in animal tests has been shown to dissolve bulging tumors within hours
after application.
 Wells may have pesticides


   Unhealthy levels of pesticides and nitrates are thought to be contaminating
wells that provide drinking water for hundreds of communities, the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) said Tuesday.

    EPA officials emphasized that a nationwide sampling of wells indicates that
fewer than 1 percent are contaminated to levels that are of concern.

    Nevertheless, those wells provide drinking water for millions of  people,
the officials said.

    The survey also indicated more than half of the nation's wells have water
contaminated with nitrates from fertilizer, sewage sludge or septic tanks.

    Many of the pesticides found in the drinking water are suspected of causing
cancer or damage to vital organs if consumed at significant levels over a long
period of time.

    In most cases, the water contamination is believed to be below levels that
pose a health concern to humans, the EPA said.
  Vitamin A and heart disease


   A form of vitamin A common in carrots and many other fruits and vegetables
appears to substantially reduce the risk of heart trouble in people who already
have coronary artery disease, according to a study released Tuesday.

    The findings about beta carotene are considered preliminary, but raise the
possibility that people whose heart arteries are clogged may be able to ward off
heart attacks and other cardiac problems by consuming the nutrient.

    However, Dr. Charles Hennekens, who directed the study at Brigham and
Women's Hospital in Boston, cautioned that the study will have to be confirmed
by further research before anyone recommends people eat carrots to save their
hearts.

    Beta carotene, which the body changes into vitamin A, is the nutrient that
gives fruits and vegetables their orange color.  Especially good sources include
carrots, sweet potatoes, peaches and cantaloupes.
 Child heart recipients to soar


   The number of children receiving heart transplants is likely to increase
substantially as doctors find new uses for this dramatic surgery and overcome a
critical shortage of organs, physicians say.

    Doctors at the annual meeting of the American Heart Association in Dallas
also said the outlook for young heart transplant patients is improving, largely
because of better ways to prevent their bodies from rejecting the new organs.

    The use of heart transplants, especially in the very young, grew quickly
during the past decade. In 1979, doctors performed just one of these operations
in children. By 1989, there were 187 operations at 58 hospitals around the
world.

    "I think the number will become much larger," said Dr. David Baum of
Stanford University.
 Information from the Associated Press, New York Times, Washington Post and
Reuters was used in this report.

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); aspirin; a carrot

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1992


                             1709 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  November 14, 1990, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 162 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for cancer set to begin

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    The first gene therapy for treating cancer patients was approved Tuesday by
the Food and Drug Administration.

   Trials involving up to 50 patients with malignant melanoma will begin
immediately at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   ''I'm optimistic (it) will eventually work,'' says Dr. Steven Rosenberg,
heading the trial with Drs. French Anderson and Michael Blaese. ''This is highly
experimental.''

   Three patients have been selected; others will be added.

   How the therapy works:

   - Natural cancer-fighting cells are removed from the patients' tumors and
grown in huge numbers in the lab.

   - A gene that makes an anti-cancer hormone is added.

   - Back in the body, the cancer-fighting cells zero in on the tumor, while the
new gene makes the hormone that shuts off the tumor's nutrient supply.

   The first gene therapy attempt was Sept. 14 in a girl with an enzyme
deficiency. Results are promising with no side effects so far, says Anderson.


                             1710 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                  November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 784 words

HEADLINE: FDA Approves Gene Therapy For Use in Cancer Treatment

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: William Booth, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Gene therapy, the radical but unproven strategy of scientifically
manipulating genes to combat disease, cleared one of its biggest hurdles
yesterday when the government gave researchers permission to use the technique
for the first time to treat cancer.

   In a matter of weeks, researchers at the National Institutes of Health plan
to inject genetically altered white blood cells into three patients with
advanced melanoma, a malignant skin cancer for which there is no effective
treatment once the cancer has spread from the skin to other organs.

   The scientists hope the altered blood cells will find their way to the
patient's tumors and will begin churning out a potent cancer-busting compound
that could shrink or even destroy the growths.

   "What we're trying to do is produce an effective treatment for cancer," said
Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute, who is leading the study.
"We're trying to kill cancer cells using the tools of gene therapy."

   "It is an important project," said Gerald Quinnan, acting director of the
Food and Drug Administration's Center for Biologics, Evaluation and Research,
which approved the experimental use of gene therapy for melanoma yesterday.

   FDA approval of the radical new technique marks the second time gene therapy
will be tried in humans and the first time it will be used to treat a common
cancer.

   "The principle sounds great," said Dusty Miller, a leading gene therapy
researcher at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. "But in
this particular case, whether it works or not is unclear."

   The American Cancer Society reports that there will be 27,600 new cases of
melanoma in 1990 and that 6,300 people will die. In recent years, the incidence
of melanoma has been rising faster than that of any other cancer in the United
States.

   In September, NIH researchers used gene therapy for the first time to treat
an extremely rare disorder of the immune system. The patient, a 4-year-old girl,
is being monitored and researchers say it is too early to tell whether the
therapy had any effect.

   In the next six weeks, Rosenberg and his colleagues will give three melanoma
patients transfusions of their own white blood cells, which have been
genetically altered to fight cancer. Eventually, as many as 50 patients may be
treated. To enter the study, all patients must have advanced melanoma and must
be expected to live for no longer than three months without the treatment.

   Rosenberg said he and colleagues Michael Blaese of the National Cancer
Institute and French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
are getting about 20 or 30 calls a day from patients desperate for the
experimental therapy.

   To treat the patients, the researchers will remove special cancer-killing
cells called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) from the patient's tumors.
These lymphocytes are white blood cells that migrate from all over the body to
attack cancer cells.

   Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes naturally produce a powerful compound called
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which eats away at cancer cells. In mice,
scientists have observed remarkable improvements following treatment with tumor
necrosis factor. Unfortunately, human lymphocytes produce only a tiny amount of
the anti-cancer compound, apparently not enough to destroy large or rapidly
growing tumors.

   So the researchers will insert a pair of genes into the patient's
lymphocytes, which increases each cell's production of TNF by a hundred-fold.
The gene package includes a bit of DNA called a promoter, which essentially
flips the switch that turns on the production of tumor necrosis factor and keeps
it on.

   The patients will get 3 billion altered cells in their first dose. At the end
of 15 weeks of therapy, they will be getting about 300 billion cells per dose.
Rosenberg said the first patient already has had cells harvested from his tumors
and that in the next few days, the researchers will begin inserting new genes
into that batch of cells in preparation for the first injections.

   The experiment is an attempt to improve upon mixed results obtained in
earlier studies in which cancer patients were treated with unaltered
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes with high doses of a cell-stimulating substance
called interleukin-2.

   Researchers also have tried injecting patients directly with tumor necrosis
factor, but the treatment failed. Rosenberg said that, in humans, high doses of
the anti-cancer agent cause shock and body wasting.

   He said he hopes that by delivering a large amount of tumor necrosis factor
directly to the tumors, the substance's toxicity will be reduced and the tumors
will be flooded with the anti-cancer agent.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, AN EXTRA GENE FOR 'KILLER CELLS', PETER HOEY


                             1711 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 13, 1990, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 25; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 797 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE / GENETIC ENGINEERING;
SAFER GENE THERAPY MAY BE POSSIBLE

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists have used a new genetic engineering technique to successfully
insert genes into heart and other muscle tissue of rats, promising a new,
potentially safer way of carrying out gene therapy, a Michigan researcher said
Monday.

   One potential application of the technique might enable the heart to secrete
proteins to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels that would bypass clogged
arteries leading to the heart, thereby avoiding the need for bypass surgery.
Internist Jeffrey M. Leiden of the University of Michigan Medical Center
reported the results at a meeting in Dallas of the American Heart Assn.

   The approach could also be used to replace the defective protein that
cripples muscular dystrophy victims. The researchers are exploring these
possibilities in animal models of the disorders.

   Leiden was able to insert a bare piece of DNA into cells, where it could
produce a missing or desirable protein.

   "It's a very promising development," said Gary Nabel, a University of
Michigan molecular biologist who was not involved in the research. "Now all
(Leiden) has to do is figure out which genes are going to be the most helpful"
in treating heart disease.

   Two general approaches are now used in studies of gene therapy. In the most
common, now being studied on patients with a severe immune deficiency by
researchers at the National Institutes of Health, white blood cells are removed
from the patient and treated with a specially prepared virus that inserts a
healthy copy of a defective gene into the patient's own genetic material. The
altered cells are then reinjected into the patient.

   In the second approach, which is unlikely to be attempted in humans anytime
soon, the virus is injected directly into the patient, where the virus can
insert the gene into many different cells.

   "The problem with using viruses is that they . . . can cause persistent
infections in animals and humans" with potentially deleterious effects, Leiden
said. Furthermore, he added, there is a risk that the virus will insert the
added gene at an inappropriate site in the patient's DNA -- deoxyribonucleic
acid, the genetic blueprint of life -- causing mutations or cancer.

   In contrast to those two approaches, Leiden uses a circular piece of
bacterial DNA, called a plasmid, into which the desired gene has been inserted.
Researchers have long used plasmids to insert new genes into bacteria, but it
has been believed that the technique would not work in animals because the
plasmids would not be able to get inside mature cells.

   But Leiden found that the plasmids were readily absorbed by mature heart
muscle cells called cardiac myocytes, where they produced the desired protein.
But even after the plasmids are absorbed, he said, they remain separate from the
cells' own DNA so there is no risk of cancer.

   Leiden used the technique to insert a bacterial gene for an enzyme called
beta-galactosidase into the heart cells. The enzyme has no useful function; it
simply serves as a marker to indicate that the gene insertion works. Its
presence can be detected by adding a chemical that turns blue when it is altered
by the enzyme.

   He injected the plasmids into the beating heart muscle of nine rodents. When
he removed heart tissue four weeks later and exposed it to the chemical, he
found that seven of the nine had taken up the plasmid and were producing the
enzyme.

   "You can hold the hearts up and see splotches of blue with the naked eye," he
said in a telephone interview.

   Earlier this year, molecular biologist Jon A. Wolff of the University of
Wisconsin had shown that the same technique could be used in skeletal muscles.
"It's significant that this works in heart muscle as well," Nabel said. "That's
not something you could take for granted." Leiden's results suggest that the
absorption of plasmids is a general phenomenon of all types of muscle cells and
thus could be widely applicable, he added.

   Leiden is now treating rat hearts with the gene for a protein, called
angiogenesis factor, that stimulates the formation of new blood vessels in the
hopes that it will generate new blood supply to damaged areas.

   He and Wolf are also testing the technique for replacement of a defective
gene in mice with a type of muscular dystrophy. They hope that it can supplant a
technique called myoblast transfer, now being tested in humans, in which cells
from a healthy relative are injected into muscle cells to replace the defective
gene.

   Although myoblast transfer so far seems to be effective in improving muscle
function, the patients must have their immune systems suppressed to prevent
rejection of the injected cells. Injection of plasmids would be safer because
they would not stimulate rejection, and no immune suppression would be
necessary.


                             1712 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    November 9, 1990, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F3; MICHAEL SCHRAGE

LENGTH: 1129 words

HEADLINE: Questions of Economics and Ethics Haunt the Future of Gene Therapy

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: MICHAEL SCHRAGE

BODY:

   What's a cure for diabetes worth? How much would you pay for a single shot
that forever frees you from ulcers? Should a pharmaceutical company be allowed
to charge a fortune for an anti-cancer vaccine that only costs a few cents to
"make"?

   The emerging field of human gene therapy offers perhaps the most exciting
possibilities for profound and painless treatment of human ills. Our growing
ability to actually edit someone's genetic code to suppress harmful genes and
promote useful ones represents a fundamental revolution in healing. Once-chronic
illnesses might be cured with a single shot.

   "Gene therapy in the next century will be as important as immunization and
antibiotics were in this," declares Dr. William N. Kelley, who runs the
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center and serves on the National Institutes
of Health's human gene therapy subcommittee.

   But there's absolutely no guarantee that medical breakthroughs will translate
into cost-effective new treatments. The marketplace matters, and it's not at all
clear how basic economics will shape the evolution of human gene therapies.

   "The real issue for all these technologies is, how are we going to pay for
them?" says G. Steven Burrill, national director of the high-technology practice
at the accounting firm Ernst & Young in San Francisco. "Where the biotech and
pharmaceutical industries are naive is that they haven't adequately thought out
the pricing dynamics of the 1990s."

   Indeed, Burrill asserts, human gene therapy represents "a new paradigm -- and
that should argue for a new pricing paradigm, but there isn't one that exists
yet." The new paradigm must strike a balance between pharmaceutical profit and
public health.

   Gene therapy will create thorny economic questions for pharmaceutical
companies basking in the cash flow of their most successful drugs. For example,
Tagamet and Zantac are extraordinarily profitable anti-ulcer drugs. Suppose that
researchers working on the Human Genome Initiative -- a multiyear,
multibillion-dollar project to map the human genetic code -- discover a clear
genetic link to ulcers. By crafting the appropriate suppressors, this ulcer-gene
can be switched off. One shot of ulcer vaccine does it. In sufficient
quantities, a single injection may cost only pennies to manufacture.

   So what happens to Zantac and Tagamet? If you're the drug company, what do
you charge for that single shot -- $ 1,000, $ 2,000, $ 10,000? Does the drug
company get to charge what the shot is "worth" or what it costs to develop and
manufacture?

   Politics and societal expectations will shape that answer as much as
economics. Burroughs-Wellcome, the British pharmaceutical house, was savaged for
its monopolistic pricing practices surrounding AZT, its antiviral treatment for
AIDS -- which originally sold for $ 10,000 for a year's worth of dosages. The
need to profitably recover one's investment is understandable, but so is
society's desire that everyone have an affordable chance at good health.

   "If these biotech companies do a good job presenting their case, then they
have an industry," says Ernst & Young's Burrill. "If they do not, we won't get
these medical breakthroughs to market."

   "I'm concerned that progress in this field may not occur as fast as it would
if the ability of the corporate world to recover its investment were more
obvious," says Pennsylvania's Kelley, who believes that many gene therapies
might ultimately qualify as "orphan drugs."

   "Generally speaking, if a drug represents a cure, it's got less of a market
than one that is chronically administered," observes Joseph S. Lacob, a partner
at Kleiner Perkins, the venture capital firm that initially funded Genentech.
"It's not as attractive financially."

   Given the current state of the technology and the economics, some researchers
even question how the gene therapy industry will grow.

   "I think there are very few economically appealing gene therapy targets that
are both technically feasible and in the near term," asserts Dr. Ronald C.
Dorozio, a biotech entrepreneur who is starting up a gene therapy company whose
first product will boost bone marrow resistance to aid chemotherapy. "It's a
tough market. I don't think there will be many broadly based therapies for a
while."

   Because it takes years and more than $ 150 million to bring even a
conventional drug to market, it's not clear how the traditional pharmaceutical
companies will participate in this new technology. Gene therapy represents a
fundamental challenge to their economics.

   "This doesn't fit their existing models of the business," says Dr. Stephen
Sherwin, who left Genentech to run Cell Genesys, a Foster City, Calif., biotech
firm exploring various gene therapy technologies. It's certainly unclear whether
entrepreneurial gene therapy firms would have the stamina, resources and capital
to bring new therapies to market.

   Despite the media storm of excitement surrounding the NIH's approval of
clinical trials for human gene therapy, few organizations are coming to grips
with the economic questions. The Health Care Finance Administration, which
oversees Medicare reimbursement, hasn't even begun to consider where gene
therapy may fit in the health-care economy. It's far too early to say whether
gene therapy will boost our nation's health-care spending or be a force that
ultimately reduces costs.

   Indeed, Kleiner Perkins's Lacob and Pennsylvania's Kelley point to the
technologies underlying gene therapy and insist that there will be economies of
scope and scale that will dramatically reduce costs over time. Knowledge from
the Human Genome Initiative will provide targets for therapy. The real cost of
producing gene-based therapies will decline.

   What's more, a vaccine that prevents -- or cures -- a condition is far
cheaper than a drug that simply alleviates it. Even a vaccine that creates a
one-time cost of thousands of dollars is cheaper than the cost of managing a
chronic condition for decades.

   The point is that human gene therapy could be as revolutionary in managing
health-care cost pressures as it could be in eliminating disease. "The potential
is almost unbelievable," says Kelley.

   Nevertheless, it is foolish to divorce the potential of the technology from
the dictates of the marketplace. The NIH does a disservice when it exalts the
wonders of gene therapy without mentioning the arduous and uncertain road to
commercialization.

   If we really want to reap the benefits of our multibillion-dollar investment
in medical research, it's time that the public and private medical establishment
open up a dialogue about how best to manage the delicate intersection of
investment, price and the public health.

   Michael Schrage is a columnist for the Los Angeles Times.


                             1713 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 8, 1990, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1116 words

HEADLINE: INNOVATION:  GENE THERAPY'S PROMISING, BUT AT A PRICE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHRAGE

BODY:

   What's a cure for diabetes worth? How much would you pay for a single shot
that forever frees you from ulcers? Should a pharmaceutical company be allowed
to charge a fortune for an anti-cancer vaccine that only costs a few cents to
"make"?

   The emerging field of human gene therapy offers perhaps the most exciting
possibilities for profound and painless treatment of human ills. Our growing
ability to actually edit someone's genetic code to suppress harmful genes and
promote useful ones represents a fundamental revolution in healing. Once-chronic
illnesses might be cured with a single shot.

   "Gene therapy in the next century will be as important as immunization and
antibiotics was in this," declares Dr. William N. Kelley, who runs the
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center and serves on the National Institutes
of Health's human gene therapy subcommittee.

   But there's absolutely no guarantee that medical breakthroughs will translate
into cost-effective new treatments. The marketplace matters, and it's not at all
clear how basic economics will shape the evolution of human gene therapies.

   "The real issue for all these technologies is, how are we going to pay for
them?" says G. Steven Burrill, national director of the high-technology practice
at the accounting firm Ernst & Young in San Francisco, "Where the biotech and
pharmaceutical industries are naive is that they haven't adequately thought out
the pricing dynamics of the 1990s."

   Indeed, Burrill asserts, human gene therapy represents "a new paradigm -- and
that should argue for a new pricing paradigm, but there isn't one that exists
yet." The new paradigm must strike a better balance between pharmaceutical
profit and public health.

   Gene therapy will create thorny economic questions for pharmaceutical
companies basking in the cash flow of their most successful drugs. For example,
Tagamet and Zantac are extraordinarily profitable anti-ulcer drugs. Suppose that
researchers working on the Human Genome Initiative -- a multiyear,
multibillion-dollar project to map the human genetic code -- discover a clear
genetic link to ulcers. By crafting the appropriate suppressors, this ulcer-gene
can be switched off. One shot of ulcer vaccine does it. In sufficient
quantities, a single injection may cost only pennies to manufacture.

   So what happens to Zantac and Tagamet? If you're the drug company, what do
you charge for that single shot? $1,000? $2,000? $10,000? Does the drug company
get to charge what the shot is "worth" or what it costs to develop and
manufacture?

   Politics and societal expectations will shape that answer as much as
economics. Burroughs-Wellcome, the British pharmaceutical house, was savaged for
its monopolistic pricing practices surrounding AZT, its antiviral treatment for
AIDS -- which originally sold for $10,000 a year. The need to profitably recover
one's investment is understandable, but so is society's desire that everyone
have an affordable chance at good health.

   "If these biotech companies do a good job presenting their case, then they
have an industry," says Ernst & Young's Burrill. "If they do not, we won't get
these medical breakthroughs to market."

   "I'm concerned that progress in this field may not occur as fast as it would
if the ability of the corporate world to recover its investment were more
obvious," says Pennsylvania's Kelley, who believes that many gene therapies
might ultimately qualify as "orphan drugs."

   "Generally speaking, if a drug represents a cure, it's got less of a market
than one that is chronically administered," observes Joseph S. Lacob, a partner
at Kleiner Perkins, the venture capital firm that initially funded Genentech.
"It's not as attractive financially."

   Given the current state of the technology and the economics, some researchers
even question how the gene therapy industry will grow.

   "I think there are very few economically appealing gene therapy targets that
are both technically feasible and in the near term," asserts Dr. Ronald C.
Dorozio, a biotech entrepreneur who is starting up a gene therapy company whose
first product will boost bone marrow resistance to aid chemotherapy. "It's a
tough market. I don't think there will be many broadly based therapies for a
while. "

   Because it takes years and more than $150 million to bring even a
conventional drug to market, it's not clear how the traditional pharmaceutical
companies will participate in this new technology. Gene therapy represents a
fundamental challenge to their economics.

   "This doesn't fit their existing models of the business," says Dr. Stephen
Sherwin, who left Genentech to run Cell Genesys, a Foster City, Calif., biotech
firm exploring various gene therapy technologies. It's certainly unclear whether
entrepreneurial gene therapy firms would have the stamina, resources and capital
to bring new therapies to market.

   Despite the media storm of excitement surrounding the NIH's approval of
clinical trials for human gene therapy, few organizations are coming to grips
with the economic questions. The Health Care Finance Administration, which
oversees Medicare reimbursement, hasn't even begun to consider where gene
therapy may fit in the health-care economy. It's far too early to say whether
gene therapy will boost our nation's health-care spending or be a force that
ultimately reduces costs.

   Indeed, Kleiner Perkins' Lacob and Pennsylvania's Kelley point to the
technologies underlying gene therapy and insist that there will be economies of
scope and scale that will dramatically reduce costs over time. Knowledge from
the Human Genome Initiative will provide targets for therapy. The real cost of
producing gene-based therapies will decline.

   What's more, a vaccine that prevents -- or cures -- a condition is far
cheaper than a drug that simply alleviates it. Even a vaccine that creates a
one-time cost of thousands of dollars is cheaper than the cost of managing a
chronic condition for decades.

   The point is that human gene therapy could be as revolutionary in managing
health-care cost pressures as it could be in eliminating disease. "The potential
is almost unbelievable," says Kelley.

   Nevertheless, it is foolish to divorce the potential of the technology from
the dictates of the marketplace. The NIH does the world a disservice when it
exalts the wonders of gene therapy without mentioning the arduous and uncertain
road to commercialization.

   If we really want to reap the benefits of our multibillion-dollar investment
in medical research, it's time that the public and private medical establishment
open up a dialogue about how best to manage the delicate intersection of
investment, price and the public health.


                             1714 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     November 5, 1990, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 203 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF:  GENE THERAPY HOLDS HOPE FOR CHOLESTEROL PROBLEMS

BYLINE: From Times staff and wire reports

BODY:

   A Michigan researcher has used gene therapy in rabbits to correct an
inherited disorder, characterized by high levels of cholesterol, that is a
primary contributor to heart disease in humans. The finding potentially opens
the door to a new era in treating hardening of the arteries and liver disease.

   The rabbits have a genetic defect called familial hypercholesterolemia. They
have a defective gene for a liver protein, called the LDL receptor, that is
important for clearing low density lipoprotein, the so-called bad cholesterol.
About one in 500 Americans has a mild form of the disorder that causes an
increased risk of heart attacks and strokes.

   Michigan biochemist James Wilson reported last week in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences that he removed liver cells from animals with the
disease, used genetic engineering techniques to insert a healthy gene for the
LDL receptor, and then injected the cells into other rabbits with the disease.

   The treated rabbits showed a 30% drop in blood cholesterol levels within
three days. The effect persisted for only two weeks, however, because the cells
were eventually rejected. Wilson now is working on ways to prevent that
rejection.


                             1715 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 3; National Desk; HEALTH

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy May Help Correct a Rare Liver Disorder

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   In yet another victory for gene therapy, researchers have sharply reduced the
cholesterol levels of laboratory rabbits afflicted with severe cholesterol
disease by inserting healthy copies of a critical gene into the animals' livers.

   Scientists say the new approach may soon be used to treat patients with
familial hypercholesterolemia, a rare disorder in which the liver fails to make
the proteins that absorb cholesterol from the blood. It afflicts about one in a
million people, and the only therapy is a liver transplant.

    "It's impossible to really predict this sort of thing, but we hope to have
the technology ready for humans in less than five years," said Dr. J. Roy
Chowdhury of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx. Dr. Chowdhury
is one of the authors of the paper, which appears in this week's issue of the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Researchers say the ability to target vital genes to liver cells may prove
invaluable for treating a broad spectrum of hereditary and hormonal diseases.

   In the experiments, the researchers removed liver tissue from rabbits that
lacked the gene responsible for making the low-density lipoprotein receptor, a
protein that sits on the surface of liver cells and snares molecules of
cholesterol that pass in the bloodstream. Once in the cell, the cholesterol can
be broken down and excreted as bile acids.

   Using a genetically engineered virus, the researchers installed in the cells
a copy of the human gene for the critical receptor. Then they injected the
manipulated cells into other rabbits with the disease. The cells homed in on the
liver and attached themselves to the organ, where they began producing the
necessary receptor.

   The researchers estimate that the cells harboring the inserted genes
manufactured about 3 percent of the receptor proteins found within normal
rabbits, but with a striking effect. In days, the cells had reduced the rabbits'
blood cholesterol levels by 30 percent.

   The effect stopped working after several days, the scientists said, probably
because the rabbits' immune system rejected the liver cells as foreign. The
scientists are now trying the same gene-insertion method but are reintroducing
the liver cells into the rabbit from which they were isolated.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1990


                             1716 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   November 1, 1990, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 210 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy can lower cholesterol

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Pioneering animal research shows for the first time that very high
cholesterol can be lowered by gene therapy.

   Though human tests may be several years away, the study is important for
people born with familial hypercholesterolemia - in which a protein that breaks
down ''bad'' cholesterol in the liver is deficient, causing very high
cholesterol.

   ''We now can clearly lower the level of cholesterol in animals,'' says Dr.
James Wilson, Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator at the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

   A new gene that makes the needed protein was put in the liver of rabbits.
Three days later, cholesterol levels plunged 30%, but returned to the high level
after two weeks. Next goal: Maintain low cholesterol for more than a year.

   The severe form of the disease strikes 1 in 1 million children. They get
clogged arteries and die from heart attacks in infancy and childhood. Gene
therapy would be used first on these kids, whose only alternative is a liver
transplant.

   About 1 in 500 people inherit a milder form that can cause heart attacks in
early adulthood. Wilson says gene therapy would not be an option for them until
it has been greatly perfected. Findings are in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.


                             1717 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words

HEADLINE: New Medical Research Tool: Human Tissues in Lab Mice

BYLINE: By SANDRA BLAKESLEE

BODY:

   In a series of bold experiments, scientists have created laboratory mice with
tiny samples of human organs growing in them: lungs, intestines, pancreases,
lymph nodes, thymuses, and livers. The purpose is to study the viruses of human
diseases in living human tissues.

   The mice provide a singular opportunity to gauge the effectiveness of various
antiviral drugs. They have been successfully infected with the AIDS virus and
with two cancer viruses that cause leukemia.

    Researchers plan next to infect the mice with cytomegalovirus, which can
damage the brains of unborn children. After that will come infections with the
viruses of influenza, chronic infant diarrhea, genital warts and hepatitis.
Because these viruses attack only humans, it has been impossible hitherto to
study them in animals.

Not Carbon Copies

    The organ structures are not miniature copies of adult organs but contain
complete sets of cells that make them able to function as well as the organs of
a newborn baby.Thus, each organ, about the size of a pencil eraser, can carry
out its normal function in tandem with the mouse's own organs.

   The novel mice were developed by Dr. J. Michael McCune, an immunologist who
treats AIDS patients at San Francisco General Hospital.

   A second kind of mouse, carrying adult human blood cells, has been developed
by Dr. Donald E. Mosier, an immunologist from the Medical Research Institute, a
private research laboratory in La Jolla, Calif.

   Both scientists announced two years ago that they had implanted human immune
system tissues into immune deficient mice and reported the mice formed human
white cells. Since then, they have learned how to grow other organs in mice and
to infect the animals with human viruses. Many of those experiments are being
carried out by companies recently formed by Dr. Mosier and and Dr. McCune.
Researchers at Duke University, Stanford University and the University of
California at Los Angeles have also replicated the work.

   Because human fetal tissues are being implanted into animals and not humans,
Dr. McCune and his colleagues are not subject to the Federal ban on the use of
such tissues in medical research. The ban, imposed two years ago by the
Department of Health and Human Services, was intended to prevent women from
having abortions for the sake of donating fetal tissue to people, but the
regulations make no mention of mice, said Dr. McCune, whose work has been
financed largely by the National Institutes of Health.

Important New Tool

    The mouse "is potentially quite an important model" for studying AIDS and
other viral diseases, said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md. The mouse is
"phenomenally important," said Dr. David Baltimore, president of the Rockefeller
University in New York. "It offers you the opportunity to look at viruses
without having to deal with human beings" and to conduct imaginative
experiments. Dr. Baltimore helped form Dr. McCune's company, Systemix of Palo
Alto, Calif., two years ago.

   Dr. McCune said his notion for creating the mouse was born of frustration. In
his work with AIDS patients, he developed concepts for therapies that needed to
be tested in animals, yet the AIDS virus infects only human cells. His idea was
to insert tissues from human fetal organs into mice with deficient immune
systems that would not reject the implants. Such mice had been developed at the
Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia.

   To create mice with human immune systems, Dr. McCune takes the thymus, liver
and lymph nodes from human fetuses less than 22 weeks old and divides them into
hundreds of pieces, each about the size of a grain of rice.

   Using a microscope, he implants a piece of each organ under the kidneys of
young mice. Within days, the mouse's blood vessels move into the human tissue,
nourishing it and encouraging it to grow. In a month or two, the human organs
are the size of blueberries and are able to engender the cells of the immune
system.

   Though small, the organs are functionally complete, Dr. McCune said. Human
immune T-cells circulate in the mouse's bloodstream, he said, while B-cells and
other human immune system components reside in the liver and thymus.

   Dr. Mosier's company, Lidak Pharmaceuticals in La Jolla, Calif., makes an
immune deficient mouse that supports immune system cells taken from adult
humans. Dr. Mosier injects white blood cells from adult donors into a mouse's
abdominal cavity. The cells migrate to the mouse's spleen and lymph nodes and
create a functioning human immune system. For reasons that are not understood,
Dr. Mosier said, the human cells do not attack the mouse's tissues.

Trials With AZT

    Such mice are being studied under a wide range of experimental conditions,
said Dr. McCune. In one experiment, which is to be published shortly,
researchers treated mice with the drug AZT at different intervals after
infection to test the advantages of early treatment. The answer may help guide
the treatment of hospital workers who accidentally stick themselves with
AIDS-contaminated needles, Dr. McCune said.

   Hundreds of antiviral compounds are being screened in both versions of the
mice. Because the AIDS virus mutates rapidly, the researchers plan to test
combinations of the most promising drugs.

   At Stanford University, Dr. Edwin Mocarsky plans to infect mice with
cytomegalovirus, an organism that can cause blindness in AIDS patients. At
U.C.L.A., Dr. Irvin Chen is studying two human leukemia viruses to find out how
the virus transforms human cells into a cancerous state.

   Scientists at Systemix are beginning to implant other human organs in the
mice, including lungs, intestines, pancreases, pituitary glands, skin, brain
cells and placenta. The work is in very early stages, but so far the tissues
have correct structural elements and a healthy blood supply, said Dr. McCune.
"The only thing holding us back is having enough hours in the week to do the
experiments," he said.

   Certain brain cells and pituitary gland cells grow well in the mice, Dr.
McCune said, as do beta cells and islet cells of the pancreas. But a major goal
of the research, he said, is to isolate the human blood stem cell -- a master
cell that gives rise to all the various types of blood and immune cells.

   Possible stem cells will be inserted into mice whose human blood-forming
system has been destroyed by radiation. Real stem cells should then disclose
their identity by regenerating blood and immune cells. "You just can't do this
experiment in people," Dr. McCune noted.

   Human stem cells will be invaluable for gene therapy, he said, and for
isolating blood growth factors for treating cancer and other diseases.

   Dr. McCune said the research has not encountered any opposition from
anti-abortion or animal rights groups.

A Mouse With Tissues Of a Human
When a deficient immune system gets implants of fetal thymus, liver and lymph
nodes cells, the tissue is not rejected. Instead, the mouse's blood vessels
nourish it, and human organs the size of blueberries develop. They function
along with the organs of the mouse and make cells of the human immune system,
including T-cells that circulate in the mouse's bloodstream and B-cells and
other immune cells that reside in the liver and thymus. The mice can be used to
study viral activity in human tissue and anti-viral drugs.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Donald E. Mosier, immunologist at Lidak Pharmaceuticals, La
Jolla, Calif., with mouse that can carry human blood cells. His immunedeficient
mice support immune system cells from adult humans. (Robert Burroughs for The
New York Times); diagram illustrating implanted human fetal tissue, and T-cells
and B-cells in mice. (source: J. Michael McCune, M.D.) (pg. C3)

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1990


                             1718 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    October 30, 1990, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1283 words

HEADLINE: NEW FRONTIER;
DESIGNER GENES TAKE ON CANCER;
Treatment takes battle inside body

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    The first gene therapy for cancer - now ready to be tried on patients -
opens an era in which new genes installed in the body supercharge a person's
natural cancer-fighting ability.

   Food and Drug Administration approval ''could come at any moment,'' says Dr.
Steven Rosenberg, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Md.

   The first treatment will be given to patients at NCI with a deadly form of
skin cancer called malignant melanoma. If the experiment is successful, gene
therapy for cancer could become available to the general public in as little as
two to three years.

   ''This is a new technique that's going to have a tremendous impact on
medicine,'' says Rosenberg. ''Most of the properties doctors use to treat cancer
involve external forces such as a scalpel, injections of chemotherapy or
radiation. Gene therapy is a way to modify the body's own cells to give them new
properties to combat disease.''

   Rosenberg's trial will be the first to apply gene therapy to a disease
affecting millions of people. The experiment follows the first, widely
publicized gene therapy attempt Sept. 14 in a 4-year-old girl. She has an
extremely rare, inherited immune system failure - adenosine deaminase (ADA)
deficiency, better known as ''Bubble Boy'' disease.

   ''She is doing beautifully and we're very encouraged so far,'' says Dr.
French Anderson, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. He and Dr. Michael
Blaese and Rosenberg inserted a new gene into a billion copies of the girl's
infection-fighting white blood cells. The gene should manufacture a crucial
enzyme missing from her immune system. The girl had a second infusion of the
gene-altered cells last week.

   Thanks to the two new experiments, this trio of government scientists -
Rosenberg, Anderson and Blaese - will be known in tomorrow's history books as
the world's pioneers of gene therapy.

   While these trials are on the frontier, scientists across the nation have
begun experimenting with genes to treat breast, bladder and colon cancer, AIDS,
heart disease, diabetes, and classic genetic diseases such as hemophilia.

   ''I think we're going to see a lot of future applications,'' says Rosenberg.
''But if this tool is going to have a major impact, then cancer will have to be
a major focus of the efforts. Genetic diseases are very rare.''

   How does gene therapy work? In a nutshell, it is the delivery of a new gene
into the DNA, or genetic material, of a cell. The theory is the new gene will
correct a disorder caused by a missing or defective gene.

   Human DNA contains 46 chromosomes, on which 50,000 to 100,000 genes reside.
Genes are the biological equivalent of a computer program, determining
everything from eye color to cell function.

   The delivery system for genes used in the two pioneering trials is a virus -
the same general type that gives people colds. Viruses make reliable delivery
vans because they have built-in machinery for slipping new genes into a cell.

   In gene therapy, the disease-causing part of the virus is disarmed and the
new payload becomes whatever gene a scientist chooses.

   In Rosenberg's experiment, the payload is a gene that instructs the body to
make a potent anti-cancer hormone, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which cuts off
the supply of nutrients to a tumor.

   The gene is delivered via a virus into the DNA of natural cancer-fighting
immune cells called tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL). Rosenberg already uses
TIL cells alone as an experimental cancer therapy and has been successful in
destroying some tumors and shrinking others in 50% of patients with melanoma.

   After the TIL cells have been supercharged with the new TNF gene and given to
patients, they may carry a one-two punch that makes Rosenberg's therapy even
more effective in a greater percentage of people. Another advantage of TIL
cells: They have a natural homing device that speeds them and their new genes
directly to cancer cells.

   So far, four patients have been selected. Their TIL cells have been removed,
altered with the new gene and put into storage, pending the FDA's signal to
proceed. In future experiments, genes for the anti-cancer substances
interleukin-2 and alpha interferon will be put in TIL cells.

   ''Our lab is working around the clock to put other genes in TIL cells.
Already we've shown that we can grow TILs from tumors of the breast, bladder and
colon,'' says Rosenberg.

   But even if the experiments are successful, Anderson says there's a long way
to go before gene therapy becomes a widely available treatment for diseases
other than cancer.

   One reason: the viral delivery van is only the ''Model T'' of gene- delivery
systems. The virus can't deliver a gene to an exact address within the DNA.
Instead, genes are dropped off at random locations in the genetic material.

   The randomness of the delivery is important for two reasons:

   - Theoretically, the new gene could land in a spot where it inadvertantly
turns on a cancer gene or turns off a cancer-supressing gene. ''Extensive safety
studies have been carried out over the past five years in animals and not a
single tumor has yet to be found,'' Anderson says. ''Nonetheless, the finite
risk of a cancer caused in part by the gene transfer procedure exists.''

   - For many genetic diseases, it may be critical that a new gene is delivered
directly to the doorstep of the defective gene in order to replace it and take
over. For cancer treatment, the location probably does not matter since all that
is needed is for the new gene to get into a tumor cell and make its anti-cancer
product.

   Dr. Mario Capecche, professor of biology and human genetics at the University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, is working on targeting genes into precise spots in the
DNA.

   This technology, called homologous recombination, will provide the needed
breakthrough. So far, genes can be targeted in mice. But at the human level,
progress is on par with a manned mission to Mars: it's technically possible, but
many basics must still be worked out.

   ''People were hoping that gene therapy would progress a lot quicker than it
has,'' says Capecche. ''But it is not surprising that it won't be clinically
useful for roughly another 10 years. A lot of initial attempts will have to be
made before all of the bugs have been worked out.''

   Anderson says three things must be done before gene therapy becomes a major
treatment for diseases other than cancer:

   - Scientists must develop a simple delivery system that can be put in a vial,
taken off a shelf in a doctor's office and injected into a patient.

   - The gene must recognize its defective counterpart and replace it.

   - The dose of the substance made by the new gene must be controlled.

   Says Anderson: ''Although it will be a number of years before gene therapy
will have any significant impact on the lives of most people, the technique does
have the potential for accomplishing immense good by reducing the suffering and
death caused by disease.''

    TEXT OF GRAPHIC
DNA: the genetic material that makes up genes

    TEXT OF GRAPHIC
How gene therapy therapy attacks a tumor
1. Natural cancer-fighting cells, made by the immune system, are removed from
the patient's tumor and grown up into huge numbers in the laboratory.
2. The gene for potent anti-cancer hormone is put into a virus. the virus acts
as a delivery van for the gene.
3. The virus is introduced to the immune system cells and delivers the new gene.
The result: the cells are modified.
4. The gene-modified cells are then injected into the patient's bloodstream,
where they travel to the tumor and go to work. The immune-system cells attack
the tumor directly, while the added gene works to cut off the tumor's blood
supply.

GRAPHIC:  color, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY; GRAPHIC; color, Julie Stacey, USA
TODAY; PHOTO; color, Eileen Blass, USA TODAY

CUTLINE: PIONEERING DOCTORS: Drs. Rosenberg, Blasese, Anderson lead way in gene
therapy.


                             1719 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 24, 1990 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-4

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Research talks here hone anti-virus tool

BYLINE: Susan Duerksen, Tribune Health Writer

BODY:

   Researchers from around the world are meeting here this week to sharpen a new
molecular tool that may be able to control everything from AIDS to the common
cold by chopping up the genetic blueprints of viruses. The recent discovery that
certain genetic molecules, called ribozymes, can be tailored to attack and cut
the genes of viruses has excited hopes of halting the deadly AIDS virus, as well
as diseases ranging from flu to cancer. "This will probably be a very important
anti-viral strategy," said Dr. John Rossi, a geneticist at City of Hope research
center in Duarte.

   "People are custom-designing it to destroy any viral product.

   It breaks the genetic information into two pieces so it's no longer
functional." The technique has proven successful in laboratory tests, but won't
be ready for human testing for at least three years, scientists estimate. "I'm
absolutely certain we'll be able to use this technology -- it's just a question
of when," Rossi said.

   He said there still are obstacles to getting the ribozymes to the right
location within living cells. Rossi has created synthetic ribozymes coded
specifically to find and chemically cut the genetic sequence of HIV, the virus
that causes AIDS. He said any known virus could be the target of the "molecular
scissors," without any harm to healthy cells.

   Therefore, he said, there's little danger of side effects. "All the evidence
we have so far is that ribozymes are not going to be toxic to normal cells,"
said Dr. Nava Sarver, chief of targeted drug development for the AIDS division
of the National Institutes of Health, which funds much of the research. She said
ribozymes eventually could be given as a form of gene therapy to people known to
be exposed to HIV. Their own cells then would continue to produce the ribozymes,
which would be ready to pounce on any HIV molecule that began to reproduce,
preventing the infection of other cells. "The beauty of ribozymes is it allows
us to target a very, very early step in the viral replication cycle, which
nobody has a handle on yet," Sarver said.

   "It attacks the master control for all subsequent events (in the spread of
the virus). This is not a cure, but it allows us a long-term control of the
virus." Two researchers from the University of Colorado, Dr. Thomas Cech and Dr.
Sidney Altman, received the 1989 Nobel Prize in chemistry for the discovery that
ribozymes, a form of ribonucleic acid, or RNA, could act as scissors. Although
much of the ribozyme research since then has focused on AIDS, Sarver said
treatment for some simpler viruses, such as the cold or flu bugs, could be
developed earlier. She predicted ribozymes will be in use against plant and
livestock viruses within a year. "The interest in ribozymes is increasing
exponentially," she said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1720 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1990 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             October 5, 1990 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. C15

LENGTH: 881 words

HEADLINE: BETTELHEIM'S IDEAS SET BACK TREATMENT

BYLINE: JOAN BECK

BODY:

   Friday, October 5, 1990 BETTELHEIM'S IDEAS SET BACK TREATMENT

   Seldom has the reputation of a prominent man suffered as much in the  months
after his glowing obituaries were published as that of Bruno  Bettelheim, the
influential psychoanalyst, author and apparent expert on  children's emotional
disorders.

   Rarely has it been more important to set the record straight.

   For some of Bettelheim's ideas and preachings have had a corrosive effect  on
parents and children, spread misunderstanding about mental illnesses in
youngsters and been influential in misdirecting research into their causes and
treatment.

   When Bettelheim, 86, committed suicide in a Maryland retirement home last
March, The Washington Post lauded him for ``the originality, warmth and wisdom
he brought to the study of the minds and emotions of children'' and credited
him with ``originating many of the techniques and principles of modern child
psychiatry.''

   In a front-page obituary, The New York Times said, ``His therapeutic
techniques became major contributions to therapy for children,'' adding, ``He
was widely admired as a practicing therapist and as a profound and original
thinker in psychoanalysis.'' Bettelheim ``left to the world -- and especially
to parents and children -- an enduring vision of love, innocence and
idealism,'' eulogized Parenting magazine.

   But now, a dark, sick side of the man is being described by some former
patients at the Orthogenic School in Chicago, which he directed for decades,
and by some of his former students and staff.

   Most recent is an article in the October issue of Commentary by Ronald
Angres, a graduate student in international affairs at George Washington
University. Angres spent 12 years at the Orthogenic School, diagnosed by
Bettelheim as ``autistic'' although he seems merely to have been  uncoordinated,
given to day-dreaming and twiddling his fingers -- and, at age  7, still unable
to read.

   Bettelheim was in reality cruel, rude, insulting, intimidating and
demeaning, said Angres. Although he wrote and lectured against any kind of
corporal punishment, he routinely slapped and beat his charges and dragged  them
around by their hair.

   ``I lived for years in terror of his beatings, in abject, animal terror,''
Angres wrote. ``I never knew when he would hit me or for what or how
savagely.'' Other former patients have written about how teen-age boys were
forced to bathe and dress in front of young female counselors. One young woman
describes how, as a teen-ager, she was dragged wet and embarrassed from a
shower by Bettelheim who then beat her, naked, in front of a room full of
people.

   Bettelheim routinely called the children ugly names -- psychopath,  paranoid,
anal-retentive and, most often, crazy. And he deliberately and  effectively shut
them away from their parents.

   Said Angres, ``Bettelheim's constant verbal abuse of the parents with whom
he dealt, and whom he refused to allow past the visitors' area -- combined  with
his well-publicized assertion that it was parents who caused mental  illness in
their children -- systematically destroyed their will to stand up  for
themselves or their children.''

   The need to set the record straight about Bettelheim goes far beyond the
fact that the famous guru who preached love and supportive care for children
often beat them in what Angres calls ``exultant rage'' and emotionally
undermined them in cruel and ugly ways.

   It's important to discredit permanently Bettelheim's conviction that mental
illness in children -- especially autism -- is caused by emotional factors,
especially maternal feelings and behavior.

   In his book on autism, ``The Empty Fortress,'' Bettelheim describes in
detail how some initial awkwardness in getting breast feeding started could
lead an infant to reject all contact with humans and to deny his own feelings
-- to become, in fact, autistic.

   Autism is almost certainly caused by a genetic defect, not a cold style of
mothering.

   Eventually, autism will probably be treated with gene therapy or effective
medications will be developed to counter the defect. But such efforts might
have come sooner had prominent leaders like Bettelheim not asserted that  mental
illnesses are caused by emotional factors -- and insisted on blaming  mothers,
as he also did for many other problems of children.

   Much ambiguity and disagreement will persist in the field of mental health.
There is urgent need to redefine many disorders to differentiate which are
diseases of the brain and which truly are abnormally intense responses to
factors in the environment.

   Bettelheim's claim to have treated autistic children successfully is
suspect; no independent diagnosis or verification is available. It is likely
many youngsters he called autistic were not, by usual definitions.

   But his assertions -- and the accounts of cruelties to children in his
closed center -- underscore the need for better standards for diagnosing  mental
illnesses and evaluating treatments. State supervision of treatment  centers has
improved since Bettelheim ran the Orthogenic School. But states  must make sure
captive children are not mistreated physically -- or  emotionally -- by those
who profess to be helping.

   Knight-Ridder News Service

   Joan Beck is a columnist for the Chicago Tribune.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1721 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  October 5, 1990, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1187 words

HEADLINE: SOUTHWESTERN ISN'T THE BELL ON TOP TODAY

BYLINE: Andrew Leckey

BODY:


   Q. My wife and I are retired and would like to invest in telephone company
stocks. We hear they are very safe. What do you think about Southwestern Bell?
A. Perhaps this isn't the best choice to ring up.  The stock of Southwestern
Bell Corp. (around $50 a share, New York Stock Exchange), which provides
telephone services in Kansas, Arkansas, Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas, should
perform only about in line with the overall stock market the next six to 12
months, predicted Greg Sawers, analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein.  Because he
doesn't consider Southwestern Bell a stellar stock likely to take off in value,
Sawers has assigned it only a neutral ranking.  ''You should view every stock
from an investment perspective, not just as a safe haven,'' advised Sawers.
''If you are seriously interested in some good telephone company stocks, I'd
look to NYNEX Corp. or Bell Atlantic Corp., whose prospects are brighter than
Southwestern Bell right now.'' Q. It seems that none of my investments is going
anywhere. I am thinking about unloading Safety-Kleen Corp. Should I do it now?
Should I wait until the stock market has a strong rally?  A. While it's probably
safe to hold this stock, don't expect to clean up in a potential market upturn.
Safety-Kleen Corp. (around $38, NYSE), a firm in waste treatment and recycling
of hazardous materials, is a fairly priced stock of a company with strong
earnings potential, said Vishnu Swarup, analyst with Prudential-Bache
Securities. ''Yet I don't really think that Safety-Kleen will be a stock that
rapidly outpaces the market if and when there is a rally in the market,'' said
Swarup.  ''On the positive side, it has a very strong market presence in
hazardous waste removal, while on the negative side, it is a fairly newly traded
company up against truly strong competitors such as Waste Management.'' There
are other positives. Since the company acquired 80 percent of the now wholly
owned Breslube oil recovery operation in 1987, its volume has increased
significantly. In addition, its fluid recovery business is also advancing.  Its
pioneering cleaner system service, in which solvent is used to de-grease car or
industrial parts, is still going strong as well.  Q. What are your thoughts on
McGraw-Hill Inc.? I'm getting sick of this stock.  A. Don't become ill over this
stock, but don't expect miracles, either.  McGraw-Hill Inc. (around $46, NYSE),
a company that publishes books and magazines and is in education/information
services and public television, has had its share of problems. It has
encountered major difficulties in all phases of restructuring and in putting
into place its new operations system.  ''I'd hold on to your McGraw-Hill stock
for now, taking a wait-and-see attitude, but I wouldn't invest any new money,''
said Jim Goss, analyst with Duff & Phelps. ''Operating earnings have been
somewhat better this year, but there remains doubt as to whether the company
will really achieve the restructuring gains it says it will.'' Au br e& a S Wt t
sC p Q. What do you think about Baxter International? Do you think its
restructuring moves will pay off? I've been disappointed with it.  A. You're
right to expect more.  Baxter International (around $24, NYSE), a worldwide
supplier of hospital supply products and home care products and services, has
underperformed other stocks in its industry this year.  Nonetheless, it is a
stock well worth holding or buying, according to Dean Witter Inc., which
believes Baxter's massive rextructuring program will provide benefits.  The
company recorded its best operating profit gains since 1987 in the second
quarter of this year. Reorganization should begin to take more dramatic effect
in the third and fourth quarters, carrying through into 1991, Dean Witter
predicts.  However, Dean Witter also cautions that growth in sales are harder to
predict once the reorganization is completed.  Although it could still lag
competitors such as Johnson & Johnson and Abbott Laboratories, Baxter should
provide 13 percent annual earnings per share growth the next five years.  One
potential positive for Baxter is gene therapy, as the company is one of three
suppliers of equipment for blood cell separation.  This procedure shows promise
in cancer treatment.  Andrew Leckey answers questions from readers, but only
though his column.  Address inquiries to Andrew Leckey, Chicago Tribune, 435 N.
Michigan Ave., Chicago, Ill. 60611.  SOURCE: 1990, Tribune Media Services Inc.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993


                             1722 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 2, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z11; HEALTHTALK

LENGTH: 1282 words

HEADLINE: Some Hope for People With Gaucher's

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sandy Rovner, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   For the first time, victims of the devastating genetic illness, Gaucher's
disease, may be dramatically helped by a new therapy. For the estimated 5,000 to
15,000 Americans who live their lives in pain and fatigue and who may be
bedridden for years, there now is genuine hope that the ravages of this
sometimes fatal disorder can be almost completely controlled.

   Robin Berman, medical director of the National Gaucher Foundation,
anticipates that "enzyme replacement will be to Gaucher's what insulin was to
diabetes, what Factor VIII clotting factor is to hemophilia." Even the sickest
patients will recover eventually, the specialists believe.

   Scientists at the National Institutes of Health who have been working on
Gaucher's for some 40 years, along with those at a Boston biotechnology firm,
believe their Gaucher treatment marks the first time that an enzyme missing in
the human body because of a glitch in genetic material has been effectively
replaced, fully restoring normal function.

   Roscoe O. Brady is the NIH geneticist who identified the cause of Gaucher's
disease and subsequently isolated the missing enzyme itself about 30 years ago.
A few weeks ago, the outcome of a clinical trial he conducted on 24 patients
with Gaucher's, 12 of whom were treated with the modified enzyme, was published
in the American Journal of Human Genetics.

   All 12 treated patients, ranging from very young children to middle-aged
adults, "exhibited striking improvement," the scientists said. "Patients who
were incapacitated prior to this treatment have resumed activities such as work
and school."

   If this is the happy culmination of his life's work for the 66-year-old
Brady, it is simply "a miracle," as far as Robin Berman is concerned. Three of
Berman's six children have Gaucher's disease and two others are carriers.

   Both family practitioner Berman and her businessman husband, Dennis, are
carriers of the recessive gene that causes the illness. In this country, about
two thirds of the Gaucher patients are descended from Eastern European Jews. In
Europe, about half the patients are non-Jews, and in some countries it is found
mostly outside the Jewish population.

   In the new treatment, the substitute enzyme is derived from human placental
material, purified and then modified in a way that lets it zero in on the
precise cells that need it.

   Enzyme replacement has been tried with only marginal success for such
diseases as cystic fibrosis or the disorder in which the missing enzyme is ADA,
adenine deaminase.

   Earlier work in enzyme replacement for Gaucher's was disappointing. The
treatment seemed to work for some patients in some aspects of the disease, but
most specialists continued to pin their hopes and their research on gene
therapy.

   Now, however, the modified enzyme product, called Ceredase, appears to work
on all patients to a greater or lesser extent, depending on how long they have
been ill and how seriously.

   Alison Taunton-Rigby, scientist- spokeswoman for Genzyme, the Boston firm
that makes Ceredase, says the enzyme replacement does not cure the disorder --
probably only gene therapy could actually do that. "But," she says, "here is a
disease that can be extremely debilitating and life-threatening, and it used to
be there was no hope."

   Some victims have died soon after the onset of the disease, which can occur
at any time after birth and at any age. Others may have no symptoms at all, but
many are deformed, in almost constant agony and subject to broken bones for year
after year.

   There are three types of the disease. In the U.S., Type-1 Gaucher's is the
most common genetic disease in the Jewish community, far more common than the
always fatal Tay-Sachs disease, for example. Gaucher Types 2 and 3 are found in
all racial and ethnic groups and tend to be even more virulent, affecting the
central nervous system and producing not only chronic bone and joint problems
but retardation and dementia as well.

   The current trials have all been done on the more common Type 1, but Brady is
readying trials with the more deadly forms of the illness.

   In addition to her work with the National Gaucher Foundation, Berman has
worked at NIH alongside Brady and his clinical chief, Norman Barton. And the
Bermans' son, Brian, was the first Gaucher's patient treated with the modified
enzyme.

   When he was 6, his spleen was so enlarged he literally looked pregnant. He
notes wistfully in a videotape he made for the foundation that "my friends
called me fat, but I wasn't."

   He has been on the enzyme now for almost six years. Recently, his dose was
reduced drastically, but he continues to improve. Today at 11, he looks like a
normal healthy kid.

   Gaucher's disease is caused by the body's inability to dispose of lipids,
fatty substances that are normally broken down by the missing enzyme. As a
result, they accumulate in the bone marrow, the liver and the spleen, preventing
these amd other organs from functioning properly.

   The spleen becomes enlarged and blood platelet counts plummet; the
accumulating lipids crowd out red blood cells produced by the bone marrow so
that the victim becomes anemic. Bones become honeycombed and fragile, deformed
and subject to constant breaks and barely functional.

   For New Orleans publicist Louise Glicksman, mother of two Gaucher patients, a
son and a daughter, ages 20 and 16 respectively, the success of Ceredase may be
a mixed blessing. Producing it is a complicated and extremely labor-intensive
procedure, making it so expensive that in some severe cases it may cost up to $
200,000 to bring a patient under control.

   The Gaucher Foundation, of which Glicksman is a founding member, is working
with health insurance carriers, as is Genzyme, and there has been some success
in getting the treatment covered, even on pre-approval experimental programs.

   The product has been granted orphan drug status, giving the manufacturers a
temporary monopoly in exchange for a guarantee that drugs for limited patient
populations will be available.

   The foundation expects that the cost will come down eventually. First, when
the drug is approved, there will be a larger pool of patients over which the
basic costs can be spread. Second, initial treatments were done with relatively
high doses, because the sickest patients were treated first. Bigger doses are
needed to correct symptoms that have developed in some cases for 20 years or
more.

   As many as 50 patients around the country are currently being treated, and
all are responding, the researchers said. The Food and Drug Administration,
which has already granted approval for the drug's use in experimental programs,
is expected to approve it for general use sometime before the end of the year.
An FDA advisory committee will look at it next month.

   Once the symptoms are under control, the researchers expect that the doses
may be dropped to as little as one tenth of the initial intensive therapy.

   "That," says Brady, "is our next order of business," to find the lowest
effective maintenance dose and the lowest dose at which the drug becomes
effective, as well as determining if the therapy will work on the other two
types of the disorder.

   And Genzyme is already starting a program to try to replace the enzyme
missing in people with cystic fibrosis. The cure for these diseases must await
gene therapy, but control via enzyme replacement may now be at hand.

   Brady, whose sense of excitement is almost palpable when he talks about the
trials, is being asked by colleagues and friends how it feels to have success so
close in his efforts. "How does it feel?" he repeats. "Well, it feels a lot
better than if it didn't work, I'll tell you."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ROSCOE BRADY, A GENETICIST AT THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH,
HAS TREATED BRIAN BERMAN, SHOWN AT AGE 6 ABOVE AND AGE 11 BELOW, FOR GAUCHER'S
DISEASE. CRAIG HERNDON


                             1723 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

              September 30, 1990, Sunday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2539 words

HEADLINE: CONCERNS RAISED OVER NEED FOR CANCER RESEARCH CENTER

BYLINE: By LINDA ROACH MONROE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The already-crowded cancer research and treatment field in San Diego is
getting another entrant, a private experimental treatment center that many in
the existing research community see as unnecessary.

   Immunologist Dr. Ivor Royston labels his plans for the new San Diego Regional
Cancer Center as an opportunity for San Diegans to get better access to
promising new cancer treatments.

   "There are in San Diego many individual groups and organizations that do very
excellent basic science research and very good clinical care in oncology,"
Royston said. "But these activities are not well coordinated, and not brought
together in the way that I would like to see it happen for a city like San
Diego."

   But he also acknowledges what his critics hint: that leaving UC San Diego
after 13 years is in part a way to deal with his frustration at being unable to
influence the course of planning for the Gildred Cancer Center at UCSD.

   "I don't have any sour grapes about the academic side of things," Royston
said. "But I like to feel more in control of what's happening, rather than just
be passive. I guess I am interested in having a little more authority. I have a
certain vision that I'd like to achieve, and I don't think I can do that within
the university."

   The cancer research program Royston and a group of local physicians have put
together will focus on potential cancer treatments that are already being
explored in San Diego: gene therapy, biological response modifiers such as
interferon, and the field in which Royston has pioneered, monoclonal antibodies.

   Still, Royston's critics are being careful about what they say. If anyone can
make an idea succeed, they reason, it is Royston -- who became one of
biotechnology's first scientist-millionaires after co-founding Hybritech in
1978.

   Royston emphasizes that the San Diego Regional Cancer Center will be
nonprofit and aimed solely at getting promising new treatments to patients, but
even friends and acquaintances are acting as though it were otherwise.

   "They keep asking me, 'How do I buy into this?' " Royston said. San
Diego-based Hybritech sold to Eli Lilly Co. for $480 million in 1986.

   Although Royston won't directly criticize anyone, the very idea for a
Regional Cancer Center calls into question how good a job he thinks these
institutions have done at bringing frontier treatments to San Diegans.

   Royston and colleagues even hint that federal officials are eager to bless
their new cancer center with money as well as eventual designation as San
Diego's premier center for experimental cancer treatments, over expected
competitors UCSD and Scripps Clinic.

   In the immediate geographical vicinity of Royston's new clinic are the Salk
Institute and La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, which do basic research on
cancer; Scripps Clinic, which does both basic research and experimental
treatments, and the clinically oriented Stevens Cancer Center at Scripps
Memorial Hospital-La Jolla.

   UCSD also will be expanding its cancer center with 29 beds at the new
Thornton Hospital, being built east of Interstate 5 near Scripps Memorial, and
an outpatient facility next door. The center itself will stay in Hillcrest,
however.

   In addition, San Diego County also has many established cancer treatment
programs affiliated with community hospitals.

   Officials at these institutions carefully phrase their reactions to the
Royston plan.

   A spokesman for Dr. John Trombold, medical director of the Stevens Cancer
Center at Scripps Memorial Hospitals, said Trombold considers commenting "not
appropriate."

   Dr. Lawrence Piro, director of the cancer center at Scripps Clinic, was
definitive: "I don't think there's anything that Royston could do that we can't
do."

   At UCSD, Medical Dean Dr. Gerard N. Burrow notes that the university has
known of Royston's desire to go out on his own for the last year. They had
originally discussed the possibility of setting up the private cancer center
next door to Thornton Hospital, but delays in planning frustrated Royston,
Burrow said.

   And Royston's stated plan to eventually move the new center from basic
research into broad clinical treatment of cancer has Burrow puzzled.

   "At no time in our conversations did we ever have a conversation about a
clinical program (at the new cancer center)," Burrow said. "I would
unequivocally say that our cancer center has been offering and will continue to
offer even in a greater way state-of-the-art cancer therapy."

   R. Douglas Armstrong, executive vice president of the La Jolla Cancer
Research Foundation, suggested there is no need for another cancer center at
all.

   "Perhaps, there may already be in place existing clinical programs which
could be the basis for accomplishing the same goals of the Regional Cancer
Center," Armstrong said.

   For their part, Royston and colleagues express confidence that their program
will prove worthwhile to San Diegans.

   As models, they point to the Fred Hutchison Cancer Research Center in Seattle
and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. These are among the few
federally designated "comprehensive cancer centers" not operated by a
university.

   Cancer centers can perform a variety of functions. Among the typical models
are:

   Facilities at community hospitals, which are mainly treatment programs. If
any experimental therapies are used there, it is under the auspices of projects
run out of research programs headquartered elsewhere.

   Federal basic research centers, funded by the federal government to look at
cellular and molecular aspects of cancer. Salk, La Jolla Cancer Research
Foundation and UCSD all have this designation. Scripps Clinic also does a large
amount of basic research applicable to cancer.

   Federal clinical research centers, where promising new drugs and other
therapies are tested. One of these is at UCSD. Scripps Clinic also does clinical
trials of cancer drugs, but without the federal designation.

   Comprehensive cancer centers, the designation that is held by 24 of the
premier cancer treatment centers in the nation. These centers must have strong
programs in basic research, clinical trial of new therapies, transfer of
technology to community oncologists, and cancer education programs. It is this
status that Scripps Clinic and UCSD both already plan to seek, and which the
Royston group also is eventually eyeing. Currently, the closest comprehensive
center to San Diego is at UCLA.

   But the private cancer centers that have achieved this status were founded
during the heyday of federal funding of medical research and construction.

   "It's harder to get money today than it was in the '70s," said Dr. Emil Frei
III, physician in chief at Dana-Farber. "Twenty years ago there was money for
construction, there was money for all kinds of things. Now money is much more
limited."

   Under the Royston group's plan, on Nov. 1 Royston will leave his position as
head of clinical immunology at UCSD and become scientific director of the new
cancer center. He will remain an unsalaried professor at UCSD.

   The trustees of the new cancer center already have decided that the work will
concentrate on three frontier areas in cancer treatment: Royston's main field of
using monoclonal antibodies as "magic bullets" against cancer cells; biological
response modifiers such as interleukins, to boost the body's immune system, and
gene therapy in which cancer-suppressing genes are inserted into people.

   All are extremely complicated areas, each of which can preoccupy several
research labs by itself. Yet organizers say the center will not only do basic
research but also function as a clearinghouse for oncologists to find new
treatment options and for San Diego's 90 biotechnology companies to find
patients willing to try their new drugs.

   Royston sees himself as a unique bridge between basic research and the
biotechnology industry. "There just aren't that many bridging scientists that
can grasp concepts, move quickly to develop new clinical treatments, work with
the basic scientists and so on. The only other institutions that can do that are
the university and Scripps Clinic, but there's just a limited number of people,"
he said.

   Initially, the work will largely be funded by about $600,000 a year in
federal research grants that Royston said he and other scientists will bring
with them to the new center.

   The rest of the $900,000 to $1 million budget is being donated by the
trustees themselves, and other private funding also will be sought, Royston
said.

   Other trustees of the new center are its chairman, oncologist Dr. Thomas A.
Shiftan; surgeon Dr. Allan H. Goodman; Sidney Green, a founder of the La Jolla
Cancer Research Foundation; oncologist Dr. Christine White, and oncologist Dr.
Robert Barone.

   The organizers say they are looking to unify, not divide, the oncology
community.

   "In the bread and butter, everyday cancer, the treatment (in San Diego) is
superb," Goodman said. "What's needed is something to draw it all together, and
I think that's the goal this cancer center has. It's the tragedy of medical care
-- that fractionation develops and nobody puts the pieces together."

   Trustees chairman Shiftan, himself a private-practice oncologist, said the
regional cancer center would help physicians help their patients.

   "The patients would be treated in the same place by the same people, but
there would be a more coordinated effort to bring them better treatments, newer
drugs, and make drugs more available that are perhaps difficult to get today,"
Shiftan said.

   But the fact that the new cancer center eventually may have its own
facilities for treating patients still is a sensitive issue. Both of the San
Diego center's model programs -- Fred Hutchison and Dana-Farber -- use community
or university hospitals for their patients. But Hutchison has sparked
controversy in Seattle with a proposal to build its own hospital within the next
few years.

   Royston says that a hospital isn't in the San Diego Regional Cancer Center's
near future, although smaller clinical facilities at the center's La Jolla
location might be.

   "We've got plenty of good hospitals," Royston said. "We're not going to build
hospitals. We're going to build ideas."

   "I'm not gonna say we're never going to build a hospital," Royston added.
"What I am saying though, is that San Diego has an overabundance of good
hospitals. What we're going to do is work with the existing hospitals."

   At least initially, Royston hopes to contract to conduct his clinical
research on patients at UCSD.

   Royston also is very careful to avoid criticizing UCSD's cancer efforts.

   "I'm interested in being part of an organization where the only priority is
cancer research and improved therapy," he said.

   "I think there are things that UCSD will continue to do very well. It has its
own strengths, but there are other things that can be done better through an
independent organization," he said. "What I think can be improved are programs
that bridge the laboratory and the clinic."

   But Roystan stammered through an explanation of what UCSD's relative
strengths and weaknesses are: "It's very good in basic research, it's very good
in training students, but . . . umm . . . but I just think that -- I have to be
very careful . . . It's very difficult."

   He tried again: "The university's strongest suit is doing lab research and
providing . . . it's very difficult to . . . uh . . . what I don't want to do is
really talk about the university."

   Dr. William Stanton, a community oncologist, expressed puzzlement at the
assumption behind the new cancer center's founding that novel cancer therapies
are not easily available through UCSD. Scripps Clinic doctors also seek patients
from the community for novel cancer therapies.

   "From the standpoint of my practice, I think the UCSD Cancer Center has done
a magnificent job of technology transfer and bringing state-of-the-art therapy
to San Diego," Stanton said. "It's just a simple matter of picking up the
telephone (to gain access for patients)."

   Most of the oncologists in the county have had some connection with UCSD in
the past, so they know how to do this, Stanton said.

   Goodman, whose 20-year-old son died of leukemia about a year ago, used the
case as an example of why he believes better cancer programs are needed in San
Diego.

   Among other special procedures, the young man needed an unmatched bone marrow
transplant, which requires treatment of the marrow to avoid rejection, Goodman
said. He was treated at Stanford University and at the Fred Hutchison center in
Seattle.

   "There wasn't anybody I spoke to, not one person -- and I talked to a lot of
people at the National Cancer Institute and to everybody I could find in San
Diego -- and not one person even suggested that it would be something to do in
San Diego," Goodman said.

   "I began to realize as a physician practicing that there really was something
missing in San Diego," Goodman said. "My son particularly felt bad about leaving
the city. You have to go through that experience with a sick family member -- to
pack up and leave, even if it's just to Los Angeles, is a tremendous hardship."

   Both Scripps Clinic and UCSD have bone marrow programs, but they are not as
advanced as Seattle's. However, both facilities also are in the middle of
efforts to expand and strengthen their cancer centers.

   It is neither realistic nor cost-effective for the most high-tech cancer
treatments to be available in every major city, Stanton contended.

   "There are always going to be technologies which are going to be limited to a
few institutions throughout the United States," Stanton said. "And I think it
would be extraordinarily costly for every community to duplicate every service.
Our resources in health care are just too limited to do that."

   Dr. Bruce D. Cheson, chief of the medicine section of the cancer therapy
evaluation unit at the National Cancer Institute, said regional affiliates of
national oncology cooperatives are a common way to get more people involved in
clinical trials of new therapies.

   But those are programs, not independent research facilities, Cheson noted. He
questioned the need for a private cancer center in a city that already has
leading research and treatment centers.

   "It's more than economic resources," Cheson said. "There are intellectual
resources and there are patient numbers. To have more and more independent shops
being set up is a tragedy."

   Aware of such criticisms, organizers of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center
are meeting with officials of other programs to reassure them and to set up
cooperative efforts.

   They stress that the goal is to help patients through cooperation.

   "I've come to the opinion that the best way to further cancer research and
treatment is to come at it through an independent type of organization that is
unencumbered by other kinds of priorities that exist at other institutions,"
Royston said.

   "The best of all possible worlds is to have an independent cancer center that
works with UCSD and other institutions to develop a much greater cancer center
than would be possible from any institution alone," he added. "If we all work
together, we'll have the very best cancer center in the United States."

GRAPHIC: Photo, Among the principals in the San Diego Regional Cancer Center
are, from left, Drs. Ivor Royston, Allan Goodman and Thomas Shiftan. Some in
medical research community dispute need for center.  SEAN M. HAFFEY / For The
Times


                             1724 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 25, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2210 words

HEADLINE: Uneasy Doctors Add Race-Consciousness to Diagnostic Tool

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   DOCTORS are showing a cautious resurgence of interest in giving more
consideration to their patients' racial or ethnic backgrounds when diagnosing
and treating illnesses.

   Mounting evidence suggests that race and ethnicity can and should be factors
in evaluating symptoms while reaching a diagnosis and in determining the
treatment and how the patients fare.

   Because of the country's sensitivity to racial issues, there has been a
reluctance to address race or ethnicity in medicine except in the most obvious
cases, experts say. Tay-Sachs disease among descendants of Eastern European
Jews, sickle cell disease and hypertension among blacks, diabetes among some
native Americans and stomach cancer among immigrant Asians are well-known
conditions associated with particular groups.

   But specialists note that other well-known health problems, although often
considered ethnically neutral, may express themselves in different ways and vary
in incidence among ethnic groups, requiring different approaches in treatment.

   For instance, new evidence indicates that the incidence of severe kidney
failure among some blacks, long known to be higher than that of whites, is much
worse than previously believed. Research also suggests that Chinese and Hispanic
women face a significantly greater risk of developing diabetes during pregnancy
than comparable blacks or whites.

   Also, blacks with high blood pressure generally respond much better than
whites when treated with diuretics, drugs that lower salt and water levels,
while Asians being treated for psychiatric problems respond to some
anti-psychotic drugs at doses one-tenth the level recommended for whites.

   Proponents of increasing the awareness of ethnicity in medicine acknowledge
the problems that could result, such as a rise in racism, increased debate over
the relative roles of heredity versus environment in illness, and misconceptions
about genetic superiority or inferiority associated with eugenics.

   ''The political concerns are real,'' said Dr. Robert F. Murray Jr., a
genetics expert who is professor of pediatrics and medicine at Howard University
in Washington. ''There is always a desire among some to use any hint of a
genetic defect against you. But all groups, without exception, have genetic
disabilities and people have to recognize that and move on to what we can do
about them.''

   It has become almost impossible to properly deliver medical care without
considering the ethnic background of the patient, including the effect of both
genetics and socioeconomic factors, said Dr. Murray and other experts.

   ''The idea of emphasizing ethnicity in medicine came up before, 20 years ago
during the civil rights era,'' Dr. Murray said, ''but it was downplayed because
some felt the racial climate was too charged and there were too many people who
would use this to perpetuate their racism. Now people are beginning to say we
have to address this because you get better results with your patients if you
do.''

   Citing mounting evidence that knowledge of a patient's background can improve
care, Dr. Arthur C. Caplan, director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the
University of Minnesota, said: ''You must take into account race and ethnicity.
You can't ethically treat patients without considering it.''

   American society remains unsure how to handle the idea of equality, and
medicine reflects this uncertainty, Dr. Caplan said. With some exceptions, he
added, medicine generally has ignored ethnic difference in the name of equality,
which has led to considering the norm as being white and middle class.

   ''On one hand, society believes it can only reach equality if it treats
people as if they were identical, interchangeable or the same,'' Dr. Caplan
said. ''But it also thinks it can deal with equality if it recognizes
differences and makes adjustments, such as special programs, to assure equal
access and opportunity.''

   Dr. Richard A. Williams, a cardiologist and adjunct professor at the Medical
School of the University of California at Los Angeles, said that if people were
becoming ill because of genetic problems or their way of life, doctors and other
health professionals could not ignore it.

   ''Failure to acknowledge the racial or ethnic background of a patient is
itself a kind of discrimination,'' said Dr. Williams, who 15 years ago was
editor of the ''Textbook of Black-Related Diseases,'' an out-of-print volume by
two dozen experts that summarized disease as it related to blacks.

Ignoring Reality

   ''A lot of people run away from the idea of considering ethnicity because
they feel the implication is inferring inferiority or superiority among
groups,'' said Dr. Williams, who is completing a new book, ''The Textbook of
Ethnic Medicine,'' that he says addresses health problems of many ethnic groups.
''Doctors can't be so sensitive about ethnicity that it keeps them from doing
their job.''

   Dr. Caplan and others cited new evidence suggesting that race could be factor
in successfully adapting to transplanted organs as an example of a quandary
facing medicine. Most transplant studies show that kidney transplants are about
15 percent less successful in blacks than whites. But recent evidence that organ
survival in blacks improves by 5 percent to 8 percent when kidneys from black
donors are used could pose more problems at time when donor organs from all
people, particularly blacks, are in short supply, Dr. Caplan said.

   ''Now race and ethnicity may become factors in deciding where to send a
scarce resource,'' he said.

   The nation's blood collecting and banking system, which does not label blood
by the race of the donor, may also be facing new medical and ethical questions
involving race.

Transfusion Complications

   In June, Dr. Elliot P. Vichinsky and colleagues at Children's Hospital in
Oakland, Calif., published a report in The New England Journal of Medicine
suggesting that patients with sickle cell disease might avert transfusion
complications if they received blood donated by blacks.

   One treatment for severe episodes of sickle cell disease, an inherited blood
disorder that mainly affects blacks in this country, involves giving the patient
blood transfusions. About one-third of these patients develop antibodies against
foreign proteins in the donated blood, which makes it very difficult to find
compatible blood for subsequent treatment.

   The Oakland researchers determined that 82 percent of the antibodies produced
by sickle cell patients were against four proteins commonly found in blood
donated by whites and suggested that the complication was partly a result of
racial differences.

   In an accompanying editorial in the journal, Dr. Samuel Charache, a
hemotologist and sickle cell expert at Johns Hopkins University Medical School,
said complications for these patients might be reduced if the race of the donor
was known.

   Dr. Charache suggested that the ethical merits of asking donors to indicate
their race, information that would only be used by the blood bank to channel
supplies, should be debated. While acknowledging that the notion of black blood
for blacks and white blood for whites suggested ''colored only'' drinking
fountains and segregated buses of another era, he said, ''It is time to bring
the question out of the closet.''

Unanswered Questions

   Raising the perception of ethnic differences begs the question of what is
behind those differences. Clearly, there is an interplay among traits that are
genetically passed on from generation to generation, multifaceted environmental
differences and cultural factors.

   While it is easy to point out the well-known genetic defect, found more often
in blacks than whites, that causes abnormal hemoglobin to form in sickle cell
disease, it is more difficult to determine why black men are four times as
likely as whites to have no warning pain with a heart attack.

   Lupus, a condition in which the immune system goes awry and attacks
connective tissue and organs, was once believed to be a disease afflicting young
white women. Studies now indicate that while the disease affects one in 750
women generally in varying degrees, it inexplicably afflicts one in 245 black
women and one in 500 Hispanic women, according to the Lupus Foundation of
America.

   And why do Mexican-American women, who tend to live in poverty and have
prenatal care as poor as blacks, have a much lower rate of infant mortality? In
fact, the Mexican-American infant death rate of 9.0 per 1,000 infants in the
first year is even slightly better than the overall white rate of 9.1, which in
turn is half the black rate of 18.7.

   Dr. Rueben C. Warren, assistant director for minority health at the Federal
Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, said he believed that most ethnically
related health problems in this country have environmental and cultural causes.
Factors like cigarette smoking, eating rich diets high in fats, and alcohol
consumption not only do damage by themselves, but also aggravate genetic
predispositions toward certain diseases, he said.

   ''There are many things that ethnic minorities share in common that influence
poor health, and most of them are social and economic,'' Dr. Warren said. ''Many
minorities live in older neighborhoods, for instance, which are full of lead
paint, may be on some forgotten toxic waste site or near industrial pollution.''

   ''In health, you have to take ethnic background into account,'' he said,
''but always in the context of environment.'' Many people, especially members of
minorities, he said, mistakenly believe that if a disease is genetic, it is a
kind of ''act of God'' that they cannot influence, and they therefore do not
try. ''We have to work through that attitude and try to change it,'' he said.

   Dr. Murray of Howard University gives genetics at least equal weight with
environmental factors in determining ethnic health.

   ''Genetics is playing a predominate role in that it determines a
predisposition to conditions produced by the environment,'' he said.
''Environment can trigger the expression of genetic disease and if it were not
for social and economic factors, many genetic diseases would stay dormant and
people would never suffer from them.''

Influencing the Environment

   Even with new prospects of genetic therapy, repairing or replacing defective
genes responsible for most inherited disease is years, if not decades, away, Dr.
Murray said. ''For the time being, you can't take the genes away, but you can
influence the environment,'' he said, ''and that's what we should be trying to
do.''

   In a book to be published in October by Johns Hopkins University Press, Dr.
Murray and Dr. James E. Bowman of the University of Chicago write that genetic
differences can also be positive. While blacks may be prone toward skin
pigmentation disorders and umbilical cord hernias, the authors say in ''Genetic
Variation and Disorders in Peoples of African Origin,'' they are far less likely
than whites to suffer with cystic fibrosis, skin cancer or PKU syndrome, a
metabolic disorder that can lead to mental retardation.

   Dr. Keh-Ming Lin, an associate professor of psychiatry at the Harbor-U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in Torrance, Calif., said doctors also had to consider ethnicity
in dealing with mental illness and personality disorders. While all psychotic,
personality and mood disorders can be found in every ethnic group, cultural
factors influence how they are expressed as well as viewed by the therapist, he
said.

   ''The Asian culture discourages people from expressing feelings, especially
negative feelings,'' said Dr. Lin, ''while Western culture goes to the other
extreme and people talk a lot about their problems. Therefore, Western-style
psychoanalysis may not work so well with these minorities.''

Problem of Misdiagnoses

   Dr. Lin also said it was not uncommon for blacks suffering from bipolar manic
depression to be misdiagnosed by white psychiatrists as schizophrenic, thus
decreasing their chances of recovery. Blacks with psychological problems are
more likely to complain of hallucinations and hearing voices, which seen in
cultural context might not seem as bizarre as it would be in whites, he said.

   ''Part of the problem may be racist in that the doctor may be unfamiliar with
blacks, scared of his black patient and overestimates the degree of pathology he
sees,'' Dr. Lin said.

   The psychiatrist said it was important that all health providers take courses
on ethnic issues early in their training so that sensitivity to cultural
diversity in medicine develops early.

   ''But you must strike a balance,'' Dr. Lin said. ''You want to increase
cultural sensitivity but be aware of the danger of cultural stereotyping. You
must see each patient as an individual and not just as belonging to some
group.''

   Several experts pointed to this danger of seeing people so much in terms of
their ethnic background that patients are misdiagnosed or given the wrong
treatment.

   ''If a black patient comes in with a warty lesion on the bottom of his foot,
you can't just say 'blacks shouldn't have malignant melanoma' and not take it
seriously,'' said Dr. Williams of U.C.L.A. ''Being conscious of ethnicity should
improve diagnostic skills rather than hamper them.''

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Robert F. Murray Jr., Howard University. (Andrea Mohin/The
New York Times); Dr. Keh-Ming Lin, Harbor-U.C.L.A. Medical Center (Bart
Bartholomew for The New York Times) (pg. C10)


                             1725 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 25, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z8

LENGTH: 2083 words

HEADLINE: Medicine's 4-Year-Old Pioneer;
First Gene-Therapy Patient Opens Door to Treating 4,000 Inherited Diseases

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The girl with the round face and dark hair sat quietly on the bed in the
National Institutes of Health clinical center while pediatrician Kenneth Culver
slid the needle of a catheter into a vein running along the top of her left
hand.

   This 4-year-old doesn't cry from needles anymore. "She just pulls back a
little bit," said the 35-year-old, bearded and bespectacled pediatrician. "She
is a tough, stoic kid."

   She knows all about needles and doctors and drugs because she has been sick
nearly since birth. The girl inherited a defective gene that cripples her immune
system so it no longer protects her from the chronic ear and lung infections
that ultimately could kill her.

   A week and a half ago, she became the first patient to enter the promising
new world of human gene therapy. She suffers from severe combined immune
deficiency, which is caused by inheriting a damaged gene that blocks the
production of a vital single enzyme. If the experiment works, her fatal disease
-- up to now temporarily held at bay by weekly injections of the missing enzyme
-- could be cured at its genetic roots.

   Until the doctors know whether the treatment is working or not, the family
has refused to disclose the girl's name. The NIH team expects to begin treating
a small number of other children with the same disease in the next few months.

   This experiment has opened the door to a wide range of new gene therapies
that many scientists believe will eventually revolutionize the treatment of a
large number of illnesses. Initially, gene therapy will be aimed at some of the
nearly 4,000 inherited illnesses caused by defects in single genes -- among them
muscular dystrophy, Huntington's disease and sickle cell anemia.

   At the same time, researchers are making significant progress in using the
same approach to attack diseases not usually thought of by the public as genetic
disorders -- cancer, heart disease, Parkinson's disease and others. Gene therapy
may even one day be used to lower cholesterol levels.

   The pressure to find permanent genetic solutions to such diseases is rapidly
increasing.

   Last week, researchers announced an important advance toward a gene treatment
for one of the most commonly inherited genetic diseases of childhood -- cystic
fibrosis. Howard Hughes Medical Institute scientists at the University of
Michigan Medical School and the University of Iowa College of Medicine reversed
the defect in CF patients' lung and pancreas cells growing in the laboratory.
While this raises the promise of future gene therapy for CF patients,
experiments in humans are years away.

   "For CF clearly, what has been done here is a step in the right direction,"
said the University of Michigan's Francis Collins, who helped discover the genes
that cause cystic fibrosis and neurofibromatosis, once called Elephant Man's
disease. "It shows it is possible to make the correction in cell culture. But
the problem is going to be delivery, getting the gene to an awful lot of cells
in the patient."

   Even as advances in the field speed up, some scientists are warning of
over-promises of dramatic genetic cures at a time when formidable technical
problems remain.

   "I don't want to argue that gene therapy will never be achieved," said
Stanford University's Paul Berg, who won a Nobel prize for being the first to
put new genes into living cells. "I just want to dampen this near hysteria that
we have solved the problems of genetic disease. We have not."

   Moreover, a few gene therapy researchers, some of whom are competitors, have
publicly criticized the NIH gene team that treated the 4-year-old girl.

   In published remarks, Richard Mulligan, a genetics researcher from the
Whitehead Institute of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, Mass., and a long-time
critic of the NIH team, said, "The possible benefits of the experiment don't
outweigh the risks. It should be scuttled."

   The risks include the small, but real, chance of causing cancer when the new
gene is randomly inserted into a white blood cell.

   Other critics include Arthur Bank of Columbia University, who called the NIH
effort "not good science," and Stuart Orkin of the Harvard Medical School, who
said it was a long shot that the first patient would be helped.

   W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the gene
therapy pioneer who pushed for permission to treat this first patient, defended
the experiment by pointing to more than 3 1/2 years of public and scientific
debate and extensive review by federal committees, including the Food and Drug
Administration.

   Some of these debates were heated, but when the votes came, the NIH
researchers won near-unanimous approval. Only Mulligan, a member of a key review
panel, voted against the project.

   Once the approvals started coming, the NIH team got into a high-pressure race
against time to have everything ready to treat the first patient when the FDA
gave its final approval on Sept. 14. Four hours later, the first patient began
receiving the gene-altered cells.

   That moment, however, was rather anticlimactic. The thousands of pages of
documents, years of review and a couple of sleepless nights all came down to a
simple half-hour transfusion of gene-altered white blood cells.

   The NIH team of Anderson, Culver and R. Michael Blaese removed white blood
cells from a vein in the patient's arm. After growing the cells in the
laboratory for a few days, they infected them with a genetically engineered
virus designed to carry the gene for the missing enzyme.

   The virus, a retrovirus distantly related to the virus that causes AIDS, is
called a "vector," or carrier, for its ability to transport human genes and
insert them into the a target cell's chromosomes without causing a harmful
infection.

   After the girl's white blood cells had been exposed to the gene-carrying
vector, they were squirted back into her body, where, it is hoped, they will
begin making the missing enzyme and restore her immune system.

   During the injection, the pioneering patient "was waiting for something to
happen," Anderson said. "And nothing happened. She didn't feel anything."

   When the treatment was finally over, all she wanted to do was play. "She
said, 'Hey Dad, can I go back to the Children's Inn playroom?' " Culver
recalled. "That's how good she felt afterward."

   The doctors sent her to the playroom for a while, watched her overnight and
sent her home on Saturday.

   "This is the blast-off," Anderson said. "Even if this first experiment
doesn't make it, it was still a moon shot."

   The thunder of that launch has galvanized scientists and physicians around
the country.

   "There is a much greater sense of optimism that gene therapy will find a
niche in a number of diseases," Collins said. "Now it may have early success in
non-genetic diseases, particularly cancer, maybe AIDS. No one talked about that
until a year or so ago."

   With NIH funding, the University of Michigan has begun a project to conduct
several kinds of gene therapy experiments. "We have a weekly seminar on gene
therapy," Collins said. "There is a lot of enthusiasm for it around here."

   The excitement has spread to other places, too. Anderson already has received
nearly a dozen requests from scientists around the world -- mostly in the United
States but also in Canada, Italy, Belgium and Holland -- to collaborate on new
experiments. "We are pulling new people into the field," Collins said.

   "It is not just a little retrovirus club now," Blaese said. "There are lots
of people in academic clinical medicine who are now thinking about how they can
apply gene therapy" to the diseases they study.

   "I think gene therapy is here to stay, no matter how it may stumble in the
early phases," said Nelson A. Wivel, head of the NIH Office of Recombinant DNA
Activities, which conducted a key scientific review of the first experiment.
"It's clearly is a rational way to go for a lot of diseases."

   What's less clear is how fast different gene therapies can be developed to
treat the sick.

   The biggest problem is getting the right gene into the right cell in such a
way that it functions. In the early 1980s, scientists believed that they had to
insert the new gene into a type of bone marrow cell called the stem cell because
it gives rise to all other blood cells. Human stem cells, however, are hard to
identify and target, so few of these key cells take up the new gene.  For
several years, this problem seemed unsolvable, slowing advances.

   Now, however, scientists have come up with new approaches.

   "I think the logjam that had gotten a number of people a bit discouraged is
breaking not because we solved the stem cell problem," Collins said, "but
because we thought of other targets."

   In the case of the first human trial, for example, the NIH team put the
repair gene into the girl's T cells, a type of white blood cell that controls
the immune system and can persist in the body.

   T cells may or may not be the solution. No one knows how long they will last,
though animal experiments in Italy suggest they alone could restore a defective
immune system. The NIH team expects to inject the patient with gene-altered T
cells once a month for the next six months and look for improvement in the
functioning of her immune system.

   T cells also have been targeted for a type of gene therapy aimed at killing
cancer cells. The NIH gene team, working with Steven A. Rosenberg at the
National Cancer Institute, plans to put the gene for tumor necrosis factor, a
protein that causes cancer cells to die, into a type of T cell that attacks
melanoma, a form of skin cancer. Rosenberg hopes that supercharging the T cells
with this toxic gene will provide better cure rates. These experiments, still
awaiting FDA approval, could begin later this year.

   Other research groups are developing alternative ways to get genes into human
cells to fight diseases.

   Research groups from NIH, Johns Hopkins and Harvard have shown that genes can
block the growth in the test tube of several types of cancer cells, including
cancers of the breast, lung, colon, bone and brain.

   While all of these experiments offer the hope that similar genes could be put
into sick people to treat their disease, some scientists are skeptical.  "We
cured Lesch-Nyhan disease in the test tube five years ago," Berg said, speaking
of an unusual form of mental retardation. "That is no big deal doing it in
culture, but doing it in a person is a very different ball game."

   Another University of Michigan group recently reported inserting genes into
cells that line blood vessels, opening the possibility of producing
clot-dissolving proteins near a narrowed artery to prevent a heart attack or of
manufacturing anti-cancer drugs near a tumor.

   A research team at the University of Wisconsin and another at the University
of Michigan have been trying to put genes for a cholesterol receptor into liver
cells. Increasing the number of these receptors should pull more cholesterol
into the liver, lowering the level of cholesterol in the blood. Lowering
cholesterol has been shown to decrease the risk of heart attack and stroke. This
kind of gene therapy might help prevent heart attacks.

   Last year, Theodore Friedmann and Fred Gage at the University of California
at San Diego showed that cells could carry the gene to make nerve growth factor,
and that putting these cells into an animal's brain could protect the nerves
from damage similar to the damage of Alzheimer's disease. Their current work
shows that inserting genes into rats can cause the animals to produce a chemical
that reverses the symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

   For all these promising efforts, Anderson believes there are limits to the
current approach.

   "I am going back into the lab to develop an [approach] so a doctor can take a
vial off the shelf and just shoot [the gene] into the body," Anderson said.
"Until we can [inject genes directly] into the body, gene therapy is not going
to be a major therapeutic option. You can do a few hundred patients a year, but
not millions" with the current approach. He predicted, in fact, that gene
therapy would not be used widely until early in the next decade.

   Several scientists nonetheless said gene therapy could be expected to move
rapidly in the next year or two, including therapy for some forms of cancer,
hemophilia and, perhaps, AIDS.

   "I always wondered if we were going to do it," Blaese said of the first gene
therapy experiment. "Now, the era has begun."


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, PHYSICIANS MONITORING THE FIRST GENE THERAPY PATIENT AT
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH ARE, FROM LEFT, R. MICHAEL BLAESE, W. FRENCH
ANDERSON AND KENNETH CULVER.; PHOTO, NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE


                             1726 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 25, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z9

LENGTH: 723 words

HEADLINE: Poll Finds Support for Use of Gene Therapy

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson

BODY:

   All too often, talk about altering genes raises science fiction images of
giant ants, Andromeda strains and Frankenstein's monster. Such images have
lingered.

   Then, when scientists raised real concerns in the mid-1970s about possible
risks of moving genes between species, Congress and the public became so
concerned that some gene experiments were temporarily banned.

   Now, there are worries that the same fears will arise with the advent of
human gene therapy.

   "There is plain irrational fear. I call it genophobia. Genoneurosis. Gene
psychosis," said Arthur L. Caplan, head of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at
the University of Minnesota. "You say 'gene' and people kind of lose their
ethical bearings. They immediately assume that the clone of Adolph Hitler is
coming over the hill."

   So when scientists started talking seriously about altering genes in people
to treat disease, even the research community got a little nervous. As a result,
the federal government created a special review system to examine plans to plant
genes in people. The review was more extensive than any ever conducted for a
medical experiment, including trials as dramatic as putting an artificial heart
in Barney Clark and others.

   But genes have always been different, and there are many reasons for the
fear, Caplan said.

   "People just don't understand genetics very well," he said. "Anything they
don't understand, they fear." Then there is the real history of eugenics, where
the Nazis tried to improve the race by encouraging people with certain genetic
traits to multiply and destroying others. And some people -- such as the Green
Party in West Germany -- believe it just is not right to fool around with Mother
Nature.

   Leroy Walters, head of bioethics at the Kennedy School of Ethics at
Georgetown University, is less certain that the public is afraid of genetics and
points to a 1987 Lou Harris poll.

   This poll of 1,273 people conducted for the congressional Office of
Technology Assessment indicated that 83 percent of American adults favored using
gene treatments to "cure a usually fatal genetic disease."

   What's more, the poll found that 84 percent favored gene treatments that
would "stop children from inheriting a usually fatal disease" -- essentially
genetic alteration of their parent's sperm and egg, so-called germ-line therapy.

   Support for the technology dropped only by half when the poll asked if
techniques called genetic enhancement should be used to improve a child's
intelligence (44 percent in favor) or physical characteristics (42 percent in
favor).

   "I think that when specific applications of genetic intervention are
mentioned, like curing a usually fatal genetic disease, the public affirms those
goals and is willing to use gene therapy," Walters said.

   Even so, some researchers still worry.

   "I think there is still a strong undercurrent of concern about mucking about
with people's genes," said Paul Berg of Stanford University, winner of a Nobel
prize in genetics and a central figure in the early debates about the hazards of
genetic engineering. "I don't think it is very vocal, but I don't think it would
take a lot to bring it to the fore."

   W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute believes
that public acceptance of gene therapy is tied to what happens to the first
patients. "The public's concerns will depend on whether we get a patient cured
before we have a problem."

   Critics such as Jeremy Rifkin, president of the Foundation for Economic
Trends, have accepted the current gene treatments that only repair cells in a
single individual but still object to germ-line therapy, the genetic
manipulations that forever alter future generations.

   "There are people who worry about the slippery slope," Caplan said -- the
idea that once gene therapy starts, scientists will be engineering future
generations. But "to block germ-line therapy down the road makes no sense when
it might get rid of inherited diseases," he said.

   Caplan, Walters and others agree, however, that the debate becomes far more
complicated when discussing the possiblity of using gene enhancement to make a
child taller or smarter. Most oppose that.

   Scientists do not now have the techniques to either alter the germ line or
enhance a child. These battles will be fought sometime in the future.


                             1727 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 23, 1990 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1806 words

HEADLINE: New gene treatments bring hope;
Area scientists to help develop use of advanced therapies

BYLINE: David Graham, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Long considered the medicine of the future, gene therapy is advancing toward
use in patients, with the first experimental human treatment just under way and
research labs brimming with potential therapies for other diseases. If the first
attempt at gene therapy -- a blood transfusion of genetically altered cells into
a 4-year-old girl -- succeeds, it will encourage other scientists to try
gene-transfer experiments and shorten the lengthy federal safety and ethical
reviews that have slowed human testing, experts say. A gene therapy for
melanoma, a virulent skin cancer, has already passed a federal review for
testing, and therapies for hemophilia and other blood disorders might be among
the next attempted, experts say.

   A La Jolla biotechnology firm, Viagene Inc., is preparing to seek federal
approval to use gene therapy techniques to treat AIDS patients in trials next
year. "It's an extraordinarily exciting time because the technical and political
aspects (of gene therapy) have now been cleared, and the doors have now been
opened to embark on investigations into an entirely new field of therapeutics,"
said Dr. William Polvino, a National Institutes of Health (NIH) researcher
participating in the first experiment, which was undertaken just nine days ago.
"Now the possibility exists for us to develop an entirely new branch of
treatment that offers significant advantages over what we have to offer many
patients at present." Human trials of aggressively pursued gene therapies for
muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis, Parkinson's disease and diabetes may be
among those to come within several years, medical experts say. San Diego, with
research labs at UCSD and numerous biotechnology companies, is expected to have
an important role in the development of the new technology, experts say. Wen-Hwa
Lee, a UCSD scientist who hopes one day to treat cancerous tumors with genes,
said the NIH's first treatment is an important psychological landmark.

   Success will help win acceptance from the both public and insurance
companies, and that acceptance, in turn, will accelerate the practice of gene
therapy, Lee said. "People who hear about gene therapy now become open-minded,"
Lee said.

   "I believe fundamentally we will revolutionize medicine." An alluring goal
for scientists for more than two decades, gene therapy seeks to treat illnesses
by giving patients properly functioning copies of genes to correct disorders
caused by damaged or missing genes. Its power lies in treating the cause of
illness, in contrast to standard medical therapies that treat disease symptoms,
said Dr. Theodore Friedmann of UCSD. Friedmann, one of the early gene therapy
theorists, is studying applications for Parkinson's disease, disorders of the
central nervous system, the brain and atherosclerosis. Friedmann and Richard
Roblin published a landmark paper in 1972 discussing the technical and ethical
considerations of treating illness with genes. That paper proposed using a
disarmed virus to carry genes into cells, the very technique that is being used
now, Friedmann said. As techniques are refined, gene therapy in principle could
be used to treat many of the more than 3,000 diseases that have thus far been
been shown to have a genetic basis. The first human gene therapy experiment,
which started Sept. 14 at the NIH in Bethesda, Md., involves a girl at risk of
severe infections and early cancers because of an extremely rare malfunction of
her immune system.

   The child's disease, adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, is caused by the
absence of a particular enzyme in the blood that cleans up harmful byproducts in
the body.

   Without that enzyme, the byproducts destroy the immune system. Led by Dr. W.
French Anderson, of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, scientists
gave the girl a transfusion of about one billion white blood cells -- a few
teaspoons full -- that had been altered with recombinant DNA techniques to
contain the gene that produces the enzyme. According to a standard laboratory
procedure, functioning copies of the gene were inserted into a harmless
retrovirus, which then infected the cells taken from the girls' body, carrying
the good gene into the cells. In theory, the cells should live in the blood and
act as little factories producing the enzyme that could allow her immune system
to function normally.

   It could take months to gauge the cells' effect, doctors say. If the
experiment does not harm the girl, individual gene therapy experiments may
become much more routine, with the special federal safety and ethical reviews
shortened and eventually eliminated, said Arthur Caplan, director of the Center
for Biomedical Ethics at the University of Minnesota. "I would be very surprised
if review didn't revert to local control within a year, meaning the dismantling
of the whole federal apparatus," Caplan said.

   "I think that's appropriate." If the experiment somehow harms the girl --
something considered unlikely -- the elaborate federal reviews of gene therapy
experiments will remain, he added. The ADA deficiency experiment took about
three years to gain approval, including permission required from the NIH's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, its Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee, the NIH
director and the federal Food and Drug Administration, which must approve
medicines. The concern was for new safety and ethical questions raised by
tinkering with human genes, the chemical codes that give people all their
inherited characteristics, Caplan said. The gene therapy experiments in question
attempt to treat specific diseases and are not expected to affect other systems
in the body, scientists say. The genetic change is not inherited by offspring.
The most feared risk of gene therapy is that it could cause cancer because of
the gene transfer techniques, Polvino said. When the therapeutic genes are
placed inside cells in the lab, the genes are implanted into the cell's normal
collection of genes but at random places.

   Although it is not expected, there is concern a placement could activate a
gene that causes cancer or inactivate one that suppresses cancer in the patient.
Perhaps the biggest question concerns just how effective gene transfers will be
at treating illness.

   It might be that the genetically altered cells are implanted and do nothing,
Caplan said. And it is unclear how long the genetically altered cells will live
in the body and whether they will divide -- the way cells reproduce -- and
maintain the gene in the body, or whether the patients will need boosters of the
modified cells.

   The plan now is to inject the ADA deficiency patient each month with an ever
larger number of cells, Polvino said. Another important question concerns how
quickly researchers can refine gene therapy techniques so that they can be used
to treat a wider range of disorders, experts say. Many of the earliest gene
treatments will be those that require less precise regulation of the products
made by the transplanted genes and that require less precision in reaching the
targeted organ in the body, scientists said.

   Diabetes treatments, for example, might come later in the experimental
process because the amount of insulin produced by the transferred gene would
have to be finely regulated. The next gene therapy experiment is likely to be
another for ADA deficiency, which Anderson's group expects to start this year,
with more following in 1991, Polvino said.

   Only about a dozen children in the world are known to have the disorder.
Treatment of this disease has come first in part because it was a rather
well-understood procedure and one that promised much more benefit than the risk
posed by the treatment, Polvino said. Dr. Steven Rosenberg, of the National
Cancer Institute, has received approval from the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee to use a gene to treat melanoma, so it could become the second disease
treated with gene therapy. That gene creates tumor necrosis factor to shrink
cancers.

   Another experiment to use another gene for the same disease is under review
by the committees. Viagene Inc. of La Jolla is preparing to seek FDA permission
to try a gene therapy technique to treat AIDS in people, said Doug Jolly,
director of research at Viagene and formerly of Friedmann's lab at UCSD. Viagene
wants to begin trials by late next year. Viagene is taking a different twist on
gene therapy, Jolly said.

   Instead of using "classical" gene therapy to treat genetic disease, it is
being used to treat viral diseases, in this case AIDS. The method would use gene
therapy techniques to carry genetic information for replicating a portion of the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS. Inside the body, the
genetic information would create a harmless HIV portion that scientists hope
would stimulate a beneficial immune response. The goal is to produce so many of
the immune system's cytotoxic T lymphocyte cells -- also known as killer T-cells
-- that they could kill HIV throughout the body. Scientists believe that HIV's
ability to avoid the T-cells accounts for part of its success in avoiding
destruction by the immune system. The whole approach worked in experiments in
mice "just as planned on paper," said Bradley Gordon, Viagene's vice president
for finance.

   The scientists say they are initiating tests in primates. Gordon said
biotechnology companies have been pushing ahead "much faster than most people
expected just three years ago" with applications of gene therapy technology and
theory that originated in government and university labs. Somatix Corp., of
Cambridge, Mass., is studying gene therapy for diabetes and hemophilia.

   Gene Therapy Inc. is a Maryland company started with the NIH's Anderson to
work in gene therapy. Others in San Diego envision treating patients based on
their research. Lee, who recently announced he is moving next summer from UCSD
to the University of Texas, San Antonio, wants to test the ability of the
retinoblastoma gene to suppress certain cancers in people.

   He has shown the gene, whose function is to suppress cancer, can reverse
cancer in cells in lab dishes.

   The gene has been associated with cancers of the eye, lung, breast and blood.
The next step is to create tumors in lab animals and cure them with the gene
transplants, Lee said.

   "Then, I don't see the reason why not to try in human beings," Lee said.

   "I must say that I'm quite optimistic." Those human experiments probably are
years away, he said.

   One difficulty in this case is in targeting the transferred genes to hit the
tumor cell, Polvino said.

   The technique for reaching all the cells is not well developed, Polvino said.
Dr. Ivor Royston, who also is leaving UCSD to become scientific director of a
new San Diego Regional Cancer Center Nov. 1, said he hopes his new labs will
pursue gene therapy techniques for cancers and possibly other diseases.

GRAPHIC: 4 DRAWINGS; CAPTIONS: First human gene therapy | 1. In the first
attempt at human gene therapy, white blood cells -- called T-cells -- were
removed from a 4-year-old patientwhose immune system lacked an enzyme needed to
remove toxins in the blood. The genetic disorder is known as adenosine deaminase
deficiency. 2. A mouse leukemia virus, harmless to humans, was genetically
altered to enable it to carry a functioning copy of the human gene necessary for
production of the adenosine deaminase enzyme. 3. The T-cells removed from the
human patient were brought together with the genetically engineered virus in a
laboratory dish. The virus infected the human cells, carrying the desired gene
into them. 4. The T-cells with the new genes were then re-injected into the
patient. (A-24); PHOTOBY: The San Diego Union | SOURCES: Knight-Ridder, New York
Times News Service

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1728 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1990 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    September 21, 1990, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1 p

LENGTH: 864 words

HEADLINE: Genes are used to rid lung cells of cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Little more than a year after the discovery of the genetic mutation that
causes cystic fibrosis, scientists say they have repaired lung cells from cystic
fibrosis patients in the laboratory by inserting copies of the normal gene.

   Researchers said the demonstration that normal gene implants can correct the
cellular defect brightens prospects for developing gene therapy or other
treatments for cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited disease in North
America.

   The feat has been reported in laboratory experiments only. It is being
reported independently today by two research groups, one in the Boston area.

   "These papers rank among the most important publications in the foundation's
history," said Dr. Robert K. Dresing, president and chief executive officer of
the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   Cystic fibrosis develops in people who inherit a mutated gene that produces
abnormally thick mucus in the lungs, leading to infections and respiratory
ailments that are eventually lethal.  Inserting copies of the normal gene into
laboratory-grown cells from patients corrected the fundamental flaw in the
cells, the researchers said.

   It was just over a year ago that researchers identified the defective gene
that leads to the disease in respiratory and digestive cells. Cells with the
mutated gene cannot produce a crucial protein they need to function normally.

   With the latest advances, scientists say they can begin searching for ways to
replace the defective gene in patients or give them doses of the missing
protein.

   As important as this milestone is, years of work in test tubes and animals
are needed to translate it into a therapy in humans, according to specialists in
the disease.

   "Cystic fibrosis patients should be heartened by everything that's going on,"
said Dr. James Wilson of the University of Michigan Medical School, principal
author of one of two papers.  "But we're not even at the point where we can
prognosticate" when it will be possible to attempt gene therapy in cystic
fibrosis patients.

   The first authorized attempt at human gene therapy of any kind was made last
week, when researchers at the National Institutes of Health infused blood cells
with new genes into a 4-year-old girl suffering from a severe inherited immune
deficiency.

   Wilson collaborated with Dr. Francis Collins, also of the University of
Michigan, and Ray Frizzell of the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Their
report was published in today's issue of the journal Cell.

   The other team, headed by Alan Smith of Genzyme Corp. in Framingham, Douglas
Jefferson of Tufts University School of Medicine and the New England Medical
Center, and Dr. Michael Welsh of the University of Iowa, will publish their
report in the journal Nature next week.

   Even when cystic fibrosis was a mostly mysterious disorder, it was clear that
cystic fibrosis patients were unlike other people in that they had accumulations
of sticky, thick mucus in their lungs and airways.

   Eventually, scientists discovered that they had a cellular defect that
prevented free passage of chloride, or salt, ions out of the cells that line the
lung's airways. That caused salt to accumulate in those cells, drew water in
from the airways and made the mucus thicker than normal.

   The discovery of the gene in August 1989 enabled researchers to identify the
protein product it makes. They now know it is a large protein that plays a
critical role in transporting chloride out of the cells, but they do not know
exactly how it does this.

   Nevertheless, the two research groups were able to piece together the DNA of
the normal cystic fibrosis gene. This gene causes cells to make the crucial
protein.

   Before they could insert the normal gene into lung cells taken from patients,
however, they had to put the fully assembled gene into bacteria in order to
produce copies of the gene in large quantities. That proved difficult because
something about the gene was toxic to the bacteria, and the bacteria died. The
toxicity problem was eventually solved by a technical trick, overcoming a major
hurdle.

   Scientists from both the Michigan and Genzyme groups then used harmless
viruses as carriers, loading them with copies of the normal gene and allowing
them to infect cystic fibrosis cells in the laboratory. The viruses transported
the genes into the cells, where, the scientists found, the genes began making
the protein that cystic fibrosis patients lack.

   Both research teams showed that with the protein in place, the membranes of
the cystic fibrosis cells gained the ability to transport chloride ions out of
the cell as they normally would.

   "This is another milestone along the road to a therapy," said Smith, vice
president for research at Genzyme. He said the company is developing strategies
for delivering the normal protein into the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients,
but he cautioned that any therapy will require years of further research.

   The Genzyme-University of Iowa team also has created antibodies to the cystic
fibrosis protein, said Smith, which could provide a means of pinpointing
precisely where the cystic fibrosis protein is located in cell membranes and how
it works.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1990


                             1729 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    September 21, 1990, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   Two groups of researchers have independently corrected the biochemical defect
that causes cystic fibrosis by inserting a healthy gene into diseased cells
grown in the laboratory, a major step toward developing new therapies for the
disease.

   The new findings announced Thursday in articles in the journals Cell and
Nature suggest it may be possible within a few years to cure the disease either
by replacing the defective gene with a healthy one through gene therapy, by
delivering an intact protein to the diseased cells or by the development of new
drugs.

   "We're not talking decades, we're talking years, a few years," said Robert J.
Beall, medical director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "We're very excited."

   "These papers rank among the most important publications in the foundation's
history," added Robert K. Dresing, the foundation's president.

   Researchers discovered the genetic defect that causes the disease only a year
ago. Thursday's announcement indicates that the discovery has greatly
accelerated the pace of research on the disease, which affects one in every
1,800 children, impairing breathing and cutting life short.

   The possibility of gene therapy for the disorder has become even more
intriguing because the first efforts at human gene therapy were finally begun
last week at the National Institutes of Health. After suffering years of
obstacles and setbacks, researchers there began treating a child with another
genetic defect called adenosine deaminase deficiency.

   Success of that treatment, or at the very least a demonstration that it does
not have any adverse side effects, is expected to pave the way for experiments
with other proposed therapies, such as for cystic fibrosis. "I think we have
reason to be very optimistic," Beall said.

   In more general terms, the new findings also reflect the greatly accelerated
increase in knowledge about a wide range of genetic diseases. In recent months,
researchers have also discovered genetic defects that cause one form of
arthritis, neurofibromatosis, myoclonic epilepsy and a form of kidney disease
called Alport syndrome, among others.

   Also this summer, researchers began studies in humans of a new form of
therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy based on the recent discovery of the
defective gene that causes that disorder. These results and others still in the
laboratory stage suggest that intensive efforts over the last decade to
understand genetic diseases are beginning to bear rich fruit in therapeutic
applications.

   The defective gene that causes cystic fibrosis is one of the most common in
nature. It is carried by one in every 20 whites -- about 12 million Americans in
all. When two carriers marry, each child has a 50% risk of inheriting the gene
from both parents and developing the disease.

   The disease is marked by a buildup of mucus in the lungs and the upper
respiratory tract that impairs breathing and leaves the victims susceptible to
respiratory infections. It also affects the pancreas in about 75% of victims,
blocking secretion of enzymes necessary for digesting and absorbing fats in the
diet.

   The symptoms arise because defective cells are not able to properly secrete
salt and water through pores called chloride channels. Instead of a thin film of
water that is important for cleansing the lungs, for example, the defective
cells produce a thick mucus that traps bacteria and viruses that can cause
infections.

   Earlier in this century, cystic fibrosis was uniformly fatal, killing most
affected children during their first year of life. The development of
antibiotics to control lung infections and the adoption of nutritional therapies
have extended the median life span of cystic fibrosis patients to about 26
years, and many live into their 30s and 40s.

   But there is no effective therapy for the disorder itself.

   The two groups -- one headed by internist Michael J. Welsh of the University
of Iowa College of Medicine and molecular biologist Alan E. Smith of Genzyme
Corp. in Framingham, Mass., the second by geneticists Lap-Chee Tsui of the
Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto and Francis Collins of the University of
Michigan -- used slightly different techniques to achieve the same goal.

   Tsui and Collins, who discovered the defective gene last year, worked with
test tube-grown pancreas cells from a cystic fibrosis patient who lacked a key
protein. They inserted a gene from healthy cells into a virus that carried it
into the defective cell's nucleus, where it became integrated with the cell's
own genes and began producing the protein. The cells could then secrete salt
normally.

   Welsh and Smith used a different virus to insert the cell and they worked
with cells from the respiratory tracts of cystic fibrosis patients, but their
results were identical: The cells could function normally.

   Researchers cautioned that many questions must be answered before similar
gene therapy could be attempted in humans. "Which cells do you put it into,"
asked Welsh. "Do you have to have it in all the cells? What happens if you get
too much of the protein? Are there any side effects?" These questions must be
studied in animals before human studies can begin.

   Meanwhile, Smith and his colleagues at Genzyme are working on an alternative
approach. Instead of inserting a healthy gene into the cells so that the cells
themselves can produce the protein, they hope to administer the protein at
intervals directly into the lungs and respiratory tract. Although this would
constitute a more short-term approach, it would have the advantage of
sidestepping some of the ethical and moral questions of altering genetic makeup.

   The problem is that it is more difficult to get a protein inside a cell than
it is to insert a gene, but he hints that it may be possible. "That's something
people have thought about a lot in the past," Smith said. "I wouldn't deny that
it's a difficult problem, but there are approaches that might work."

   Finally, now that researchers have identified the defective protein that
causes the disease, it may be possible to use traditional pharmaceutical
approaches to design drugs that would improve the protein's function. Such drugs
might greatly ameliorate the symptoms of the disease.

   Beall predicted that it will be a race among researchers using the different
approaches to see who can be successful first.

   Others who participated in the research included molecular biologist James
Wilson of the University of Michigan and Ray Frizzell of the University of
Alabama.


                             1730 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 21, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

HEADLINE: TEAM CURES CELLS IN CYSTIC FIBROSIS BY GENE INSERTION

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   Scientists have cured cystic fibrosis cells in the laboratory by inserting a
healthy version of the gene that causes the disease, an unexpectedly swift
advance that left researchers almost giddy with delight.

   The results throw open the door to using human gene therapy to treat the
deadly respiratory disorder, the most common fatal genetic ailment in the United
States. People who suffer from the disease lack working copies of the cystic
fibrosis gene, a defect that leads to such devastating symptoms as thick mucus
buildup in the lungs, chronic infections and extreme digestive problems. The new
experiments strongly suggest that supplying patients with new genes will reverse
many, if not all, the symptoms of the illness.

Insertion of Healthy Gene

   ''One of the things that we're awed by is the speed with which these things
are happening and coming together,'' said Robert K. Dresing, president of the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. ''We're in the business of trying to save as many
C.F. kids as possible, and we just took a giant step forward in that
direction.''

   In the experiments, researchers used genetically engineered viruses to slip
good copies of the gene into cells taken from the respiratory tract and the
pancreas of cystic fibrosis patients. With the addition of the healthy gene, the
sickly cells became robust, displaying such key hallmarks of biochemical
normality as being able to deftly absorb and secrete chloride molecules.

   Scientists believe a defect in chloride traffic leads to many of the symptoms
of the disease.

Optimism on Development

   The latest experiments were performed under test-tube conditions, and
researchers warn that clinical therapies based on the new results are several
years in the future.

   The scientists also said they must still determine whether the insertion of
the gene affected the levels of sodium in the cell. A defect in sodium flow in
the body is another symptom of cystic fibrosis.

   And researchers warned that installing copies of the cystic fibrosis gene
into patients could have side effects, which they have yet to discover.

   But even the most cautious scientists say the ability to correct the cystic
fibrosis defect in the laboratory holds great promise for treating the disease.

   ''My tendency is to be very conservative, but the hazard with that is you end
up underestimating how fast the field of gene therapy is expanding,'' said Dr.
James M. Wilson of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, lead author on the
paper reporting the new results today in the journal Cell. ''At this point, it's
impossible for me not to be optimistic about cystic fibrosis.''

   Among Dr. Wilson's collaborators on the project was Dr. Francis S. Collins of
the University of Michigan, one of the scientists who isolated the cystic
fibrosis gene in August 1989.

   Two other groups are reporting a similar ability to reverse the biochemical
defects of cystic fibrosis in next week's issue of Nature. So eager was the
British journal to have its reports announced along with the Cell paper that it
agreed to early disclosure of the achievement.

   Scientists say their work is also important because they have managed to spur
the cystic fibrosis gene to manufacture its protein in the laboratory. They say
that by studying the isolated protein, they will be able to determine the
precise role it plays in normal cells, and how a defect in the protein leads to
mishaps in the flow of chloride ions in the body. In turn that knowledge will
enable them to target their gene therapy efforts more precisely and to devise
related treatments.

   ''The door to gene therapy is now open, and there are a lot of clever people
out there,''said Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, who is now carrying out the first federally approved trials of human
gene therapy on a little girl with an immune deficiency disease. ''I'm sure
there will be clever approaches coming up that we haven't even thought of yet.''


Gene-Insertion Strategies

   Cystic fibrosis is the most prevalent hereditary illness among whites,
afflicting about 30,000 people in the United States. One in 20 Americans is a
silent carrier of the disease, and if two carriers have children, they have a
one-in-four chance of bearing a child with the disease. Most cystic fibrosis
patients die before the age of 30, usually of chronic bacterial infections that
settle into the mucus-filled lungs and destroy the fragile tissue there.

   There are few treatments, although several new drugs to help clear up the
mucus and protect the lungs are in or nearing clinical trials.

   To get the good gene into cystic fibrosis cells, the research teams used
slightly different strategies. One group used as its shuttle a genetically
engineered vaccinia virus, a relative of the smallpox virus. Another team relied
on a type of retrovirus, a member of the viral family that includes the AIDS
pathogen.

   In both cases, the carrier viruses had been deactivated so that they could
not cause disease.

   The experiments required great technical skill and exquisitely precise
measurements. Dr. Michael J. Welsh of the University of Iowa College of Medicine
in Iowa City, the lead author of one of the reports appearing in Nature, said he
and his co-workers were at first astonished when the project succeeded.

   ''There was a great deal of fun and excitement here,'' said Dr. Welsh. ''I
remember one of my students running out of the lab room saying, 'I can't believe
it worked!' ''

   Researchers said they were not likely to use a viral carrier to insert the
cystic fibrosis gene into the lungs of patients. Instead, they suggested that
the gene could be packaged in a tiny fat-coated bubble, which can penetrate
through cell membranes. Patients would probably inhale such a novel drug in an
aerosol form.

GRAPHIC: Diagram (pg. A18)


                             1731 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 21, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 284 words

HEADLINE: A step closer to treatment for cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Kim Painter

BODY:

    The basic inherited defect behind cystic fibrosis can be corrected by gene
therapy - at least in a lab dish, new studies show.

   The breakthrough, reported by two scientific teams, raises hopes for treating
the USA's most common fatal genetic disease and comes a year after discovery of
the CF gene.

   ''This has just tremendous implications,'' says Robert Beall of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, Md.

   In CF patients, cells in the airway and elsewhere don't properly transport
chloride and sodium, leading to mucus buildup. The result: respiratory
infections, impaired digestion and, often, an early death.

 In both studies, including one today in the journal Cell, researchers corrected
defective cells from CF patients by adding normal genes, transmitted through a
harmless virus.

   The corrected cells were able to transport chloride through cell membranes.

   ''The assumption is that if you fix the chloride problem, you fix everything
else,'' says Dr. James Wilson, University of Michigan and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Ann Arbor, part of the team reporting in Cell. The second study will
be in the Sept. 28 Nature.

   Next hurdle: Animal studies, in which researchers will try to find the best
way to get corrective genes into airways. One possibility is an inhaled mist.

   Human gene therapy for CF hasn't yet been approved. But CF is among
candidates for testing in the next few years.

   The new research also could lead to better drug treatments.

   One in 20 Americans carries the CF gene; the disorder occurs once in 2,000
births. About 30,000 children and young adults have CF and rely on drugs and
daily lung-clearing exercises to survive. Half die before their mid-20s.


                             1732 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 21, 1990, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 964 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Finding May Enable Gene Therapy;
Researchers Correct Defect That Cripples Cells

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: William Booth, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Biomedical researchers have corrected the crucial defect that cripples the
lung cells of cystic fibrosis patients, raising the possibility that gene
therapy can be developed to treat those who suffer from the common childhood
killer.

   Just a year after researchers found the defective gene that causes cystic
fibrosis, scientists have inserted normal copies of the gene into cells and
shown that, at least in the laboratory, the new genes reverse the chief symptom
of the inherited disease.

   The cells of cystic fibrosis patients produce an abnormally sticky mucus that
fills the lungs and makes victims far more vulnerable to the infections,
inflammations and lung scarring that kill half of all sufferers by their
twenties.

   The research, which is to be reported by two groups in two scientific
journals, Cell today and Nature next week, demonstrates the speed at which
genetic studies are moving forward and raises the possibility that cystic
fibrosis (CF), the most common inherited fatal disease of children and young
adults in the United States, may soon be treated with a revolutionary procedure
called gene therapy.

   "Only a few years ago the idea of introducing normal genes into the CF lung
to correct its fatal susceptibility to infection was science fiction," said Paul
Quinton of the University of California at Riverside. "Now the accomplishments
of these investigators seem to press the fiction inspiringly close to reality."

   "This is a major hurdle," said Robert Beall, vice president and medical
director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, which supported in part the
research. "This is clearly going to move cystic fibrosis up the list as a
candidate for gene therapy."

   "It is a very nice advance, a big advance," said Ronald Crystal, chief of the
pulmonary branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, who is working
on gene therapy for cystic fibrosis. "It demonstrates that the normal gene can
reverse abnormalities caused by the defective gene."

   The work comes at a time when researchers have been electrified by the
possibility that human disease can be treated and perhaps even cured by
inserting copies of normal genes into the body to take over functions that
defective genes are failing to carry out.

   The first attempt at gene therapy was performed last week at the National
Institutes of Health, when researchers gave a 4-year-old girl with a rare
inherited immune dysfunction about one billion genetically altered blood cells
that had been removed from her two weeks earlier. Results of the experiment will
not be known for months.

   In the study on cystic fibrosis, two teams of researchers used specially
engineered viruses to insert copies of normal CF genes into cells taken from the
pancreas and lungs of patients with the disease.

   Viruses are used because they naturally splice their genes into the
chromosomes of cells they infect. The viruses in this case were given the CF
gene to include in the splicing process. Other virus genes needed to reproduce
the virus were deleted.

   In a cell with normal genes, chloride ions and water move into and out of the
cell. But with cystic fibrosis, the pumps and channels are blocked. Chloride
ions enter the cell but cannot be pumped out and, as a result, the phenomenon of
osmosis causes water to diffuse into the cell from the mucus that coats its
outer surface. The dehydrated mucus turns thick and sticky. In the lung's
airway, this mucus becomes infected with bacteria and other microorganisms,
inflamed and over time the tissue becomes scarred and damaged.

   The researchers, however, found that the insertion of a normal gene allowed
the cells in the laboratory to regain normal function and resume the proper
balance of water and chloride ions.

   The work was performed by two groups. Alan Smith of Genzyme Corporation,
Douglas Jefferson of Tufts University and Michael Welsh of the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute and the University of Iowa and colleagues are to publish their
report in the Sept. 27 issue of Nature. James Wilson and Francis Collins of the
University of Michigan and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Ray Frizzell
of the University of Alabama report their study in today's issue of Cell.

   Scientists now hope to devise a way to insert normal genes into the cells of
patients without having to remove the cells from the patient's body, as was done
with the 4-year-old girl. Since the most affected cells line the lung's air
passages, the researchers believe that an aerosol carrying the genetically
engineered viruses can be inhaled by patients.

   It is also possible that instead of the gene, the protein it produces can be
delivered to the lungs, where it could be absorbed by the cells.

   However, researchers cautioned that they are still unsure how effective
introducing genes or proteins would be. For example, will the therapy work if
only half the cells in the airways harbored normal genes?

   Also, the scientists said, even if it worked, the therapy would still be far
from a cure. Since the affected cells are continuously being sloughed off and
replaced, a patient would have to keep inhaling new genes every day or so.
Researchers do not know where the "stem cells" lie that give birth to the cells
that line the air passages of the lungs. If they discovered the location of
these mother cells, they could theoretically target them for infection with
normal genes, which would then be passed on to all the daughter cells.

   The next step is the development of an animal that could serve as a surrogate
for experimentation. At least five research groups are trying to create mice
with the genetic defect that leads to cystic fibrosis. Officials at the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation believe such an animal model will be introduced within a
year.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, CORRECTING CF CELLS WITH GENE THERAPY(DATA FROM THIS
GRAPHIC WAS NOT AVAILABLE.), MICHAEL DREW


                             1733 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    September 20, 1990, Thursday, P.M. Final

SECTION: Part P; Page 2; Column 1; Late Final Desk

LENGTH: 135 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH;
CYSTIC FIBROSIS CELL CORRECTED

BYLINE: From Times Wire Services

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists have corrected a crucial defect in cells taken from cystic
fibrosis patients, a step called a milestone toward eventually treating the
disease through gene therapy or new kinds of medication.

   The cells carried the abnormal gene that causes cystic fibrosis, and
researchers fixed the defect by giving them a normal copy of the gene.

   While the notion of gene therapy for cystic fibrosis was science fiction only
a few years ago, the new work has "pressed the fiction closer to reality," said
Paul Quinton, a cystic fibrosis researcher at the University of California,
Riverside, who was familiar with the work.

   Cystic fibrosis affects about 30,000 children and young adults in the United
States. Their lungs produce a thick, sticky mucus that sets the stage for fatal
lung infections.


                             1734 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                September 20, 1990, THURSDAY, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1214 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY  AS EXPERIMENTS START, ETHICS ISSUES CRY OUT

BYLINE: Sally Lehrman 1990, San Francisco Examiner

BODY:


   SAN FRANCISCO (REST) THE REVOLUTIONARY practice of mending human genes has
become reality, bringing with it a tangle of social questions.  Government
researchers started the first-ever gene therapy experiment last week by
transforming six tablespoons of cells and returning them to the bloodstream of a
4-year-old girl with a rare, lethal immune disease.  Over the next two to three
years, this child and nine others will receive infusions of cells with repaired
genes every month. Government researchers also are ready to begin a more
complicated experiment to enhance the cancer-killing cells of terminally ill
melanoma patients; the researchers are awaiting approval from one more federal
agency.  No one knows whether the experiments will work. But already, industry
observers are naming a half dozen or more diseases that could be routinely
treated at the genetic level. Some say the treatments could become as common as
hip replacements.  There's ''a growing realization that the technology is very
usable, workable in the clinical setting and can be applied in a very broad
way,'' said Eric Tomlinson, president of Somatix Corp., a gene therapy firm.
''It's moved away from being a Cinderella science into being a practical reality
in the space of two years.'' So far, just one other gene therapy experiment has
been submitted for scrutiny by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, a
government oversight team. But the committee, called the RAC, expects proposals
to come streaming in, including several that would use marker genes to study
little-understood bone marrow cells. Market Intelligence Research Co. in
Mountain View, Calif., predicts that in less than 10 years, gene therapy will
command a $324 million market.  Already, at least 11 small private companies
dream of making it rich on gene therapy.  Among the 11 are: Somatix, which aims
to use genes to teach cells to produce missing proteins in diseases such as
hemophilia and diabetes. Tomlinson expects to begin human clinical trials in
about two years.  Viagene Inc., in San Diego, which expects to enter clinical
trials with a gene therapy for AIDS by the end of next year.  Genetic Therapy
Inc., a Maryland company that supplied some of the materials for the government
experiment at the National Institutes of Health.  Genetic Therapy is heading
rapidly toward a public stock offering based on its gene therapy work.  ''People
will become increasingly comfortable that this is a safe and manageable method
of treatment,'' said Bradley Gordon, vice president of finance at Viagene.
''Then we'll see an explosion in the different therapeutic applications.'' But
in its readiness to leap into this futuristic technology, the corporate world is
forgetting some of the troubling issues raised by the genetic engineering of
people.  Even the RAC, which traditionally focuses on scientific and safety
issues, found itself grappling with ethics in considering the first human gene
therapies. ''There's no one else to do it,'' said RAC Chairman Gerard McGarrity.
McGarrity said the committee tangled over questions of patient access to
insurance, informed patient consent, the cost of the treatment and its benefits
in light of unknown dangers.  The committee spent nine months studying the
experiment that proceeded last week. But in many ways, members said, the cancer
experiment posed more ethical and scientific problems because it would augment
genetic activity rather than replace missing genes.  RAC members worried about
the toxic effects of the tumor-killing agent, especially because researchers
hadn't been able to show that it actually could help patients. All they could
prove was that tumors in mice injected directly with the substance shrank
dramatically.  After a day's deliberations, the group decided to only give the
go-ahead to begin testing dosing levels of the agent in humans.  Jeremy Rifkin,
an activist who opposes such experiments, immediately announced his opposition
to the pioneering work being done at the National Institutes of Health. Last
week, he petitioned the institutes to set up a eugenics advisory committee to
assess the social and economic impact of human gene experiments.  The RAC asked
hard questions, but somehow, a gap remains in society's ability to comprehend
the impact of gene therapy. With genetic engineering generally becoming better
understood, even the members of RAC believe it's time for this committee to take
on social issues in earnest.

GRAPHIC: Graphic; CHART-TABLE/SKETCH: AP graphic by Karl Tate ''Revolutionary
Gene Treatment'' ... The new process marks the first time that human genes have
been manipulated for the purpose of treating a genetic disorder.  Normally, the
ADA gene produces an enzyme that is needed for the body's immune system. A child
with a defective ADA gene cannot produce the enzyme, called adenosine deaminase
(ADA). The result is sever immunodeficiency and little resistance to infections.
Untreated, the child dies within a few years. Working ADA genes are inserted
into the patient's cell through the use of a genetically engineered virus. The
virus is disabled and non-infectious, and is used as a vehicle to get the gene
into the cells. 4 SKETCHES show figure of girl with needle in arm (white cells
are removed from patient's blood), dropper dropping fluid in petri dish (cells
are grown in a tissue culture), microscope with inset of molecule (virus that
carries normal ADA genes is inserted into cells), and figure of girl with IV in
arm (ADA-corrected cells are infused back into the patient intravenously).
Source: National Institutes of Health.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993


                             1735 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1990 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 18, 1990, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 71 p

LENGTH: 944 words

HEADLINE: Metaphors rain down like . . . well, like metaphors;
LITERARY LIFE

BYLINE: By M.R. Montgomery, Globe Staff

BODY:

    For many years, The New Yorker has filled the odd spaces at the bottom of
its columns with snippets of other people's faulty writing.  My favorites have
always been those labeled: "Block that metaphor!" The sources of inappropriate
metaphor are many, but the most common is ignorance mingled with imagination.
The worst metaphors depend on an event that neither the writer nor the reader
has ever seen. For example, if you want to write about a rainstorm in Japan, it
will not do to describe the storm in understandable English; the metaphoraholic
will do something like this: "A violent thunderstorm rattles in during the
night, and the winds, shifting suddenly, sound like silk kimonos snagging in the
trees." Or, perhaps, one will describe a totally unfamiliar sensation - walking
in ankle-deep bird doo-doo - thusly: ". . . shuffling through guano as thick as
smudgy peas." Or, perchance, the writer wants to convince you that a character
in a story has highly charged emotions: "He lifts tightly clenched fists in the
air and shakes the electricity from them." None of those phrases stand the test
of rereading, they depend entirely on the reader's willing suspension of
disbelief, and they, and many more, are littered through Diane Ackerman's
"Reporter at Large: Albatrosses," in the Sept. 24 New Yorker, like, well, like
static-charged peas clinging smudgily to a rain-soaked silk kimono.  On the
other hand, if you haven't gotten to last week's issue, there is a superb
Margaret Atwood short story, "Hack Wednesday," to look backward to.

   If The New Yorker is unable to block that metaphor, I don't know exactly what
to say about the October Wigwag, the picture of American life, as the magazine's
subtitle would have it. I am beginning to think that Wigwag is not the
alternative voice to The New Yorker, but the reincarnation of Ralph Ingersoll's
PM, a quickly failed New York afternoon paper that survives in the public's
awareness, if it survives at all, as something to be parodied.  PM's style was
to take the reader on the assignment, assume that the reader knew nothing, and
describe the process of acquiring the content of the story as if that were as
important as the news itself. In one of the better parodies, "Mr. Ingersoll Goes
to Brooklyn," widely available in collections of that low form of humor, the
narrator is pleased to discover and report that they speak English in Brooklyn
and have stop-and-go lights on their main streets.  This is the "innocent eye"
technique, or the "Martian journalist" ploy, and Wigwag's most Martian eye is an
African named Sousa Jamba who, apparently unwittingly, writes a grammatical but
slightly retarded or immature English, a near perfect parody of PM parodies:
"The weekend I arrived in Springfield, Oregon, the Grateful Dead were holding a
concert in nearby Eugene. Hundreds of fans had gathered in the area, and I could
not find a motel room.  The only solution was to go to Portland, a two-hour
drive away.  I wondered why a band with such a spooky name had so many
followers.  I was told that the group dated back to the sixties and that a large
proportion of its fans are hippies."

   It appears that metaphor, for better or worse, is beyond the capacity of
Jamba, but the entire magazine depends for its style on the near-exclusion of
metaphors, similes, fancy words in general and Latinisms in particular, and
sometimes it works.  Thomas Hackett has a piece on Elisabeth Clare Prophet of
the Church Universal and Triumphant (the survivalist sect on the border of
Yellowstone Park) that is excellent reportage, clear prose, and scary as hell.
Even Sousa Jamba's monthly contributions sometimes work, but one reader has the
nagging suspicion that the editors think his stuff is cute, and isn't it fun to
make fun of fancy writing by publishing what appear to be postcards sent home by
a freshman foreign student?
 When Spy (October) sets its mind to being mean, it is truly funny.  They herald
the imminent publication of John Updike's fourth Rabbit novel, "Rabbit at Rest,"
with a how-to kit in case Updike is serious about this being the last (after
"Run," "Redux" and "Rich") and we have to write the fifth one ourselves, in
which case we must remember to make regular references to death and mortality
(one every 1.58 pages in "Run," 1.23 pages in "Redux," 1.34 pages in "Rich," and
a paltry every 1.75 pages in "Rest") and include several dozen bits of
"embarrassing sex" and at least 150 references to current events.
 You really can tell the difference between Time and Newsweek (Sept. 24). Time
covers the world's first gene therapy procedure on a human being at the National
Institutes of Health hospital, while Newsweek runs a portfolio of photographs of
healers all across the world, from shamans to radiologists, and implies heavily
that healing is a more mystical than scientific procedure.  On the war front,
Newsweek's lead paragraph is blunt and sanguine: by Christmas, the United States
will know if the sanctions are going to move Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait, and
"January and February offer the best weather for fighting a war in the desert."
Time leads with Bush's appearance before a joint session of Congress where, they
say, he gave a "speech - no, make that an oration - that riveted listeners." As
one reads Time's speculations about the cost of even a limited war in the
mideast (cutting off Kuwait from Iraq by making a "parking lot" out of southern
Iraq), and the possibility that things may, as they always have in wars, go
wrong, the reader gets the odd feeling that crusty and conservative Time is less
bloody-minded than touchy-feely-liberal Newsweek.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1990


                             1736 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   SEPTEMBER 18, 1990, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 1061 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Pushing Genetic Experiments
 New attempt to treat malignant melanoma

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

   Barely 15 years ago researchers debated the safety, the ethics and the rules
for developing a revolutionary new science called genetic engineering and
predicted that one day their experiments would yield new ways for treating
diseases.

   Last week scientists at the National Institutes of Health launched the first
attempt at treating one extremely rare genetic disease, and now another team is
awaiting final approval to start treating patients with a far more common
illness -- malignant melanoma, a lethal form of skin cancer that will strike
more than 27,000 Americans this year.

   The two efforts, weighed by panels of technical experts, lawyers and
ethicists at wide-open public scientific hearings for the past three years, are
still only experiments, and no one yet knows whether they will work.

   But already some scientists are predicting that before long, other diseases
such as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, and human blood disorders such as
sickle cell anemia and two widely known types of thalassemi will also prove
treatable by gene therapy.

   Dr. W. French Anderson led the team at the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute that began treating a 4-year-old girl with a barely functioning immune
system. The group injected her with her own white blood cells that had been
engineered outside her body to carry the gene that produces the one essential
enzyme called adenosine deaminase, which may correct her lethal defect.

   COMPLICATED EXPERIMENT

   This week at the National Cancer Institute, a group led by Dr. Steven A.
Rosenberg is ready to start an even more complicated experiment with terminally
ill melanoma patients by treating them with their own specially cultured white
blood cells carrying a gene that governs production of a natural compound that
causes tumors to wither away.

   Anderson's experiment had been approved by a special government panel called
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, or RAC; by the acting director of the
NIH, and finally by the federal Food and Drug Administration. Rosenberg has
passed all the hurdles but one, and now awaits only the final approval for his
effort from the FDA, which is expected to rule soon.

   Enthusiasm for the concepts of gene therapy has been tempered by more sober
assessments from some scientists. For example, Dr. Charles J. Epstein of the
University of California in San Francisco, a pediatrician and geneticist who has
served on the RAC for five years and remains a member of its Human Gene Therapy
Subcommittee, is cautiously hopeful about the future, but warns that profound
difficulties remain before the technology can be widely applied.

   The efforts by Anderson and Rosenberg, he says, are ''initial, limited kinds
of studies'' and ''nice experiments.'' And it is realistic to think, he adds,
that within another year or two other experimental treatments will attack other
defects of the human immune system by splicing genes into the stem cells that
are created within the bone marrow and in turn give rise to all the varied cells
of the blood and lymphatic systems.

   The human hereditary makeup, however, consists of as many as 100,000
individual genes. No one yet knows which ones are essential, which ones control
others, and which ones actually carry the specific genetic messages that trigger
specific diseases or create susceptibility to disease.

   TOUGHER PROBLEM

   ''The much tougher problem than the two current experiments,'' Epstein says,
''will be to identify the genes for any given disorder, to control them so they
become effective, and finally to get them into the body so they reach the
appropriate target.

   ''We're still a very long way even from conceiving how to do all that,''
Epstein said yesterday.

   Only a handful of human genes -- like the one for the dominant hereditary
disorder called Huntington's disease that killed folk singer Woodie Guthrie --
have yet been identified and chemically analyzed. Most diseases, however,
involve more than just a single gene, and that complicates the problem.

   The big-science effort called the Human Genome Project, with its $ 3 billion
price tag, will need hundreds of scientists in scores of countries and at least
15 years before every gene is identified and its structure determined. In
Rosenberg's effort to attack melanoma, the scientists have found the single gene
that causes cells to produce a substance called tumor necrosis factor, or TNF.
In experiments with mice they have learned that TNF can cause cancerous tumors
to stop growing and shrink by depriving them of their blood supply. They have
also isolated a type of white blood cell called tumor infiltrating lymphocytes,
known as TIL, which naturally home in on cancerous tissue.

   WELL-KNOWN VIRUS

   So Rosenberg's team has engineered a well-known virus to deprive it of the
ability to reproduce, and then have spliced the gene for TNF into the virus.
Next, they have grown large quantities of TIL cells in laboratory culture
dishes, infected those cells with the virus carrying the gene for TNF, and
reinserted the cells into the bodies of the animals.

   The results have been promising, and Rosenberg has also shown that TIL cells
alone have at least some anti-tumor effect on a few patients.

   In a recent issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, Rosenberg reported
that TIL cells do, in fact, home in on human tumors, and that they can
effectively be used as vehicles to transport genes. Now he will try using those
same cells to carry the gene for the tumor-killing factor into the tumors of the
patients who are waiting, near death, in the cancer ward of the NIH clinical
center in Bethesda, Md.

   In effect, Epstein noted, Rosenberg is trying to provide his patients with
the gene to produce an anti-cancer drug -- a kind of pharmacological transplant.

   And in the long-term future, Epstein believes, gene therapy may well become
as widely used as organ transplants are today.

   Once scientists have learned in detail what genes are involved in what
disease, and what functions they perform, it's not impossible to contemplate
gene therapy for almost any disease with a genetic component, Epstein and others
believe.

   Susceptibility to heart disease, diabetes, many of the severe mental
illnesses like manic-depressive psychosis, and perhaps even alcoholism may all
be potential candidates for gene therapy, Epstein says.



                             1737 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words

HEADLINE: Ideas & Trends;
Why Gene Therapy Is Considered Scary But Cell Therapy Isn't

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   It took three years, three months, one week and one hour, but researchers at
the National Institutes of Health finally got permission to try gene therapy. At
10:15 A.M. on Sept. 7, the director of the N.I.H. approved a proposal by Dr. W.
French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and his
colleagues to try to correct a rare but deadly immune system disorder in
children. The researchers wanted to insert a gene taken from a healthy person
into the victims' blood cells so they could make an enzyme they lack.

   A week later, the Food and Drug Administration gave its approval. On Friday,
the first child was treated.

   In contrast, on Feb. 15, with nothing more than permission from their own
hospital's ethics committee, Dr. Peter Law and his colleagues at the University
of Tennessee inserted normal muscle cells - with their full complement of genes
- into a boy with muscular dystrophy. The theory was that the transplanted cells
would make a protein the boy's own muscle cells could not. Since then, two other
research groups have tried the experiment, all reporting promising results.

   It is an oddity of the genetic engineering age that anyone wanting to replace
a single gene in a patient's cells must negotiate a maze of Federal reviews
while someone wanting to put in all the genes at once can simply do it.

   The cell therapy was not anyone's first choice. ''It is like giving a whole
library when all you want is one book,'' said Dr. Leon Charash, chairman of the
National Medical Advisory Board of the Muscular Dystrophy Association.

   In the muscular dystrophy treatment, it would make more sense simply to
transplant the gene that produces the needed protein, but it has only recently
been isolated and animal experiments are still under way. Strangely enough, had
the researchers been more technologically adept, they might not have been
allowed to do the experiment.

   Molecular biologists and ethicists say the key to the paradox is the word
''gene.'' The muscular dystrophy therapy, with its more benign name, ''cell
therapy'' or ''myoblast therapy,'' slipped by unnoticed because it did not
conjure up Frankenstein images of messing with genes.

   ''I call it genophobia,'' said Dr. Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for
Biomedical Ethics at the University of Minnesota. For single-gene therapy, he
said, ''I certainly do not believe that the ethical problems are categorically
different in degree or kind from any other innovative form of invasive human
experimentation.''

   George Annas, who directs the law, medicine and ethics program at Boston
University School of Medicine, agrees. ''The bottom-line answer, concluded by
most who have looked at it, is that gene therapy is not qualitatively different
from other medical treatments and should not be treated as if it is,'' he said.

   Several ethicists and scientists trace the roots of the gene therapy debate
to 1975, when molecular biologists tried to forestall public opposition by
voluntarily regulating their newfound ability to cut and splice genes and insert
them into bacteria. The scientists helped set up a Federal review process to
help insure that they would not inadvertently create a monster strain of
bacteria.

   Lurking behind this fear was another frightening possibility.

   ''The concern was that once you can start doing genetic engineering in
bacteria you then develop the potential capability of manipulating genes and
redesigning human beings,'' Dr. Anderson said.

   The fears of adding genes to bacteria faded as scientists discovered that
they could not create terrible mutant strains even if they tried. ''We learned
we can't fiddle around with bacteria and make them do things that nature hadn't
already figured out,'' Dr. Anderson said. ''Almost anything you do to an
organism makes it less able to cause harm.''

   But the Frankenstein fears live on. The concern most often cited is that gene
therapy could open the door to changing the genes of sperm and egg cells. Then
the added genes might be passed on to future generations.

   Although scientists have no plans to do such ''germ line'' therapy, and they
wouldn't know how even if they wanted to, people worry that once gene therapy
starts, this could be the next step. ''They fear the camel's nose,'' Dr. Caplan
said. ''They think that if gene therapy comes under the tent, germ line therapy
is not far behind it.''

   Even so, asks Mr. Annas, what is so terrible about germ line therapy? ''Right
now, there is no good evidence against it but there is no good evidence for it
either, except for the argument that it is more efficient - and we're big on
efficiency in this country,'' he said. ''If you can get rid of a genetic
disease, why not do it rather than cure all the kids as they are born?''

   Of course, Mr. Annas said, the specter is of changing sperm and egg cells to
create a master race. ''The argument is not so much about getting rid of the
horror genes so much as it is trying to enhance performance and building up a
privileged race,'' he said. ''Rich kids already have so many advantages. If on
top of everything else they now get in society they can also get new genes, we
will create a new class.

   This is not a medical issue. It's more of a social engineering issue,'' he
said.

   Dr. Caplan said: ''In this area of experimentation, there is no doubt that
Nazi science casts a very long shadow. It is not simply a theoretical worry
about possibilities. There is no avoiding the fact that the leading scientific
society of its day endorsed a theory of racial hygiene and eugenics and
implemented it at the costs of tens of millions of lives.''

Letting Nature Be

   Another reason for genophobia, Dr. Caplan said, is the growing belief that
nature should be left alone. He said he sees this in the Green movement in
Europe and the environmental movement in the United States.

   ''Genetic manipulation seems artificial or manipulative in ways that aren't
representative of the natural order,'' he said. ''The idea is that somehow it's
wrong to manipulate the natural order, that we ought not to muck around there.''

   But even those who argue that the public's concerns about gene therapy are
grounded more in primal fears and emotions than in scientific fact do not
necessarily argue that regulations are ridiculous and should never have existed.

   ''If genophobia is a problem then of course the committees are the cure,''
Dr. Caplan said. It is perfectly appropriate, he said, for society to demand
that its fears be addressed by impartial regulatory bodies. ''The level of
review may not make sense in terms of ethics alone, but it makes sense in terms
of social reassurance,'' he said.

   Mr. Annas predicted that the future of the regulatory committees will hinge
on the newly approved gene therapy experiment.

   ''If this works, the committees will be phased out,'' he said. ''If there is
some success, maybe the regulations will stay, but they will become a formality
rather than a substantive thing.''

   And there is always the possibility, he acknowledged, that something could go
wrong. ''If it doesn't work everybody will say, 'My God, we told you we needed
these committees. In fact, maybe we need more.' ''

GRAPHIC: Drawing


                             1738 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1990 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 15, 1990, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1 p

LENGTH: 1030 words

HEADLINE: 4-year-old gets historic gene implant

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Scientists yesterday began the first authorized attempt at human gene
therapy, a revolutionary form of medicine in which normal genes are implanted
into the cells of patients born with defective genes. Such genetic defects cause
thousands of devastating disorders.

   The first patient to receive genetic implants in an approved experiment was a
4-year-old girl suffering from a rare disorder, known as ADA deficiency, that
leaves her defenseless against infections. She was not identified by the
researchers, who carried out the treatment at the National Institutes of Health
in Bethesda, Md.

   In 1984, a similar disease caused the death at age 12 of the famed "bubble
boy" David, who was forced to spend his childhood inside a transparent sterile
chamber to prevent infections. The impact of such rare but deadly inherited
immune deficiency diseases was brought home to millions by publicity about
David's plight.

   The aim of the experiment is to determine whether genes can be safely
implanted into the girl's blood cells and induce the cells to produce a vital
enzyme that victims of the disorder lack.

   If the landmark experiment and those that follow prove successful, the great
hopes for a new medical tool that were raised in the mid-1970s, when scientists
discovered how to isolate and manipulate genes, would be realized.

   The transferred genes should begin to cause the girl's blood cells to produce
the enzyme within a day or two, but doctors will not know for six to 12 months
whether the treatment has significantly restored the girl's immune defenses.

   If the implants cause the blood cells to manufacture enough of the missing
enzyme, the girl's immune system might become strong enough to ward off
infections and allow her to live a relatively normal life.

   "The patient is doing beautifully," said Dr. W. French Anderson, one of the
principal investigators, after doctors infused her with white blood cells into
which the human ADA gene had been inserted.

   "Now we can look forward to developing gene therapy as a successful
treatment," said Anderson, of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, who
had earlier described the treatment as potentially "a major new revolution in
medicine."

   Anderson is collaborating with Dr. R. Michael Blaese and Dr. Kenneth W.
Culver of the National Cancer Institute.

   About 10 patients with ADA deficiency are born in North America each year.
The disorder is caused by a defective gene in disease-fighting white blood cells
that, because they lack the ADA enzyme, cannot rid themselves of toxic wastes
and become inactive.

   To provide her with normal genes for ADA, the researchers first removed all
white cells from the girl's bloodstream. In the laboratory, harmless viruses
engineered to serve as gene carriers were loaded with normal ADA genes grown in
the lab.

   The viruses were then allowed to infect the blood cells, which carried the
ADA genes into those cells. The cells were were returned to the girl's
bloodstream in the procedure conducted yesterday. The infusion began just hours
after the US Food and Drug Administration gave its approval for the experiment,
the final regulatory hurdle for the long-awaited experiment.

   Although the experiment had been approved through a long series of regulatory
reviews, it was challenged immediately by Jeremy Rifkin, an opponent of genetic
engineering who has previously used legal objections to delay the gene therapy
trials. Rifkin's Foundation on Economic Trends yesterday petitioned the National
Institutes of Health to impose a moratorium on such experiments until an
"advisory committee on human eugenics is established to review the social and
ethical implications" of gene therapy trials, Rifkin said in a statement.

   The two existing treatments for patients with ADA deficiency are considered
less than satisfactory. One alternative is bone marrow transplants from matched
donors, who are difficult to locate. The other is weekly doses of the purified
enzyme, which has been found to provide some benefit but does not fully restore
immune systems.

   Genes are pieces of DNA that determine a person's physical characteristics
and influence health and disease. They are the blueprints of heredity, but
genetics specialists emphasized that the experiment conducted yesterday only
affected the cells involved in the disease. They did not change the patient's
overall genetic makeup and cannot be passed on to future offspring.

   "We are not changing the nature of the human being, which is something the
public has worried about," said Dr. Arno Motulski, a geneticist at the
University of Washington School of Medicine. "Any treatment that would change
genes in the sex cells of individuals is far in the future."

   Human cells contain an estimated 50,000 to 100,000 genes carried on
thread-like structures called chromosomes. Each gene directs the production of a
specific chemical component of cells, and a defect in a single gene can result
in the chemical being missing or abnormal.

   More than 3,000 diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs disease,
muscular dystrophy and sickle cell anemia, are known to be caused by a single
defective gene. For most, there is no good treatment. In addition, scientists
are increasingly discovering that flawed genes play a role in much more common
ailments that are probably due to an interaction of genes and environmental
factors. These include forms of heart disease, cancer and nervous system
diseases.

   Ever since scientists learned to isolate genes in the 1970s, they have been
experimenting with ways to deliver normal versions of genes into cells to
substitute for the defective gene. About a decade ago, a California researcher
attempted to implant genes into two victims of thalassemia, a blood disease.
Not only did the experiments fail, but the episode resulted in a setback for
public acceptance of the entire field because the scientist had not been given
federal permission for the attempt.

   Since then, all proposed gene therapy experiments have been extensively
reviewed by scientific and ethical panels at the scientists' own institutions, a
special NIH genetic engineering panel and the FDA.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1990


                             1739 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 15, 1990, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 266 words

HEADLINE: 4-YEAR-OLD GIRL BECOMES FIRST GENE THERAPY PATIENT

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A 4-year-old girl received an intravenous injection Friday and made history
by becoming the first patient to receive gene therapy.

   "The patient is doing beautifully," said Dr. French Anderson, a scientist at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   "The family now has new hope for their child," said another researcher, Dr.
Kenneth W. Culver of the National Cancer Institutes.

   During the 28-minute infusion procedure, the girl -- who was not identified
-- sat up in her bed, played and put stickers on the lab coats of her doctors.

   "I'm sure this will be one of the most closely watched human beings on the
face of the earth today," said Don Ralbovsky, a spokesman for the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., where the procedure was conducted.

   The therapy involves inserting curative genes into human cells. Its first
therapeutic use was given final approval only hours before by the Food and Drug
Administration.

   Success could lead to use of the procedure against cancer, hemophilia, sickle
cell anemia, AIDS and other diseases in years to come.

   The child suffers from a rare genetic disease called ADA Deficiency, which
weakens her immune system so that it cannot fight infection and disease.

   About 1 billion cells -- approximately a small thimbleful -- were mixed in a
saline solution in the first infusion.

   Anderson said he would not expect to see results for the first several
months, but that within a year they should know whether the treatment is
working.

   The National Institutes of Health has approval to treat up to 10 patients
with ADA Deficiency.


                             1740 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1145 words

HEADLINE: Girl, 4, Becomes First Human To Receive Engineered Genes

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER, Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Sept. 14

BODY:

   With a simple 30-minute blood infusion, a plump, somber-faced 4-year-old girl
today became the first person in history to receive human gene therapy, a
revolutionary approach for treating disease by giving patients copies of
critical genes they lack.

   The girl suffers from a rare and severe immune deficiency resulting from the
lack of a gene that regulates production of an enzyme needed to keep the body's
immune cells alive. Today she was infused with about one billion white blood
cells that had been outfitted through recombinant DNA technology with copies of
the gene she lacked.

   Researchers hope the genetically engineered blood cells will pump out normal
levels of the crucial enzyme and restore the girl's immune system to full
health. They also predict that human gene therapy will prove invaluable in the
treatment of other hereditary disorders like sickle cell anemia, cystic fibrosis
and beta thalassemia.

   The potential for inserting any gene of choice will allow researchers to
engineer cells that home in on tumors or attack specific microbes like the AIDS
virus. But they caution that many of these achievements are far in the future.

   ''This is a dramatic event in medical history,'' said Dr. Charles J. Epstein,
a pediatrician at the University of California at San Francisco, who was a
member of the Federal panel that approved the experimental therapy. ''Gene
therapy is conceptually very profound. We've been waiting for years for the day
when we could introduce a working gene to replace a gene that doesn't function
properly, and I'm delighted it's finally happening.''

   By this evening, about four hours after the infusion, the girl was walking
around, eating M & M's, and seemingly in fine spirits. The researchers said they
should know within a few months whether the revolutionary therapy was a success.

   The experimental procedure was developed by Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the
National Cancer Institute, Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung
and Blood Institute and Dr. Kenneth W. Culver, who works in Dr. Blaese's group.

   ''We feel that gene therapy is potentially a major new medical option,'' said
Dr. Anderson. ''And the most important thing, with any new therapy, is to get
started. Now we're getting started.''

   The girl, whose family agreed to be interviewed only if names and revealing
details were withheld, suffers from adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, which
is similar to the ailment that afflicted a Texas boy who spent his brief life in
a plastic chamber to protect him from infection. The disorder results from a
lack of the ADA gene, which makes an enzyme needed to clean up dangerous
metabolic byproducts in the body. Without the enzyme, the byproducts destroy the
immune cells.

   The girl does not have to live in a sterile chamber, as the ''bubble boy''
did, and she is kept in fairly good shape by weekly injections of a synthetic
version of the enzyme. But her immune system is still abnormally weak and she is
considered a walking time bomb, at risk for severe infections and early cancers.


Cartoons and Apple Juice

   Today the dark-haired child waited for the procedure to begin at the National
Institutes of Health while watching Dumbo cartoons on television and sipping
apple juice from a cardboard carton. At about 1 P.M., she was wheeled into the
intensive care unit where she remained as calm as a Zen monk as genetically
engineered blood cells coursed into her veins. Researchers hope that the new
blood cells will pump out normal levels of the crucial enzyme and restore the
girl's immune system to full health.

   ''We'd been really excited and hopeful about gene therapy since we first
heard about it a year or so ago,'' said the girl's father, a chemist. ''But we
thought it would take 20 years before anything came out of it.''

   Indeed, the speed with which human gene therapy has become medical reality
has astonished all involved. The researchers received the permission of the
final review board of the National Institutes of Health only at the end of July.
Dr. William F. Raub, acting director of the institutes, gave his approval to the
project only two days ago.

   And the Food and Drug Administration, which also had to approve the new
therapy for human trials to proceed, gave the permission just before 9 o'clock
this morning through a telephone call to Dr. Anderson.

Approval Was Expected

   But the scientists had been optimistic enough that the F.D.A. would approve
the protocol that they had asked the girl's family to drive to town the day
before and prepare for the procedure.

   The child had been chosen for the first trials from five potential candidates
with ADA deficiency, mainly because she was in relatively stable condition and
because her blood cells grew well in the laboratory. Only about 20 people are
thought to suffer from the disorder worldwide. The researchers chose ADA
deficiency for their first experiment because it was a devastating disease that
seemed particularly amenable to the earliest attempts at human gene therapy.

   To treat the child's disorder, the researchers removed some of her blood
cells and separated out the T cells, key components of the immune system. Using
recombinant DNA techniques, they inserted a copy of the human ADA gene into a
special virus that had been rendered harmless so that it could not cause
disease.

   The scientists then infected the girl's T cells with the virus and grew large
quantities of those cells. Experiments performed before the cells were given
back to the girl suggested that at least 10 percent of the cells were producing
the ADA enzyme, a success rate with which the scientists said they were very
pleased.

   Over the next few months, the child will return to the institutes on a
monthly basis to receive fresh infusions of cells containing the ADA gene. But
scientists hope that the doctored T cells prove so hardy that they will survive
in the bloodstream for months or even years, and that they will eventually be
able to cut down the number of treatments to once or twice a year. The
researchers will check for increasing antibody levels, greater diversity in
types of T cells and other measures of immune function.

   The father of the pioneering patient, while expressing pride in his
daughter's stalwart attitude, said that he wished she had not been chosen first.
''I'd hoped initially she'd be one of the later patients,'' he said. ''The first
person faces the greatest risk. But the doctors thought she was best, and so we
decided to give it a chance.''

   The research team expects to begin similar trials on other ADA deficient
children within the next few months. Although preliminary experiments for gene
therapy have been performed on monkeys and mice, the researchers say that the
ultimate test of the technique's effectiveness can only be determined through
these human trials.

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''We feel that gene therapy is potentially a major new medical
option,'' said Dr. W. French Anderson, one of the doctors who developed the
experimental gene transplant procedure. (NYT)


                             1741 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 44 words

HEADLINE: Quotation of the Day

BODY:

   ''We feel that gene therapy is potentially a major new medical option. And
the most important thing, with any new therapy, is to get started. Now we're
getting started.''     - Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute. [9:1.]


                             1742 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words

HEADLINE: News Summary

BODY:

   International    2-7

American and Australian warships fired warning shots before boarding an Iraqi
tanker in the Gulf of Oman in a coordinated action to enforce the trade embargo
on Iraq, Administration officials said.    Page 1

France says Iraqis capture four at ambassador's residence    4

The single-largest arms sale ever was announced by the Pentagon. The United
States has agreed to sell Saudi Arabia about $20 billion in advanced weapons and
technical support over several years.    5

Bonn, heeding U.S. critics, to provide planes and ships for gulf    5

The military buildup in the Gulf is affecting day-to-day life throughout the
United States. In some places it is merely a backdrop. Elsewhere, the
mobilization is more of an intrusion, interrupting established routines in
sometimes unexpected ways.    1

Syria will keep sending forces to protect Saudi Arabia from Iraq, President
Hafez al-Assad assured Secretary of State Baker. But he urged Washington to
continue to seek a political, rather than a military, solution in the Persian
Gulf.    5

Iraq's food rationing is cut 50 percent    4

Iran released an American citizen who had been held in an Iranian prison since
October 1984, the State Department announced. The prisoner was a businessman who
had been charged with violating foreign currency regulations.    4

The morale of American soldiers in Saudi Arabia may be beginning to sag,
officers there seem to believe. But Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, denied that morale was a major issue.    6

The President of South Africa, F. W. de Klerk, conceded that a ''hidden hand''
appeared to be at work in the violence that has killed nearly 800 South African
blacks in recent weeks, Nelson Mandela said.    1

A celebrated Soviet priest was slain Sunday. The killing of Father Aleksandr
Menn, a well-known dissident, has become a national mystery and scandal.    3

In East Germany, a tempest over spying    3

Sydney Journal: Asian immigrants are changing Australia    2

National    8-12

Senators on the Judiciary Committee and their top aides expressed agreement that
Judge David H. Souter was virtually assured of winning a positive vote from the
committee barring some unforeseen development.    1

News analysis: Judge Souter seems assured of avoiding the rejection that befell
Judge Bork. His two days before the Senate Judiciary Committee were a masterly
exercise in self-definition from a nominee who began the process as a virtual
unknown.    11

TV Critic's Notebook: A conservative who proves human    12

The sale of savings institutions to private investors by the Government in 1988
will cost $71 billion, almost double the amount originally projected by
regulators two years ago, a Congressional review has found.     1

Republican budget negotiators, furious over disclosures to the press about their
deficit cutting proposals, accused Democrats of unfairly casting Republicans as
champions of the wealthy and of deliberately trying to sabotage the bargaining.
    8

Philadelphia's looming insolvency continued to trouble elected officials and
civic leaders, even as bad news continued to stream in from the financial
markets.    8

A girl received human gene therapy, a revolutionary approach of treating disease
by giving patients copies of critical genes they lack. The 4-year-old girl was
the first person in history to receive the therapy.#1

Researchers have found a hormone in the body that they believe plays a major
role in the development of high blood pressure, which affects 60 million
Americans.    9

President nominates physicist to be chief of science agency    12

A new battlefield on abortion rights has emerged in Minneapolis with the
decision by the Dayton Hudson Corporation, a large national retailer, to end 22
years of support for Planned Parenthood.    8

Florida Journal: A Lotto frenzy has overcome Floridians this week. Some are
staking a life's savings on the chance to win the state lottery's record $100
million jackpot.    8

Playmates tell of boy's accidental death months ago    8

Regional    25-28

A settlement at The New York Post was reached. The agreement between Peter S.
Kalikow, the owner, and the paper's unions is contingent on approval by members
of The Newspaper Guild in a vote on Monday.    1

At The Post: First cheers, then back to business    26

A platoon of homeless ex-servicemen is patrolling the parks and trains in and
around Long Island City, Queens. Their efforts have earned them plaudits from
police and citizens, and one honor more prized than any medal -a place to call
home.    1

Murders and robberies rose sharply to near-record levels in New York City during
the first six months of 1990, the Police Department said. The report appears to
reinforce a public perception that violent crime has confronted the city with a
crisis.    25

Youth, 18, slain by panhandler is bid farewell    27

Officer shoots man to death on Upper West Side    27

District Attorney in Brooklyn wants officer's case dropped    27

Man is still in jail after dispute over towing    26

New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, replaced the executive
director in charge of the troubled $1.2 billion program for handicapped and
emotionally disturbed youngsters.    25

Link between school enrollment and population total disputed    28

New York's long-neglected bridges are in far worse shape than city engineers had
feared, and could require an additional $500 million on top of the $2.7 billion
already budgeted for making them sound again.    25

The three candidates for governor of Connecticut clashed in a spirited debate
that highlighted their past and present differences on a wide variety of issues,
including a state income tax, the disclosure of personal finances and abortion
rights.    25

Maltese victory seen as boost to New York Republicans    26 Business Digest
31

Arts/Entertainment

Poetry festival at Waterloo    13

Agatha Christie centennial    13

Theater: ''Romeo and Juliet'' from Mexico    15

Film: ''Death Warrant''    16

Dance: Lyons Dance Biennial    14

Book: ''The Arrogance of Faith''    16

TV: ''60 Minutes'' success story    46

Channel 5 drops ''Newsline''    46

Obituaries    29

Samuel S. Stratton, ex-U.S. Congressman

Marya Mannes, a writer and critic

Consumer's World    48

G.M. is challenged over seat belts

Safety standards being tightened for garage doors

Coping with renting cars to young drivers

An emergency phone for the very young

Guidepost

Sports

Baseball: Phils beat Mets    43

Mattingly returns    44

Pirates fall    43

Column: Moran on Notre Dame    43

Football: Ivy League season opens    43

Giants' Marshall struggles    45

Hockey: Rangers sign Ogrodnick    44

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials    22

Iraq swings wild, and low

No special favors on Medicare

Kids: TV's captive audience

Bright lights, big money

Letters    22

Russell Baker: No, no!! Not a kudo!!!    23

Flora Lewis: Good news takes care    23

Andrew Stein: Restoring order to the streets now    23

Osborn Elliott: To fight crime, get involved    23

Adam L. Schulman: Soviet paradox - left is right    23


                             1743 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                  September 15, 1990, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 1096 words

HEADLINE: Human Gene Therapy Debuts at NIH;
4-Year-Old With Immune System Defect Is First to Be Treated

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A 4-year-old girl born without a working immune system yesterday became the
first human being to undergo gene therapy, the long-awaited attempt to treat and
perhaps cure diseases by splicing new genes into the patient's cells.

   The experiment at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda transforms a
long academic debate about the possibilities of curing human ills at the genetic
level into a medical reality that researchers expect will revolutionize the
treatment of many human illnesses, from heart disease to cancer.

   The girl, whom the hospital and her family refused to identify, was born with
a rare gene defect that leaves her cells unable to produce an enzyme essential
to the functioning of the body's defenses against infection. Only about 10
children each year are born with this disorder -- called severe combined immune
deficiency -- and, until recently, most of them have died in childhood from
chronic infections.

   "She was very ill," her father said in a telephone interview from the
hospital during which he would not reveal his identity. "She started getting
very ill from the age of just under one."

   Shortly before 1 p.m. yesterday, doctors inserted an intravenous needle into
a vein on the shy, dark-haired child's hand as she sat on a bed, and began
injecting some of the girl's own white blood cells back into her body. The cells
had been removed two weeks earlier and genetically altered so that each now
carried a normal copy of the defective gene.

   About one billion genetically altered cells were injected. Doctors will now
wait for six months to a year to see whether they manufacture the missing enzyme
and, if so, whether that causes the girl's body to develop an immune system.

   Until yesterday's experimental treatment, the girl had been receiving weekly
injections of an experimental drug called PEG-ADA, which supplies the missing
enzyme. The treatment helps boost the patient's immunity, but does not restore
it to normal.

   "We really don't know in the long term how it [PEG-ADA] is going to work,"
her father said. Gene therapy "gives us the hope that there will be a more
permanent-type solution to her illness. I really am convinced that this is going
to work and she will not have to undergo the regular shots in the long run."

   To prepare for the gene therapy, a team of scientists, led by W. French
Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and R. Michael Blaese
of the National Cancer Institute, removed some of the girl's blood and began
culturing the cells in a laboratory vessel to mass produce certain white blood
cells, called T cells, that are a central part of the immune system. After 10
days, the researchers added a virus that had been genetically altered so that
each carried a copy of the human gene for the missing enzyme, the ADA gene.

   The engineered virus infected the girl's T cells, automatically splicing its
genes, including the ADA gene, into those of the blood cells. These genetically
altered cells, now able to make the normal enzyme, grew and multiplied in the
laboratory until they numbered in the billions.

   At 12:52 p.m. yesterday, a small test dose was injected into an intravenous
tube in the girl's left hand as she sat, wearing turquois pants and a white top
that her mother had made, on a bed in the pediatric intensive care unit of the
NIH's clinical center.

   "We watched her for about seven or eight minutes," Anderson said. "At 1 p.m.,
we continued the infusion of cells. It took about 20 minutes. Altogether, we
gave back approximately 1 billion cells. That represents about one-one
thousandth of her circulating white blood cells."

   The child, who was not sedated, played with cartoon stickers throughout the
treatment. "She put a sticker on each of our lab coats," Anderson said. "I have
a rabbit on mine.

   "She was waiting for something to happen," Anderson said. "She is 4 years old
and heard about this big thing that was going to happen, but nothing happened."
At least nothing that she could feel.

   The scientists, however, hope that the genetically repaired cells will begin
multiplying in her body over the next six months to a year -- making their own
copies of the ADA gene and passing them on to newly formed cells -- and "will
repopulate her immune system with gene-corrected cells," Anderson said. "If that
happens, we will have helped her substantially."

   After spending the night in the NIH's clinical center, the child is expected
to be released today and go home with her family. She will return to the NIH
every two weeks for tests and to have more white blood cells removed and
retreated with the repair gene. At the end of six months, the NIH team may begin
increasing the number of cells she is receiving.

   Several members of the team talked about the nervousness before the
procedure. Blaese joked about how everything was going extremely well, as long
as nobody dropped the gene-altered cells on the way to her room.

   Later, Anderson admitted to exhaustion and not having eaten for the previous
24 hours. After it was all over, he said, "I am very pleased because it was very
important that the first gene therapy experiment begin well."

   The promise of gene therapy has been discussed for most of a decade and this
experiment itself has been hotly debated for more than 3 1/2 years. Earlier gene
transfer experiments into human patients were conducted on cancer patients
expected to live only a few months. They involved foreign genes that acted only
as markers to show the cells were surviving in the body.

   Theoretically, there are some risks, though safety experiments have shown
that the genetically crippled virus used to infect the cells cannot reproduce or
threaten the patients. Anderson said that there is a small chance that inserting
genes into a cell could cause it to become cancerous. Critics have cited that
risk to oppose the experiments.

   The controversies and debate lengthened the time it took for the team to win
governmental approval for yesterday's experiment. Although versions of this
experiment have been discussed for years, the final approval became a mad dash
to the finish line. By midweek, the Food and Drug Administration, the last
agency that had to give approval, called Anderson to say the team had cleared
all the hurdles and could bring the patient to NIH.

   But the final papers were not signed until yesterday morning. The treatment
began four hours later.

   Through it all, the child sat serenely on the bed.

   "She was wonderful, just a great kid," Blaese said. "She was a lot calmer
than I was."


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, R. MICHAEL BLAESE, LEFT, AND W. FRENCH ANDERSON
ANNOUNCING THE GENE THERAPY. MICHAEL KEEGAN; PHOTO, AP


                             1744 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 14, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 152 words

HEADLINE: Doctors hope to begin gene therapy today

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    A 4-year-old girl with an immune deficiency like that of the Texas ''bubble
boy'' is scheduled today to be the first human gene therapy patient.

   Researchers at the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Md., hope to inject into the child's bloodstream a
gene she is missing: adenosine deaminase.

   The Food and Drug Administration must still approve the therapy. ''We are
encouraged to believe the FDA will approve (it) in the morning,'' Dr. W. French
Anderson said Thursday.

   Researchers hope that gene therapy will provide treatment for currently
incurable diseases, including AIDS, he says.

   Despite the possible benefits, some say gene therapy creates ethical
problems. ''We may well be on the verge of a journey into a 'brave new world,'
'' says Jeremy Rifkin of the non-profit Foundation on Economic Trends, which
plans to protest the experiment.


                             1745 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 14, 1990, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A17

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: New Gene Therapy Procedure Reportedly Done Within Body

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Malcolm Gladwell, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists have developed an improved and relatively simple technique for
performing gene therapy, the revolutionary attempt to treat disease by inserting
new genes into cells of the human body.

   The first human gene therapy attempt, which could be made as early as today
at the National Institutes of Health, is to use a complicated method which
involves removing cells from the body, introducing new genes into those cells in
the laboratory and then injecting the modified cells back into the body. The
method is plausible only for a relative few types of genetic disease.

   But in a paper in today's issue of Science, a group of University of Michigan
researchers present evidence that new genes can be inserted directly into cells
in the body, a procedure that will vastly simplify the therapy and broaden its
usefulness to many additional diseases.

   "We're talking two to three weeks with the old method versus one to two days
with ours," said Elizabeth Nabel who wrote the paper with Gregory Plautz and
Gary Nabel. All are at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the University of
Michigan.

   Gene therapy has long been envisioned as a possible cure for diseases that
result from defective genes. The hope is that by implanting replacement genes --
copies of what the normal gene should be -- the disease can be reversed.
Researchers have also proposed finding genes that peform specific
disease-fighting functions and inserting them into human cells.

   For example, scientists envision that a gene for a substance called tumor
necrosis factor, which kills cancerous tumors, could be added to the white blood
cells that normally fight tumors. This would give the blood cells an additional
weapon against cancer.

   The scientific technique involved in this procedure, however, is cumbersome.

   Researchers first remove the cells to which they want to add the gene and
grow them in a laboratory. Then they splice the gene into the genes of a type of
virus that inserts its genes into whatever cell it infects.

   The virus is then allowed to infect the removed cells, splicing the new gene
into their DNA. The altered cells are then reintroduced into the body.

   Researchers at NIH have received approval to use this procedure on 10
children suffering from an inherited malfunction of their immune systems that
leaves them susceptible to infections.

   The Michigan researchers report that they took a virus containing a new gene
and placed it directly into a pig's artery.

   They used a common medical procedure known as a balloon catheter. Two tiny
balloons were inserted into the artery with viruses carrying the new gene
trapped between them. The balloons were then moved to the spot where the new
gene was wanted. In this case, the viruses carried only a gene for an enzyme
that turned the infected area a tell-tale blue.

   The researchers also performed the same direct gene therapy using what are
called liposomes. These are small bubbles of fat enclosing new genes. In this
case, the cells absorb the lipsomes in a chemical reaction, taking up the
foreign DNA at the same time.

   The researchers said this direct gene transfer could potentially allow for
the broader application of the therapy, at least in cases where the target cells
can be reached by catheter.

   Nabel said the new method had not been tried earlier because scientists did
not know whether they could introduce new genes into cells at all. So they
worked on cultured cells in a dish. Now that the procedure is known to be
possible, she said, she and her co-researchers felt it should be possible to
transfer the new genes directly into cells while they reside in an intact
animal.

   "As the field of gene therapy evolves, we are going to get away from the
indirect method of gene transfer," she said. "I think we are going to see the
field rapidly expand in the direction of direct gene transfer."


                             1746 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 11, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z6

LENGTH: 1177 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Turn Off Growth of Cancer Cells;
Experiments in Gene Therapy Show Promise in Laboratory

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Researchers have discovered that they can turn off the growth of cancer cells
in the laboratory by inserting a gene that acts like an "off switch."

   The discovery provides important new insights into the sequence of events
that led to the creation of a cancer cell. It also raises the possibility of one
day -- not immediately -- developing new therapies aimed at the cause of this
leading killer.

   The recent results have galvanized researchers trying to understand cancer's
basic biology, as well as a number of pharmaceutical companies, including
Hoffmann-LaRoche Inc. and Bristol-Myers-Squibb Co., which have begun searching
for chemicals that can mimic the genetic "off" switch.

   A drug would be easier to use than trying to repeat the laboratory experiment
of putting the cancer-suppressing gene into the millions, even billions, of
cancer cells in a patient's body.

   Merck Sharp & Dohme recently published preliminary results with one drug that
may act like an "off" switch in cervical cancer.

   In addition, the discovery of this genetic off switch has created excitement
among doctors treating cancer patients because the most common forms of the
disease, including tumors of the breast, lung, brain, colon and bone, are
missing this switch.

   If a way can be found to use these off switches in patients, the discovery
could help thousands of people each year, said John Minna of the National Cancer
Institute.

   NCI estimates that of the more than 1 million people who will develop the
disease in 1990, about 463,000 will suffer from cancers of the breast, colon and
lung; those three diseases alone will cause nearly half of all cancer deaths.

   "These are big numbers," Minna said. Many of the previous treatment advances
-- such as drugs for lymphomas, leukemias and testicular cancer -- have been for
relatively rare cancers that afflict few Americans.

   The current work grows out of a decade- long struggle to understand how
different types of genetic damage can turn a normal cell into a cancer cell.
Scientists now know that there are perhaps 50 different normal genes in the body
that can be subverted in such a way that they cause cells to grow out of
control.

   These cancer-promoting genes -- or oncogenes -- force cells to begin growing
rapidly, just as the gas pedal on an automobile causes the car to accelerate.
Researchers have been searching for ways to block these cancer-promoting
oncogenes, but none of the possible drugs is yet being tested in people.

   Now, scientists have discovered another set of genes associated with cancer
-- called suppressor genes; when they are present and functioning normally, they
act like the brake on a car. When the genes are damaged or deleted, however, the
cell grows out of control.

   In April 1989, a group of Johns Hopkins University researchers led by Bert
Vogelstein discovered that a suppressor gene called p53 was somehow lost or
damaged in colon cancer cells. Scientists have since shown that p53 is also
deactivated in cancers of the lung, breast, brain, bone and perhaps others.

   "Various kinds of evidence suggested that the normal copy of the p53 gene
might be able to suppress cell growth," acting as a genetic off switch,
Vogelstein said.

   The Hopkins team tested that idea by putting the p53 gene into cancer cells
they had growing in the laboratory. According to their recent report in Science
magazine, this gene made the cancer cells stop growing.

   "This is the first time that the replacement of a normal gene has been shown
to stop its [cancer's] growth," Vogelstein said. "It's a provocative
experiment."

   Work on this cancer-suppressing gene has heated up in the last few months.

   A team led by W. Edward Mercer at Temple University in Philadelphia got the
same results as the Hopkins group when it put the p53 gene in glioblastoma
cells, which cause a type of brain cancer, according to a report in a recent
issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The Philadelphia team, however, inserted the p53 gene into the tumor cells in
such a way that the gene could be turned on and off. When p53 was turned on, the
cancer cells stopped growing; when p53 was turned off, the cancer cells started
growing again.

   A group at the Harvard Medical School led by Stephen Friend put the p53 gene
into osteosarcoma cells, a type of bone cancer, and again, the tumor cells
stopped growing.

   In addition, the Hopkins experiments showed that the p53 gene's braking power
worked even when the colon cancer cells The National Cancer Institute estimates
that of the more than 1 million people who will develop the disease in 1990,
about 463,000 will suffer from cancers of the breast, colon and lung; those
three diseases alone will cause nearly half of all cancer deaths.


   had suffered additional genetic damage that normally accelerates cell growth.

   "Even though these cells had several different gene defects that led to the
cancer, just putting the p53 back in seemed to stop their growth," Minna said.
This suggests that physicians may not have to repair every genetic defect in
cancer cells before their growth is stopped.

   How this finding will translate into a cancer treatment is not yet clear.
Physicians cannot now insert a gene into cancer cells in a human patient as they
can with cells in the laboratory.

   "Ultimately, we would like to have a drug that we could give people that
could replace [the damaged gene's] function," said NCI's Minna.

   Merck, Sharp & Dohme has been attempting to develop a drug based on a
suppressor gene -- called Rb -- associated with retinoblastoma, a rare,
inherited eye cancer.

   Researchers now believe that the papilloma virus causes cervical cancer when
one of the virus's proteins blocks the braking action of the Rb gene, causing
the cervical cells to grow out of control and form a cancer.

   But no drug has been identified that can act like a braking gene, and none of
the scientists expects that the emerging technologies of human gene therapy --
in which new genes are placed inside a patient's own cells -- can be used to
attack cancer cells directly.

   "Gene therapy is tricky," said Harvard's Friend. "It requires you to target
every cell. There are so many cells within a given tumor that hitting them all
is going to be difficult."

   Even as researchers search for new ways to put the brakes on cancer growth,
other reseachers have begun focusing on ways to block the genetic signals that
accelerate cells to grow out of control, said Stuart A. Aaronson, a cancer gene
researcher at the National Cancer Institute.

   His group for example, has shown that a growth hormone gets accidentally
turned on in some cancer cells, causing them to stimulate their own growth.

   If a way can be found to block the growth signals, then the disease could be
stopped. Researchers are now searching for a compound to do that.

   Still, "this is where the new knowledge that we gained over the last few
years is really taking us," said Aaronson.

   "It is giving us logical approaches to designing new methods to treat
cancer."

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, JOHNSTONE QUINAN


                             1747 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            September 9, 1990 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: Cancer researcher to leave UCSD post;
Gene therapies work to continue at Texas facility

BYLINE: Angela Lau, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Wen-Hwa Lee, a renowned cancer-research pioneer, is leaving his faculty post
at the University of California at San Diego to head a new biotechnology
institute in San Antonio for the University of Texas. "That's a tremendous
amount of responsibility, but I'm looking forward to it," said the 40-year-old
UCSD pathology professor. He has accepted an offer to direct the new Institute
of Biotechnology at the University of Texas at San Antonio, where $13 million in
endowment and start-up money and a $15 million building donated by a Dallas
businessman await Lee. Lee, who has not yet resigned his UCSD position, but who
expects to move to San Antonio next June or July, was the first to demonstrate
that a gene in the human body, the retinoblastoma gene, can suppress cancer. His
is one of three laboratories in the nation pursuing this line of research, Lee
said.

   The others are at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the University of
Southern California. Lee hopes to further his research by performing clinical
tests of gene therapies in humans.

   And the 60,000 square feet he'll have in the new building in San Antonio --
compared to 2,500 square feet here -- will provide for an expanded program. "The
offer was so good it's hard for us to say no.

   It was a very, very difficult decision," said Robert Hollingsworth, a
28-year-old post-doctoral molecular biologist who joined Lee's staff in March
and who will move to San Antonio with Lee. "We are getting to a point where it
seems we can't expand much further," Hollingsworth said.

   "We've always wanted to attract new talent, but we can't because we don't
have the space.

   We're very cramped right now. "This is a very fast-paced and competitive
field.

   There are a lot of other labs interested in doing the same kind of research,"
he said.

   "It's important we keep our work at top speed.

   Besides, we're all anxious to make our discoveries available for
application." Hollingsworth said the effort to obtain more lab space at UCSD was
not very promising.

   One possibility of expansion would come with the building of a new cancer
institute, he said, "but we'll have to wait three years. Besides, no offer of
expansion can match San Antonio's." Fifteen staffers of a 20-member team decided
to move to San Antonio with Lee after he called them together last week to
discuss the offer. Hollingsworth is one of them.

   The staffers agreed that the move to San Antonio afforded a golden
opportunity to expand Lee's research. Other departing staffers include Lee's
wife and research partner, Eva, 40, graduate students, post-doctoral researchers
and assistant professors. To minimize disruption to his research, Lee said he is
negotiating with UCSD to move the research equipment with him. Lee's move
follows UCSD's recent loss of another leading cancer researcher, Ivor Royston,
who has resigned to join private physicians to start a cancer center here. For
some of Lee's assistants, the decision to relocate to San Antonio was not an
easy one to make. "My parents live here, and we've been in San Diego since
1974," said assistant pathology professor Rob Bookstein, 33, who's been working
with Lee for more than four years.

   "But I want to stay with the lab.

   We still have some good work to do together." In San Antonio, Lee and his
team will be getting in "on ground level" of that city's push to develop
biological science research, Hollingsworth said. Carlisle Landel, 36, an
assistant professor who left the Salk Institute to join Lee's team a month ago,
also is considering going to San Antonio.

   "I want to stay with the lab.

   There is opportunity for me to set up my own group there." John P. Howe III,
president of the University of Texas Health Center at San Antonio, said of Lee,
"We're terribly excited about his coming here." He said that when Dallas
billionaire H. Ross Perot donated the building, which will be home to the
Institute of Biotechnology, the philanthropist "wanted the institute to be
headed by a world-class scientist." "We've found him," Howe said. Lee, who was
recommended for the San Antonio position by Nobel Laureate Joseph Goldstein, a
molecular biologist at the University of Texas-Southwestern in Dallas, was
selected after an 18-month international search. The establishment of the
biotechnology center is part of a statewide effort to diversify the Texas
economy in the wake of the oil bust, Howe said. Lee will be paid a salary "very
competitive" with the $105,210 he's getting from UCSD for the 1990-91 academic
year, and will join the university as a tenured professor, Howe said. However,
Lee said that salary, which was not mentioned in the letter offering the job,
was "just a minor part" of the package he's looking forward to. "I'll take
whatever they offer me.

   It's the research that's important," Lee said. Making a move like this one
only six years after he joined UCSD is difficult for him, Lee said.

   In fact, he said, he has turned down dozens of other offers from across the
country, including one from Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.

   "I wasn't ready then," he said. "UCSD has done a lot for us," Lee added. The
native of Taiwan was hired in 1984 as an assistant professor after he obtained
his doctorate in molecular biology from the University of California at
Berkeley.

   He was granted tenure in 1987 and became a full professor this year. "I'm
filled with mixed feelings.

   We are sad to leave San Diego, but we're also looking forward to building a
new institute and broadening our research on tumor suppression," Lee said.

   "We can always come back to see our friends, you know."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Wen-Hwa Lee is leaving UCSD for greener research
pastures.; PHOTOBY: The San Diego Union/Tom Kurtz

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1748 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  September 5, 1990, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Arthritis linked to gene defect

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Scientists for the first time have pinpointed a genetic defect that can
cause the most common form of arthritis.

   A family link for osteoarthritis - affecting 16 million people - was
suspected for years, but no cause had been found until now, says Dr. Leena
Ala-Kokko of Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia.

   The defective gene was identified by studying 19 family members spanning
three generations. All those with osteoarthritis had the gene defect, but none
of the healthy members did, Ala-Kokko says.

   The gene normally produces collagen II, a protein that strengthens the
protective cartilage in joints between bones. In osteoarthritis, the cartilage
deteriorates, increasing friction and inflammation in the joint and causing
severe pain.

   Osteoarthritis generally strikes at about age 55 and is the major reason for
the more than 150,000 total joint replacements done each year.

   Potential applications:

   - Children and adults in families with osteoarthritis can be tested for a
defective gene to determine who will develop the disease, says Ala-Kokko.

   - Those with the defect may delay development of osteoarthritis by avoiding
occupations and exercise that involve strenuous weight-bearing activities that
irritate joints.

   - In the future, gene therapy or a drug could be developed to restore normal
collagen II production to prevent cartilage from breaking down.

   James Mason, assistant secretary of the Department of Health and Human
Services says: ''Understanding the genetic mechanisms underlying osteoarthritis
may give us the potential to intervene early in a painful, disabling disease.''

   The research was funded by the National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal Diseases.


                             1749 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                  September 5, 1990, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A3

LENGTH: 747 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Defect Linked to Most-Common Arthritis;
As Yet Unrecognized Mutations May Underlie Other Forms of the Disease, Study
Suggests

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Susan Okie, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The most common form of arthritis, usually attributed to "wear and tear" of
aging joints, is caused by a genetic defect in some cases, researchers announced
yesterday.

   Osteoarthritis, which affects an estimated 16 million Americans, has never
before been linked to an inherited defect. The scientists said that the newly
recognized mutation may account for only a minority of cases of the disease. But
they added that the discovery suggests that other mutations, as yet
unrecognized, may underlie other cases. Most cases of osteoarthritis,
researchers say, may result from a combination of some genetic vulnerability and
environmental factors.

   "A single genetic flaw can cause at least one form of osteoarthritis, and
perhaps can cause others," said Lawrence E. Shulman, director of the National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, (NIAMS), which
paid for the research.

   The researchers said that knowing the mutation will make it possible to
insert the defective gene into mice, creating an animal model to test new
treatments for osteoarthritis. It may also make possible the development of
tests to identify people who carry the mutation and who are likely to develop
the disorder.

   Researchers said it was unlikely that so-called gene therapy could correct
genetic mutations in people with osteoarthritis. However, since carriers of the
mutation inherit two copies of the collagen gene -- one normal and one faulty --
the researchers said it may be possible to find drugs that would favor
production of the protein made by the normal gene, rather than the defective
one.

   The mutation underlying osteoarthritis creates an error in the genetic
information used by cells to manufacture so-called type II collagen, the tough
protein that provides most of the strength and resilience in the cartilage, or
gristle, that covers bones at joints. At a certain point when manufacturing the
chain-like protein, the cell adds the wrong molecular "link" to the chain,
inserting an amino acid called cysteine instead of one called arginine.

   "We know the gene, we know the protein the gene makes, and we know exactly
what is wrong with the gene," said Darwin J. Prockop, chairman of the
biochemistry department at Jefferson Medical College and a co-leader of the
research team. The finding was reported in the September issue of the journal
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, which was mailed to subscribers
yesterday.

   Osteoarthritis occurs when the cartilage lining and cushioning the joints
becomes damaged. Although it can result from joint deformities, injuries or
infection, most cases develop for unknown reasons. Obesity and stress on joints,
caused by certain occupations or sports, are risk factors. Most people with the
disorder do not develop symptoms until they are in their fifties.

   To identify the mutation, the research team tested 19 people from three
generations of an Ohio family, many of whose members developed severe
osteoarthritis beginning in their teens and twenties. Researchers established
that nine family members with the disorder carried an identical defect in one
copy of the gene for collagen II. They also carried a normal copy of the gene.

   Ten other family members who did not have arthritis each carried two normal
copies of the gene. The researchers tested 57 other healthy people outside the
Ohio family and found no one who carried the mutation.

   Prockop said nine other osteoarthritis-prone families are now being tested by
his team and by Finnish researchers. Two families appear to carry the mutation,
and seven others apparently do not. This means the genetic defect cannot be the
sole cause of osteoarthritis but does not rule out the possibility that
different mutations are producing similar effects.

   Prockop said scientists do not yet know what percentage of osteoarthritis is
caused by the known mutation, or by other possible inherited defects. "We don't
know . . . if we are going to find different defects in the same gene or in
different genes," he said.

   Roland W. Moskowitz, a professor of medicine at Case Western Reserve
University and a coauthor of the study, said about one-fourth of collagen II in
the arthritic joints of the Ohio patients was the abnormal form. He suggested
that the abnormal protein may be unusually vulnerable to damage or to chemical
breakdown, or that it may interact with other components of the joint cartilage,
making it weaker and more easily injured.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ROLAND W. MOSKOWITZ; ILLUSTRATION, TWP


                             1750 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1990 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 30, 1990, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1 p

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: First gene transfer in humans reported

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    In a major step forward for gene therapy, the Holy Grail of modern medicine
that involves inserting healthy, foreign genes into human beings to take over
for their own defective genes, scientists yesterday reported successful results
from the first human gene-transfer experiment.

   The findings, reported in today's issue of The New England Journal of
Medicine, mean that scientists have now "entered the frontier of gene therapy,"
said a Boston physician and researcher not involved in the work.

   The report, called a "landmark study" by the National Cancer Institute,
constitutes "important progress toward the development of gene therapy," said an
editorial accompanying the research in the journal.

   The data reported today show that it is possible, as hoped, to introduce a
foreign gene into human cells in the laboratory and then put those cells back
into the patients from which they came without any apparent danger to the
patient, either from the foreign gene itself or from the specially altered virus
used as a carrier molecule to insert the gene into the cells in the lab.

    In today's report, the foreign gene was used solely as a marker to determine
whether the altered cells persisted in the body - they did, for as long as two
months - and whether they reached their desired target - tumors - which they
also did.

   Because the marker gene had no therapeutic effect, the experiment was termed
a "gene transfer" study rather than true "gene therapy," in which the inserted
gene serves a therapeutic purpose, usually to supply an important protein the
patient cannot make adequately.

   Two other experiments scheduled for this fall will involve inserting genes to
correct a hereditary condition called ADA deficiency and a gene called TNF, for
tumor necrosis factor, to combat cancer. The studies were approved a month ago
by the government's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee and are expected to
receive final approval from two other bodies soon.

   The experiment reported today was the first approved clinical test of
procedures to introduce foreign genes into people. As such, it had to be
approved by numerous watchdog panels in addition to the government's advisory
committee. They included the National Cancer Institute and the National Heart,
Blood and Lung Institute, the biosafety committee of the National Institutes of
Health and the US Food and Drug Administration.

   The research was led by two of the nation's most eminent biologists - Drs.
Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute, and W.
French Anderson, chief of molecular hematology at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute.

   "This is a whole different therapeutic approach," said Rosenberg in a
telephone interview. "It shows it is possible to introduce foreign genes safely.
It's a potential new way to treat cancer. Now we need to use this technique to
help people who are sick."

   Rosenberg, Anderson and their colleagues dissected the tumors of eight
patients with advanced melanoma, a lethal skin cancer, for whom no previous
treatments had worked. Today's report focuses on five of these patients who have
been followed long enough for evaluation.
mors cells called TIL, or tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, that had probably
migrated to the tumors to fight the cancer.

   In test tubes, scientists caused the TIL to proliferate 10,000-fold by
supplying a substance called interleukin-2.

   The team then used an inactivated mouse virus, called a retrovirus, as a
carrier to take a foreign marker gene, called Neo R, into the TIL cells in the
test tube. Cells altered this way can be tracked easily when reinfused into the
body.

   After checking to be sure the cells contained no active virus, the
researchers transfused large quantities of TIL with the marker gene into
patients, and then gave them intravenous interleukin-2.

   Though two of the five patients eventually died of cancer, three showed
anticancer effects from the treatment with TIL and interleukin-2. One patient is
still in complete remission 13 months after treatment, with no sign of the
cancer that had spread to other areas of the skin, mucus and lungs. Another had
a 90 percent reduction in tumor masses, and the third a 97 percent reduction in
cancer that had spread to underarm lymph nodes but no change in a tumor in the
leg.

   Dr. Michael Atkins, head of biological therapy at New England Medical Center
and assistant professor of medicine at Tufts University School of Medicine, said
he believes these benefits are due to interleukin-2 alone, not to the reinfusion
of TIL cells.

   Though interleukin-2, an immune system booster, can be toxic, it has a 20 to
30 percent success rate against melanoma and kidney cancer, said Atkins. But the
substance, which is made through recombinant engineering, has not yet received
FDA approval because it has not been conclusively shown to be a better
anticancer agent than standard treatments.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1990


                             1751 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 30, 1990, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: INSERTING LAB-MADE GENES INTO HUMANS PROVED SAFE;
HEALTH: MODIFIED CELLS COULD DELIVER CANCER-FIGHTING MATTER TO TUMORS OR FIX
INHERITED DEFECTS, RESEARCHERS SAY.

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The first experiment in which laboratory-produced genes were introduced into
humans has proved the procedure safe, opening the way for an entirely new
approach to battling cancer and other life-threatening, even incurable,
disorders, researchers reported Wednesday.

   The findings, published in today's edition of the New England Journal of
Medicine, constitute the first step toward the use of foreign genes for actual
medical therapy in humans.

   The landmark study "represents the first time that foreign genes have been
introduced into people, and it shows that the technique is feasible and safe,"
said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute
and the lead researcher on the project.

   "We know how to do it, and we're ready to go," Rosenberg said of the prospect
of using genes to treat disease. "We can start within days."

   Wednesday's report said the initial experiments showed that the genes that
were inserted into the body could survive two months -- long enough to be useful
in treating diseases. Before the latest experiments, researchers were not
certain this could be done.

   Researchers said Wednesday that the experiments showed that gene-modified
cells could be used to deliver cancer-fighting substances to the tumors of
cancer patients, to modify a patient's genes or to correct inherited defects.

   The patients involved in the testing suffered no adverse side effects as a
result of the gene transfer, the researchers said.

   In an editorial accompanying the journal report, doctors Denis Cournoyer of
Montreal General Hospital and C. Thomas Caskey of Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston said the experiment "constitutes important progress toward the
development of human gene therapy."

   Further, they wrote, "a wide range of inherited human disorders could in
theory be corrected by the introduction of new genetic information into the
proper type of . . . cell."

   Every cell in the human body contains information that directs its function.
This information is stored in the genes, which are made up of DNA, the genetic
blueprint of life. When genes are destroyed or damaged, the cell's function is
disrupted and disease occurs.

   For a long time, scientists have hoped to develop techniques to correct
genetic disorders at their source -- the genes -- rather than treat the
resulting deficiencies, as is now the case. A recent explosion of advances in
genetic technology has brought that possibility closer.

   In May, 1989, Rosenberg, Dr. R. Michael Blaese and Dr. W. French Anderson of
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute introduced cells spliced with a
foreign gene into eight patients. The genes were used as "markers" for the cells
but not as therapy.

   The study, which reports on five of those patients, said cells containing the
new gene could be detected in the bloodstream for up to two months after the
procedure, and after nearly 200 days in one patient who had been given a second
infusion of cells.

   The patients, all suffering from advanced melanoma, a skin cancer that is
often fatal, had been given infusions of special cancer-fighting white blood
cells called tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, or TILs, into which the foreign
gene had been introduced.

   Scientists believe that TILs, which can be found in virtually all malignant
tumors, may have the potential to destroy cancerous tumors.

   The TILs were removed from the patients' tumors and bathed in interleukin-2,
a substance that stimulates cell growth.

   The researchers then used an altered, harmless mouse virus to insert the new
gene -- which was made resistant to the antibiotic neomycin -- into the TILs.

   An antibiotic-resistant gene was used to enable scientists to monitor the
TILs, because only the gene-modified cells would survive when blood and tumor
samples were later exposed to the antibiotic.

   Finally, the TILs, modified with the marker genes, were returned to the
patients.

   The scientists said they were able to detect gene-modified TILs in the
bloodstream of the five patients for 19 to 22 days after TIL infusion, and even
later in two of the patients. One patient had gene-modified TILs in the
bloodstream on day 51, and another on day 60.

   The patient whose gene-modified TILs could be found on day 51 was re-treated
with gene-modified TILs on day 94 after experiencing a tumor regrowth.
Gene-modified TILs could be detected in this patient's blood on days 121 and
189, probably TILs from the repeat infusion, they said.

   Researchers were also able to identify gene-modified TILs from tumor
biopsies, they said.

   Tumors in three of the five patients were reduced as a result of the
TIL-therapy, confirming the benefits of TIL treatment that had been reported in
earlier studies. One of the three experienced a remission that has lasted 13
months. The other two died.


                             1752 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

HEADLINE: Foreign Genes Are Inserted In Humans, a Study Reports

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   The first effort to insert foreign genes into human patients has succeeded on
every possible front, researchers say in a new report.

   The experiment had sought to test the premise that new genes can be plugged
into white blood cells and those cells transfused into people. Not only did the
technique prove safe, but it was also shown to be effective in activating the
new gene, the researchers said. In some cases, the patients' cancer went into
remission, offering hope that the new therapy may someday prove extremely
valuable in treating advanced tumors.

   In the study, the scientists inserted into blood cells a harmless bacterial
gene meant to serve as a marker, and then injected the cells into volunteers
suffering from terminal cancer.

   The researchers demonstrated that the marker gene switched on once the cells
were re-injected into patients and that the technique did not harm the patients.
In another important test, the scientists showed that the manipulated blood
cells survived for many weeks inside the patients, rather than being rejected by
the immune system as had been feared.

A Landmark Study

   In the past year, the landmark experiment, performed by Dr. Steven A.
Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., and a long list of
collaborators, has been widely discussed among scientists and in the press. But
the new report, being published today in The New England Journal of Medicine, is
the first publication of the results in a scientific journal.

   ''We've used a technology that can potentially have a very broad application
in the future, and we've shown that it can be done safely and effectively,'' Dr.
Rosenberg said. The success of the venture assures that the embryonic field of
human gene therapy, the effort to treat disease by replacing bad genes with good
ones, will continue its momentum.

   ''The whole process has been put to the test in this one paper,'' said Dr. C.
Thomas Caskey of Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, who wrote an editorial
accompanying the report. ''They've done the molecular biology, the patient
evaluation, getting Federal approval and carrying out the protocol. This was a
significant clinical undertaking and they've done it very well and
successfully.''

   Following the elaborate protocol, Dr. Rosenberg and his colleagues have
treated eight patients so far. Beyond seeking to determine that the marker gene
would switch on and therefore show that gene therapy was feasible, the
experiment offered the cancer patients hope of a cure, though not as a result of
any activity of the inserted gene.

   The volunteers suffered from advanced melanoma, a lethal skin cancer, and
were not expected to live more than 90 days.

   The researchers isolated a type of white blood cell from the patients known
as a tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte, which Dr. Rosenberg has determined can
invade tumors and help destroy them.

Infiltration of Tumors

   To transfer the foreign gene into the cells, the investigators used a type of
virus that had been crippled so it could not cause disease. Into it they had
inserted the bacterial gene using recombinant DNA techniques.

   The blood cells were infected with the virus, grown in large quantities and
then transfused into the patients.

   The researchers showed that the lymphocytes did indeed infiltrate the tumors.
In three of five patients studied in the new paper, the high doses of
tumor-fighting cells worked so well that the melanomas regressed dramatically,
the researchers reported.

   ''We have one 26-year-old woman who had multiple tumors in her lung, mouth
and under her skin,'' Dr. Rosenberg said. ''Fourteen months later, all those
tumors are still gone, and she is disease-free.'' But the other two patients
died of their advanced cancer.

   The study showed that the inserted bacterial gene was active in the
lymphocytes, though it was not meant to affect the tumors. They also proved that
the blood cells could survive for at least 200 days, far longer than they had
hoped.

Next Step in Experiment

   With the success of the experiment, scientists now hope to begin installing
genes that would not merely serve as markers but would help battle disease. Two
gene therapy proposals are nearing final approval by the Food and Drug
Administration and the director of the National Institutes of Health.

   One would treat children suffering from a severe immune deficiency disorder
by supplying them with a critical gene they lack. The investigators predict they
will begin treating young patients with the new approach by mid-autumn.

   In the second proposal, Dr. Rosenberg plans to insert into the
tumor-infiltrating cells a gene for an enzyme known as tumor necrosis factor,
which could lend the cells extra tumor-fighting muscle. He says he is ready to
go ahead with the experiments a day or two after they are approved.

   Other researchers hope to use gene therapy methods eventually to thwart
cystic fibrosis, hereditary globin disorders, metabolic diseases and a broad
array of human ailments.

   ''This paper is the first fruit of a long and involved process,'' said Dr.
LeRoy Walters of the Center for Bioethics at Georgetown University in
Washington, who has been on the review boards that must approve gene therapy
projects. ''One hopes there will be a large harvest to come.''

GRAPHIC: Photo: An experiment headed by Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg of the National
Cancer Institute indicates that inserting foreign genes into humans is both safe
and effective. (Associated Press)


                             1753 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    August 30, 1990, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A11

LENGTH: 475 words

HEADLINE: Foreign Gene Is Tested In Humans

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   In the first use of foreign genes in the cells of humans, specially groomed
cancer-fighter cells carrying a new "marker" gene were shown to have kept on
trying to kill cancer cells two months after they were injected into the
patient.

   The experiment was not gene therapy, although it is widely regarded as a
first step in that direction. The new gene was added simply as a marker to track
the fate of the patients' natural cancer-fighting cells, which had been removed,
grown in large quantities in the laboratory, and reinjected as an experimental
therapy. In true gene therapy, the new gene would confer some therapeutic power
on the cells.

   In a report in today's New England Journal of Medicine, National Institutes
of Health researchers describe what happened to the cells in the first few
patients who underwent the marker-gene procedure.

   "It is the first step in the dawn of a new era of treatment in medicine,"
said Stephen A. Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute and
head of the research group that included W. French Anderson of the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and NCI's R. Michael Blaese. "It has been a long
time in coming."

   Of the five patients reported on in the paper -- all of whom had melanoma
skin cancer that failed to respond to conventional therapy -- two had a full or
partial remission and two died from the progression of the disease. Three more
patients have since been treated, for a total of eight receiving gene-altered
cells.

   The experiment showed that "you can use this technology to introduce genes
into human cells safely," said Rosenberg, who has been mass-producing the
cancer-fighting cells for several years. "There were no dangers to the patients,
the health care personnel or the public."

   The technology uses specially engineered viruses to carry genes into human
cells. Into the viruses the NIH researchers first installed a bacterial gene to
act as the marker. When the cancer-fighting white blood cells, called
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, were removed from the patients to be grown in
the laboratory, the viruses were allowed to infect them, splicing their genes
into those of the cells.

   Rosenberg's treatment works dramatically in about 10 percent of melanoma
patients and slows the disease in about half, but fails to help the rest.

   Gene therapy is poised to take the next step. On Monday, Rosenberg asked the
Food and Drug Administration for permission to load the white blood cells with
genes intended to make them more potent cancer fighters. The NIH team already
has received permission from several scientific review committees to proceed
with what amounts to true gene therapy.

   The FDA has 30 days to make a decision. "I am hoping for approval in the next
one to two months," he said. "We are ready to go. We will start within days of
approval."


                             1754 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1517 words

HEADLINE: New Advances Offer Cystic Fibrosis Victims Heartening Prospects

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   INSPIRED by a string of recent advances in basic and clinical research,
scientists say the prospects for cystic fibrosis patients have never been more
heartening.

   In several papers published this month in the journals Science and Nature,
investigators reported significant progress in analyzing the gene that causes
the deadly respiratory disease, the most common hereditary disorder among
whites. Researchers said they also believed that they were close to
understanding how a protein produced by the gene works in the body and how a
mutant form of it can result in the severe buildup of mucus in the lungs and
subsequent infections that are hallmarks of the disease.

   The scientists say they think that the cystic fibrosis protein acts like a
powerful pump, channeling vital compounds into or out of a cell, and that the
flawed version of it pumps the wrong kinds or amounts of molecules through the
cell membrane. They say they believe this knowledge will, in the long run,
enable them to design drugs to prompt the faulty protein to pump as it should,
essentially curing the disease.

Some Trials Already Started

   Other researchers report new findings about why cystic fibrosis patients fall
prey to bacterial infections that rarely afflict normal people, and they say
they are preparing to test novel immune therapies based on the results.

   Already started are clinical trials of several new genetically engineered
drugs intended to treat the most lethal symptoms of the disease, like a buildup
of mucus and destruction of delicate lung tissue.

   ''The speed and number of these kinds of approaches are almost overwhelming
at this point,'' said Robert K. Dresing, president of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation. ''Now we're not only looking at answers for future generations, but
at treatments that will for the first time give older children with the disease
reason to be optimistic. We can keep these kids around until the big cure comes
along.''

   About 1 in 20 people is a carrier of the defective gene, and if a carrier
marries another carrier, the couple has a one chance in four of transmitting two
bad copies of the gene to a child, who then develops cystic fibrosis. The
disease, which is the leading hereditary killer of children and young adults,
afflicts about 30,000 people in the United States.

Most Die in Their Teens

   Although the severity of the disorder varies greatly, most patients suffer
from persistent, thick secretions that clog their lungs and serve as fertile
ground for bacterial infections. Traditional antibiotics can stave off some
infections for a while, but so relentless is the damage to the lungs that most
people die of respiratory failure in their teens or 20's.

   The first real breakthrough in understanding cystic fibrosis came last year,
when, after a long competition, researchers finally isolated the gene
responsible for the disease.

   Since then, investigators have been picking the gene apart in an effort to
understand the mutations that could transform a healthy, vital gene into the
cause of a fatal illness.

   Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto has organized
a consortium of about 35 laboratories around the world to gather genetic
material from thousands of cystic fibrosis patients to seek telltale patterns in
the mutations. Thus far, the researchers have found about 45 different
biochemical defects resulting from the disorder.

   Reporting in Nature, Dr. Tsui and collaborators at the Johns Hopkins School
of Medicine in Baltimore said that many of the mutations affected a particular
region of the gene. Their work dovetails with that of Dr. Christopher F. Higgins
of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund at Oxford University in Britain, who has
produced a computer model of the protein generated by the gene. His work also
appeared in a recent issue of Nature.

   Together the results suggest that the mutations twist and deform a piece of
the protein normally meant to grab activating molecules of adenosine
triphosphate, or ATP, which are packets of energy in the cell and the means by
which many proteins perform their tasks.

   Unable to clutch ATP properly, the protein cannot then pump important
compounds across the cell membrane as it should. Dr. Higgins said he has yet to
determine which compounds the protein is designed to move around, but he said he
was encouraged by the results of the protein studies.

'Hope for Therapy'

   ''With many genetic diseases, there's a complete loss of a critical
protein,'' he said. ''Here we think it's a defective protein, which gives us
hope for therapy. It's easier to repair a defective protein with a drug than to
replace the protein in large quantities, just as it's easier to repair a car
engine than it is if you haven't got an engine at all.''

   Dr. Tsui and his colleagues also are trying to detect all possible mutations
in the cystic fibrosis gene so they can devise a test to screen carriers of the
gene and warn them of the risk should they have children.

   Looking less at the basic flaw behind the disease than at the resulting
symptoms, Dr. Gerald B. Pier of Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston has
learned why cystic fibrosis patients become infected by Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
a ubiquitous bacterial strain that is harmless to healthy people.

   The question is central to the disease. ''About 90 percent of patients die
from complications associated with Pseudomonas,'' Dr. Pier said.

   He has determined that most people generate two types of antibodies to attack
the bacterium: one antibody merely sticks to its coating and has a function that
is still unclear, and another prepares the microbe to be engulfed and destroyed
by a white blood cell. By contrast, he said, cystic fibrosis patients produce
only the nondestructive antibodies.

   Studying mice afflicted with bronchial infections similar to those of cystic
fibrosis patients, Dr. Pier found he could prompt the rodents to produce
destructive antibodies by injecting them with a purified solution of a
particular piece, or antigen, of the bacterial coat. He said he saw great
therapeutic value in the new work, which he reported in a recent issue of
Science. He said he hoped to begin clinical trials of the new approach within a
year, first testing the safety of the vaccine on healthy adults.

   Early clinical trials of other therapies are already under way. Three months
ago, Genentech, the biotechnology company based in South San Francisco, Calif.,
began testing on normal adults a drug, DNase, which is designed to help
eliminate the thick mucus that gathers in patients' lungs.

Immune Response Fosters Mucus

   Researchers have found that one big cause of the mucus formation was the
patients' immune response to chronic bacterial infections. The researchers say
the body tries valiantly to fight off infections by generating white blood
cells. Although the cells fail to defeat the microbes, they gather in the lungs
and die, leaving behind spaghetti-like strands of DNA, the genetic material
inside cells.

   ''The sputum becomes so thick, it's like a gel that you have to cut with a
razor,'' said Dr. Bruce Montgomery, associate director for clinical research at
Genentech.

   Now, the only way to get rid of the mucus is to have parents spend an hour or
two a day banging at the chest of their afflicted child to loosen it.

   The new drug, DNase, which was produced through genetic engineering
techniques, works by dissolving DNA. In a test tube, the drug will turn samples
of a patient's heavy, glutinous sputum into liquid. The researchers hope the
drug, inhaled in aerosol form, will gradually soften the excess mucus so a
patient can easily cough it out of the lungs.

   Researchers say that safety trials should be completed in the next several
months, and that the drug will then be tested on cystic fibrosis patients,
perhaps being ready for general use by the mid-1990's.

   In another strategy for treating cystic fibrosis, Dr. Ronald G. Crystal,
chief of the pulmonary branch at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in
Bethesda, Md., is testing a drug that could protect the lungs from the damage of
chronic infections. He has found that the white blood cells that rush in an
attempt to battle bacteria release an enzyme called elastase, which can destroy
lung tissue. Dr. Crystal and his colleagues have developed a medication that
inhibits elastase and helps prevent destruction of lung tissue.

   They are currently testing the drug on cystic fibrosis patients, and while he
will not comment in detail until the trials are completed, perhaps sometime
within the next year, Dr. Crystal says the early results ''look promising.''

   He said he believed that combinations of new drugs like DNase and elastase
inhibitor, along with antibiotics, will prove extremely valuable for treating
cystic fibrosis ''We can allow children to survive longer until the time when we
can consider more dramatic approaches, like gene therapy to correct the primary
defect,'' he said. ''And I suspect that a type of gene therapy will be ready for
trials within a decade. Probably sooner.''

GRAPHIC: Diagrams


                             1755 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    August 28, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z11

LENGTH: 1281 words

HEADLINE: Safer Blood Factors a Boon to Hemophiliacs

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sandy Rovner, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Typically, says Linda Price, she will get a panicked phone call from a
neighbor or a teacher telling her that her 6-year-old son Gregory, a
hemophiliac, has fallen and skinned his knee.

   "I tell them, 'Just wash it off, give him a kiss and a Band-Aid and send him
back outside,' " says Price.

   "People think hemophiliacs will bleed to death if they cut themselves," Price
notes. "That's the first misconception. Hemophiliacs don't bleed faster or
harder than anyone else. They just bleed longer."

   Price, treasurer of the Washington chapter of the National Hemophilia
Foundation, has a brother who is also a hemophiliac. However, her older son
shows no signs of the disease.


   A genetic disorder in which a blood-clotting factor is missing, hemophilia
affects one male out of every 5,000. It crosses all geographic, ethnic, racial
and socioeconomic boundaries. Hemophilia has long been linked to European
royalty, many of whose members suffered from it, years before treatment to
promote blood clotting was developed, when bleeding to death was a real
possibility.

   The gene for the missing factor -- usually factor 8, sometimes factor 9, is
found on the female X chromosome. Because women have two X chromosomes, a
missing factor on one can be compensated for by the other. Males, however, have
both X and Y chromosomes.  If the factor is missing on their single X, they will
have hemophilia.

   The disorder is usually transmitted from mother to son. Daughters of
afflicted men are always carriers but have no symptoms. Hemophilia acquired its
royal connotation because Queen Victoria was a carrier and at least 10 of her
descendants were either sufferers or carriers, a fact that affected male
monarchs in Spain, Russia and England.

   In about one third of all cases, hemophilia is apparently a spontaneous
genetic mutation that occurs in families with no history of the disease. Once
hemophilia occurs this way, it subsequently can be transmitted genetically.

   In recent years, the population of hemophiliacs -- an estimated 25,000 to
30,000 Americans -- has been devastated by AIDS. Lifesaving advances in the way
the missing clotting factor was administered to hemophiliacs -- through
concentrates of factors 8 and 9 from the unscreened blood of thousands of donors
-- made widespread infection with HIV inevitable.

   Before AIDS, complications from hepatitis B, a blood-borne disease, accounted
for about half of all hemophilia deaths. With proper treatment, hemophiliacs now
have a normal life span.?  ?  ?

   Screening of the blood supply, heat treatment and pasteurization of clotting
products have virtually eliminated the threat of AIDS. However, half of the
25,000 hemophiliacs in the U.S. test pos- A genetic disorder in which a
blood-clotting factor is missing, hemophilia affects one male out of every
5,000.


   itive for HIV and about 1,400 have already died from AIDS.

   Sometimes, entire families are affected. A pediatric hematologist at a recent
conference began his presentation with a slide: a photograph of a typical
American family -- father, mother, two young children. The father was a
hemophiliac who was infected by his treatment. He transmitted the disease to his
wife, who gave birth to two children before she learned she was infected. Both
babies had HIV. "They're all dead," the lecturer told his audience. The photo
was taken in 1984.

   Factor 8 blood products are now also fairly well protected against hepatitis
contamination. But the estimated 5,000 American hemophiliacs who lack factor 9
are not so lucky. They face other complications.

   According to Craig Kessler, a hematologist and oncologist who is a medical
director of the National Hemophilia Foundation, three pure concentrates that
would provide better protection for that group have been awaiting approval by
the Food and Drug Administration for months.

   Price's son Gregory receives treatments from his father's plasma, donated
about every three weeks and stored at a hospital near the Prices' home in
Northern Virginia.

   These days, most of the danger of bleeding in the case of hemophilia is
internal -- occasionally into the brain, when it can be quickly fatal or, more
commonly, into joints, causing agonizing pain and eventual crippling. The
Russian monk Grigori Rasputin, who ministered to the hemophiliac son of Czar
Nicholas and Empress Alexandra, achieved his legendary power because of his
ability to alleviate the child's agonizing pain, possibly through hypnosis.

   Today, prompt infusion of a blood product containing the missing factor can
save a life, prevent days or weeks of pain and protect joints from the eroding
presence of blood.

   According to Kessler, the establishment of nearly 200 hemophilia treatment
centers 10 years ago has greatly improved the outlook for thousands of
hemophiliacs. In figures released last week at the World Federation of
Hemophilia conference held here, a study of 31 of the centers showed an increase
in home self-treatment, administered in a way similar to insulin, from 500 to
2,500 patients.

   In addition, these centers were linked to a decline in school absences from
an average of about 14 days to about four, a decrease in hospitalizations by 88
percent and a drop in out-of-pocket expenses from an average of $ 31,000
annually to just over $ 8,000, excluding care related to AIDS.

   Garrett Bergman, medical director for Armour Pharmaceutical Co., one of five
manufacturers of factor products, says that in developing countries and in parts
of the U.S. where treatment advances lag and clotting factors are scarce or
unaffordable, crippling caused by hemophilia can be early, permanent and severe.

   In Puerto Rico, for example, "there are children with such severely deformed
joints by the time they are 8 years old that we have to go back to texts from
the turn of the century to see that kind of thing," Bergman says. "You don't
expect that in 1990."

   Bergman cited preliminary results of a six-year international study underway
at Mt. Sinai Hospital in New York City. Four-year figures show that
"preservation of the patients' joints is very strongly correlated with the
aggressiveness of their treatment. Patients, including those in Scandinavia, who
received higher doses of clotting factor annually had significantly healthier
joints than those who received lower doses. The average cost of a year's
treatment ranges from $ 60,000 to $ 100,000.

   Scandinavian countries pay for the blood products for their hemophiliac
citizens and are more likely to treat patients as a preventive measure. In the
U.S., the safer, more concentrated products are five times more expensive than
the older ones. Insurance companies do not uniformly cover their cost and in
some cases, especially in patients with AIDS, Kessler and Bergman say that
insurers and physicians are urging use of older products, which are less potent
but have been screened for HIV.

   "It may cost a lot of money with these newer, high-purity and safer
products," Kessler says. "On the other hand, it's a lot cheaper to provide them
with these ultimately safe products than it is to have to take care of them when
they develop the viral illnesses."

   The hope of a cure for hemophilia may lie in the area of gene therapy, which
would involve implanting fetal cells either in utero or in a newborn
hemophiliac. However, the federal ban on fetal tissue research has seriously
hampered such research in the U.S., Kessler contends.

   "Society has to decide whether or not it wants to keep a productive element
of society working -- and the hemophiliac population is extremely productive,"
he says, "or whether it wants to cut corners now and pay the price later."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GREG PRICE, 6, IS ONE OF 25,000 AMERICANS WITH HEMOPHILIA. HE
PETS HIS DOG AS HIS OLDER BROTHER JEFF AND THEIR MOTHER LINDA WATCH. DAYNA SMITH


                             1756 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 24, 1990 Friday

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. C-10

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: Cheesiness saves `Darkman'

BYLINE: John Scalzi, Tribune Staff Writer

BODY:

   If summer movies were food, "Darkman" would be heavy on the cheese. And a
good thing, too.

   If this movie had tried to be serious, it would have sunk without a trace.

   Much like this summer's other action films, which, no matter how witty or
cartoony they tried to be, had a sort of desperate seriousness (directly related
to budget size) that sunk them from the word go. "Darkman," on the other hand,
is unadulterated camp, a sort of camp that doesn't happen unintentionally.

   Director Sam Raimi, whose previous contributions to the world of film were
limited to the extremely low-budget "Evil Dead" series, does what Paul Verhooven
did with the first "RoboCop," and pulls out a cinematic hat trick, combining a
well-crafted story and good actors with some truly first-rate action sequences.
The plot itself comes straight out of B-movie nirvana: brilliant young scientist
Dr. Payton Westlake (Liam Neeson) is wheeling around in his lab when he and it
are destroyed by bad guys looking for an incriminating memo discovered by
Westlake's lawyer girlfriend, Julie Hastings (Frances McDormand). Horribly
disfigured in the ensuing explosion, Westlake turns to his most recent
experiment, an artificial skin that melts in 99 minutes, to help him exact
revenge. Call it "Phantom of the Opera" on gene therapy.

   Director Raimi, perhaps sensing that this technical end of this plot, like
Westlake's artificial skin, won't hold up well in the light of day, never
bothers himself greatly with making his movie any more realistic than it needs
to be.

   Westlake's lab, with tubes and microscopes apparently loaned from Dr. Jekyll,
only barely reaches into the modern age with computers. Neither are the
characters designed to be the stuff of Oscars: Westlake is played like the
stereotypical scientist, melodramatically rubbing his chin and staring into the
middle distance with a thoughtful and compassionate gaze when his experiments go
on the fritz.

   Chief bad guy Durant (Larry Drake) is a homicidal neat freak with a penchant
for collecting fingers.

   A yuppie industrialist (Colin Friels) is so smarmy that it's amazing someone
hasn't smacked him about the head, just out of principle. These two-dimensional
characters are given a weird three-dimensionality because Raimi has a cast of
people who can actually act, something unusual for the genre.

   Liam Neeson, long one of film's most underrated actors, chews scenery like it
was going out of style.

   His transition from normal guy to Darkman (which is highlighted in a carnival
scene that is simultaneously hilarious, gruesome and sad) seems to take him by
surprise. Both McDormand and Drake, who have an Oscar nomination and two Emmys,
respectively, get to stretch their artistic envelopes: McDormand finally plays a
woman with more than a high school education, and Drake is anything but the
gentle Benny of "L.A. Law."

   His fussily malevolent Durant is this summer's best villain, and the movie's
opening sequence, which is all Drake's, is completely over-the-top. "Darkman"
works because it never tries to be more than it is: a good way to waste two
hours sitting in a dark room with your popcorn.

   It's unabashedly campy and cheesy, and one of this summer's better action
films because of it. STARS: Liam Neeson, Frances McDonald, Colin Friels, Larry
Drake. SCREENPLAY: Sam Raimi.

   MUSIC: Danny Elfman.

   PHOTOGRAPHY: Bill Pope. DIRECTOR: Sam Raimi.

   PRODUCER: Robert Tapert.

   STUDIO: Universal.

   RATED: R.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1757 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 16, 1990, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 257 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy could lead to hemophilia cure

BYLINE: Kim Painter

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

    A genetic cure for hemophilia could come within a decade, experts say.

   The bleeding disorder affecting 20,000 U.S. males ''is on everybody's short
list'' of diseases that might be cured by replacing defective genes, says Dr.
Frederick Rickles of the University of Connecticut School of Medicine in Storrs.

   Experts here for a World Federation of Hemophilia meeting say top scientists
will meet within months to solidify gene research plans.

   One reason for optimism: Much is already known about the genes that produce
inadequate blood-clotting proteins.

   But Rickles says researchers will face serious obstacles. For example, in
animal studies, the replacement genes - delivered through skin grafts - work
only temporarily.

   Meanwhile, experts are enthusiastic about treatment advances, including
synthetic clotting factors that eliminate reliance on human plasma.

   Current therapy - repeated infusions of clotting proteins during internal
bleeding episodes - exposes patients to as many as 100,000 plasma donors yearly.
As a result, half of U.S. hemophiliacs were infected with the AIDS virus in the
early 1980s. Better screening and purification methods have virtually eliminated
AIDS risks and reduced hepatitis risks, but experts are concerned about future
threats.

   The synthetic products, expected to be approved within a year, appear safe
and effective. And modifications could lead to treatments that last longer in
the body - meaning fewer infusions, says Dr. Gilbert White of the University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill.


                             1758 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1990 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             August 10, 1990 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. E07

LENGTH: 872 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CHANGING MEDICAL SCIENCE

BYLINE: JOAN BECK

BODY:

   Friday, August 10, 1990 GENE THERAPY CHANGING MEDICAL SCIENCE

   Summary: New breakthroughs can treat cancers and genetic diseases

   Lest it be lost in a sea of oil-trouble stories, there was good medical  news
last week that deserves a national hurrah.

   Historic new gene-altering treatments for cancer and genetic disease got a
``go'' signal from a key government committee that moves them a giant step
further toward saving lives in unprecedented ways. The new genetic therapies
could be a medical advance as significant -- and welcome -- as antibiotics and
vaccines.

   Gene therapy has been a long time coming, its potential payoff the result  of
years of cutting-edge research to decipher the biological blueprint of life
itself. Now it may be possible to rewrite an infinitesimally small part of
these biochemical instructions to correct hereditary mistakes and also to
strengthen the body's natural attack weapons against cancer.

   The two unprecedented uses of genetic engineering to fight human disease
were enthusiastically approved last week by the federal Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, a key group of scientists, physicians, lawyers, ethicists
and lay people. The therapies had already passed the scrutiny of 16 other
panels and must still get two more approvals before human treatment can
actually start. But the remaining clearances are routine and expected within
weeks.

   The cancer treatment will be tried first on patients terminally ill with
malignant melanoma, the deadly skin cancer. Researchers will attempt to power
up blood cells known as tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes by removing them from
the body, inserting a specially built gene for tumor necrosis factor and
reinjecting them into the patients.

   The altered blood cells should be better armed to slip inside the cancerous
tumors and destroy them without harming other tissues.

   If the treatment succeeds, the same strategy may be useful in fighting  other
cancers, researchers hope. Physicians will then have a new, powerful,  different
weapon against malignancies, and one patients may find easier to  endure than
the surgery, chemotherapy and radiation that doctors now rely on.

   The second new genetic therapy aims to correct an extremely rare hereditary
disorder that prevents the immune system from working correctly, leaving its
victims dangerously vulnerable to infections.

   Researchers plan to withdraw blood cells from patients with the inherited
disease, insert a normal human copy of the disordered gene and transfuse the
treated cells back into the patients. They expect the new genes to start
producing the enzyme needed to make the immune system function normally.
Eventually, it may be possible to inject the corrective genetic material right
into patients' bone marrow and actually cure the disorder.

   The potential for using genetic engineering and gene therapy to treat --
even cure -- genetic diseases is enormous. Several thousand disorders are  known
to be caused by errors in genes, ranging from cystic fibrosis, sickle  cell
anemia, Huntington's disease and hemophilia to conditions so rare they  affect
only a few families.

   But if genetic therapy sets off enthusiastic bursts of hope, genetic
manipulation also triggers imaginative fears straight out of brave-new-world
science fiction.

   To try to alter even the exceedingly small, devastating mistakes in the
blueprint of life could be to invite divine wrath for playing God, some people
fear. Others see dark forebodings of new and deadly genetically engineered
organisms escaping from their test tubes and raging uncontrollably through the
Earth.

   And in the genetic techniques now being used to produce better, more
efficient, more disease-resistant farm animals, some critics see the specter  of
Nazi eugenics experiments.

   Joan Rothschild of the University of Lowell in Lowell, Mass., talked about
some of these fears linked to new genetic advances in a paper for the last
annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

   ``By making it possible to identify, classify, eliminate or correct the
imperfect, science and technology redefine the perfect by what is imperfect,''
she pointed out. ``As evolutionary norms are reshaped, an ideal of the  `perfect
child' emerges'' and ``earlier patriarchal, exclusionary, racist and
ethnocentric ideals . . . resurface and are reinforced.''

   Then Rothschild said, ``As genetic science and reproductive technology
create a new health hierarchy of birth, we need to ask if the `perfect child'
will ever be female -- or black.''

   Considering recent human history, these fears -- and others far less
rational -- can't be dismissed completely.

   Even so, given the toll cancer takes in death and illness and the failure  of
current treatments to cure in so many cases, how can we possibly not learn  to
use these new therapies wisely and humanely? And given the handicaps of  illness
and disability inflicted on so many children by a mistake in their  genes, is
there any doubt that we must push ahead with the genetic revolution  -- and be
thankful the opportunity has finally come?  Knight-Ridder News  Service.

   Joan Beck is a columnist for the Chicago Tribune.

   ILLUSTRATION: Drawing By Newsday/NED LEVINE Cancer Cells

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1759 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1990 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 9, 1990, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 26 p

LENGTH: 717 words

HEADLINE: Sickle-cell gene therapy is called promising

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    In a small but intriguing study, Boston researchers have shown that a novel
treatment involving reactivation of a gene that normally functions only during
fetal development can dramatically ease the painful symptoms of sickle cell
anemia.

   The researchers, from Brigham and Women's Hospital, gave hydroxyurea, a mild
chemotherapy drug, to three patients with sickle cell anemia. After about one
year of follow-up, all three were free of the intensely painful sickle cell
crises that normally send sickle patients to hospitals many times a year.

   The new treatment, a type of gene therapy, is considered "exciting because it
represents a possible treatment which until now hasn't existed," said Charles A.
Wells, a molecular biologist at the sickle cell disease branch of the National
Institutes of Health.

   The research is published in today's issue of the New England Journal of
Medicine.

   The drug hydroxyurea suppresses formation of blood cells in the bone marrow,
including the red blood cells that carry oxygen.

   The body responds to this suppression, the researchers found, by cranking up
production of the gene for fetal hemoglobin, which is normally shut off soon
after birth when the adult fetal hemoglobin gene begins to function. Hemoglobin
is the oxygen-carrying molecule in red blood cells.

   In people with sickle cell anemia, a painful inherited condition that is
carried by nearly 10 percent of black Americans and causes terrible illness in
one of every 400 blacks, the hemoglobin molecule is structured incorrectly.

   Though this defect is devastating to its victims, it is caused by the tiniest
of heritable mistakes in the DNA or genetic material, a single error in the base
of nucleic acid.

   When the researchers gave hydroxyurea to three patients with sickle cell
anemia, all three improved markedly, Dr. H. Franklin Bunn, director of
hematology research at Brigham and Women's Hospital, said in a telephone
interview.

   "This has been fabulous," he said. "I've been taking care of sickle cell
patients for 20 years, patients like Mamie Jones, who used to spend 100 days a
year in the hospital. Their pain crises are hellish: it's severe pain that lasts
from 24 hours to 10 days. It's the most gratifying thing in my professional life
to see people like her do better."

   Jones, a 42-year-old Dorchester woman who has suffered from sickle cell
anemia throughout her life, yesterday recalled the pain "that hurt so bad you
hurt to the bone. There was no relief. It just hurt all over."

   Now, said Jones, who has been taking hydroxyurea for 14 months, "It's a
beautiful improvement. I've had no side effects, no hospitalizations. Now I am
into the church and can do a lot of things, while before I got sick so often and
stayed in the hospital so much I couldn't do things."

   Gone forever, she hopes, are the sickle cell crises, for which the only
treatment was hospitalization and narcotics, oxygen and fluids.

   The Brigham and Women's researchers, who collaborated with doctors from Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, also experimented with giving sickle cell
patients a new drug called EPO, for erythpoietin, which is known to stimulate
red blood cell production. But EPO, they found, had no effect, whether it was
given alone or in conjunction with hydroxyurea.

   Despite the promise of the new study and the fact the hydroxyurea has been
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for other uses, Bunn warned
against the use of the drug immediately by general practitioners for sickle cell
patients. A drug approved for one purpose by the FDA, in this case for
chemotherapy, can legally be prescribed by doctors for other uses.

   "This drug is very promising and we are very excited, but there's still a lot
to learn about dosage," he said. "We feel very strongly that patients shouldn't
get their hands on this unless they are part of a study."

    "This is the most advanced study" to date of the idea that scientists "have
long dreamed of," Wells said, "turning on the dormant fetal hemoglobin gene to
treat adult sickle cell patients."

   But he warned that "we won't really know" whether the new treatment is truly
effective until many more patients are given hydroxyurea in clinical trials.
Such trials, Wells said, are now in the planning stage.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1990


                             1760 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      August 6, 1990, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2052 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE / MEDICINE;
HUMAN GENE JOINS WAR ON DISEASE;
CANCER: RESEARCHERS GET GO-AHEAD FOR EXPERIMENTS DESIGNED TO STIMULATE
PRODUCTION OF ENZYMES OR HORMONES TO BATTLE DISORDER. PROCEDURE SEEN OFFERING
HOPE TO THOSE WITH INCURABLE AILMENTS.

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The idea of using human genes to treat diseases, virtually science fiction
just two decades ago, may soon become medicine's newest hope for battling cancer
and other life-threatening, even incurable disorders.

   Researchers at the National Institutes of Health are about to embark on a
series of dramatic new experiments involving the use of genes that could usher
in a new era in medicine and transform the outlook for many such critical
conditions.

   The go-ahead came last week, when Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, a leading cancer
researcher and chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute, and his NIH
colleagues received a long-awaited and crucial go-ahead to conduct two
experiments that for the first time will attempt to insert "foreign" genes into
humans in order to treat disease.

   The projects themselves are delicate -- and complex. Researchers plan to take
normal genes that have been developed in the laboratory and insert them into the
cells of patients in hopes of stimulating the production of disease-fighting
enzymes or hormones. The NCI's Rosenberg will perform his experiments on
patients suffering from melanoma, a potentially lethal skin cancer.

   An associate, Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, will perform his on children who have adenosine deaminase deficiency,
a rare inherited immune system disorder that afflicts only about 30 youngsters
worldwide at any one time.

   "We're dealing with a problem of extraordinary magnitude," Rosenberg says.
"One out of every five or six Americans will die of cancer. No family will be
spared. It's an astonishing thing, when you think about it. More Americans die
in a single year from cancer than died in World War II and Vietnam combined."

   Dr. Theodore Friedman, professor of medicine at UC San Diego and one of the
early proponents of human gene therapy, agrees that venture could prove to be a
milestone. "Throughout the history of medicine, we have treated diseases aimed
at the consequences of the defect, not at the defect itself -- such as treating
hemophilia with clotting factor, or diabetes with insulin," Friedman says. Now,
however, with the application of sophisticated genetic engineering techniques,
"we've finally come to recognize in principle that the treatment of disease at
the level of the genes makes sense," he says.

   Scientists warn that the venture still is a gamble, and may not yield the
results they seek. But Rosenberg and his colleagues are excited. If the
experiment works, he says, melanoma could be only one of numerous cancers that
potentially could benefit from human gene therapy.

   Indeed, Rosenberg has spent virtually his entire career trying to develop
therapies for the estimated 50% of cancers that cannot be cured by the usual
means -- surgery, radiation or chemotherapy. This translates into an estimated
500,000 persons annually.

   Dr. Sam Broder, director of the National Cancer Institute, says the
acceptance of the new experiments represents "a major change, a major shift in
the history of biomedical science" that could have an "important impact on
cancer, AIDS, heart disease -- in virtually every medical discipline."

   The very notion is mind-boggling. There are about 50 trillion cells that make
up the human body. Each contains information that directs its function. This
information is stored in the genes, which are made up of DNA -- the genetic
blueprint of life. When a gene is destroyed or broken, the cell's function is
disrupted or eliminated and disease occurs.

   There are two basic approaches to gene therapy: Scientists can introduce a
normal gene in an attempt to correct a defective gene or replace a missing gene.
Or the normal genes can be used to assign a cell a new function or enhance its
current function.

   The proposed treatment for the immune deficiency involves replacing a gene
that stimulates production of adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that is crucial to
the proper functioning of the immune system.

   Anderson and his colleagues plan to grow the patient's own white cells in a
laboratory, add the critical gene, then return the cells to the patient's body
with the hope that the new cells will stimulate production of the enzyme, thus
restoring the immune system.

   "This is the fascination and promise of gene therapy," Rosenberg says. "It
attempts to prevent or alter disease by altering the internal makings of the
human, rather than by applying an external force -- like a scalpel."

   Friedman and many other scientists believe that all human diseases -- even
such classic genetic disorders as Huntington's disease, cystic fibrosis and
Tay-Sachs disease -- are probably a consequence of "the interaction of genes
with the environment."

   Pioneers in the field of human gene therapy say that the action last week of
NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee in approving the projects signals the
validation of theories that began about 20 years ago with the rather
unconventional proposition that basic genetic defects could be corrected or
modified directly within human cells.

   In those days, such ideas were only supposition. Scientists were not equipped
with the tools or knowledge to isolate and reproduce genes, or insert them into
human cells. But the last two decades have produced an explosion of advances in
genetic engineering technology that has made such procedures in the laboratory
well-established.

   "Back then, we were not considered to be talking serious science," says San
Diego's Friedman. "But if we've learned anything in science, it's the speed with
which today's impossible quickly becomes tomorrow's usual."

   Several treatments for the immune disorder already exist. These include bone
marrow transplantation, which is not often successful, and a new drug called
PEG-ADA, approved by the FDA last March, which replaces the enzyme and has been
effective in many cases. Still, the incidence of the disease is rare.

   Melanoma, on the other hand, strikes an estimated 28,000 people annually, and
kills about 6,300. Moreover, it has been decidedly on the rise in recent years,
increasing at the rate of about 4% a year, according to the American Cancer
Society. If detected very early, melanoma can be cured by surgery. Advanced
melanoma, however, does not respond to any known treatment. Most patients in
this stage die within about four months.

   If the experiment works, melanoma could be only one of numerous cancers that
potentially could benefit from human gene therapy. This is why Rosenberg is so
excited about it.

   Rosenberg's approach has been to find ways that use the body's immune system
-- its own natural defenses against disease.

   "The body is normally doing battle against cancer, but the battle is favoring
the cancer," Rosenberg says. "The body's defenses are not strong enough. All of
the work I've been doing has been to develop ways to enhance the body's own
defenses."

   In recent years, Rosenberg has conducted pioneering studies that have shown
that certain types of white blood cells in the immune system can be dispatched
in the fight against cancer.

   Several years ago, in fact, Rosenberg achieved some success with several
melanoma patients using lymphokine-activated killer (LAK), a type of immune
system cell that he and his colleagues discovered, in conjunction with
interleukin-2 (IL-2), a substance that stimulates cell-replication. IL-2, a
natural substance secreted by the body in small amounts, can now be
mass-produced through genetic engineering.

   In the new melanoma study, Rosenberg and his colleagues will try to create a
kind of super-cell, which he calls a "designer lymphocyte." They will add a key
gene to so-called tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), cancer-fighting cells
found to be even more potent than LAK cells. The researchers believe TIL cells
are different from other immune system cells in that they hone in on -- and
accumulate -- only in tumors.

   The new gene will be coded to stimulate the production of a powerful hormone,
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which Rosenberg hopes will boost the ability of
these cells to attack and destroy tumors. The TILs will be taken from the
patient's tumor, modified with the new gene, and then put back into the patient.

   "TNF is a molecule that has shown dramatic anti-tumor effects in mice,"
Rosenberg says. "If you give it to mice, you can make their cancers go away."
But when TNF has been injected into humans, it has had no effect on their
cancer. Rosenberg believes this is because mice can tolerate 40 times the level
of TNF as humans can, and "it takes that 40 times more to cause an anti-tumor
effect."

   However, since TILs zero in only on the tumors, scientists hope they can
deliver TIL cells directly to the tumor and use them as "factories" to produce
the TNF right where it is needed and in doses high enough to kill the cancer,
but not the patient. "The whole rationale is to have the TILs make this extra
amount of TNF only at the tumor site, not throughout the body," Rosenberg says.

   If this works, he says, the approach will result in a significant gain over
current chemotherapy, which kills healthy cells in addition to diseased ones.

   "The major advantage of the immune approach is its exquisite sensitivity and
specificity in recognizing the difference between a cancer and a normal cell,"
Rosenberg says.

   Those receiving experimental treatment will be persons who have advanced
melanoma, whose other options have been exhausted. "It's a desperate patient
population, in desperate need of help," Rosenberg says.

   Under the procedures that Rosenberg is planning, surgeons will remove a piece
of tumor under a local anesthetic, and then send the patient home for about a
month. For the next 30 or 40 days, the NCI scientists will grow billions of TIL
in the laboratory, using IL-2 to promote replication.

   The researchers will then use a retrovirus (a virus that inserts its own
genes into the DNA of a cell), which they have rendered harmless, to carry new
genes into the cells. They will actually insert two genes -- one containing the
information for tumor necrosis factor, and a second to make the cells resistant
to neomycin, a powerful antibiotic. That antibiotic will later be used in the
culture to kill excess cells that do not contain the genes -- creating a pure
pool of gene-modified TIL.

   When the patient returns the next month, a milky white solution containing
billions of gene-modified TIL cells will be infused in his body, along with a
separate dose of IL-2. Additional infusions of IL-2 will come every eight hours
for the next three or four days, to keep the cells alive in his body. He will
return for three more infusions.

   Rosenberg believes the procedure has few risks, since the researchers will be
giving the patient back his own cells. Also, the gene produces a substance that
is normally found in the body anyway, so rejection is not a problem, Rosenberg
says.

   Rosenberg says that since TIL can be found in virtually all kinds of
malignant tumors, such an approach -- if it works -- holds the promise for
widespread application in treating other malignancies.

   Rosenberg concedes there are still numerous problems to overcome, including
developing more effective ways to grow TIL. "It's very important not to raise
unrealistic expectations," he says. Nevertheless, he finds it hard to contain
his growing enthusiasm over its potential.

   "There are problems that need to be surmounted, but I think it's eventually
going to work," he says. "Hopefully, it will work soon."

Designer Cell to Fight Cancer

   1. Tumor is removed surgically.

   2. Tumor cells are incubated with interleukin-2 (IL-2), which stimulates the
existing tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) -- critical immune system white
cells -- into replicating themselves.

   3. TILs from the tumor begin to proliferate -- while cancer cells die --
leaving only TILs.

   4. A retro-virus containing genes that have been coded to produce
tumor-necrosis factor (TNF), a powerful cancer-fighting hormone, is introduced
into TILs.

   5. Result: TILs now contain new cancer-fighting genes.

   6. Finally, "gene-modified" TILS and IL-2 are infused into the patient in
hopes that the new "designer" cells will stimulate the production of large
amounts of TNF in the tumors.

   Source: National Cancer Institute

GRAPHIC: Drawing, Designer Cell to Fight Cancer, Michael Hall / Los Angeles
Times


                             1761 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Page 9, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

HEADLINE: Technology;
Lining Up for Potential Gene Therapy Profits

BYLINE: By GLENN RIFKIN; Glenn Rifkin is features editor of Computer World, a
weekly trade publication.

BODY:

   LAST week, after years of debate about the scientific and ethical dimensions
of inserting new genes directly into humans, the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee of the National Institutes of Health approved gene therapy techniques
to treat certain types of immune disorders and a lethal form of skin cancer.

   This should come as welcome news toJU W. French Anderson, director of
molecular hematology at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute of the
National Institutes of Health. Last year, Dr. Anderson transferred the first
genetically engineered cell into a human cancer patient.

   This first experiment was designed not as a cure, but as a test to show that
such clinical trials were safe. Since then, Dr. Anderson has injected eight
terminally ill patients with genetically altered cells, and has reported that
there have been no safety problems, no toxicities and no side effects. ''I could
not be happier,'' he said.

   Approval by the Food and Drug Administration for gene therapy is still
required, but is expected to follow the advisory committee's recommendations.
This paves the way for Dr. Anderson to continue research aimed at developing
genetic treatments for disease. It also brings the company he is associated
with, GTI Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md., and others, closer to commercializing the
procedures now under study.

   If gene therapy proves to be effective, researchers like Dr. Anderson
believe, many diseases may eventually be treated without radical surgery or
lifelong drug dependency. If advances in genetic therapy produce the results
researchers hope for, the pharmaceuticals industry will be changed dramatically.

   ''After the year 2000, one of every two or three ethical drugs will turn
genes on or off,'' said Wally Steinberg, chairman of the Health Care Investment
Corporation, a Metro Park, N.J., venture capital firm hoping to commercialize
Dr. Anderson's work. ''The end game of molecular biology will be genetic
therapy.'' The potential benefits: cures for some types of cancer, AIDS, some
forms of heart disease, Alzheimer's and other diseases.

   ''What gene therapy really is, in a business sense, is simply a very
sophisticated drug delivery system,'' said Dr. Anderson. It allows a doctor to
put a genetically engineered drug, ''exactly in the cells where it is needed. It
is very probable that 15 years from now, genes will be the way that many
biologics are delivered.''

   If Dr. Anderson's hopes come true, hemopheliacs, for example, who must now
take clotting factor four times a day, could receive a long-acting, genetically
altered protein substance directly into their blood cells.

   With such breakthroughs come business opportunities, and new companies are
springing up around the country. Applied Biotechnology Inc. and the Somatix
Corporation in Cambridge, Mass., and Viagene Inc. in San Diego, Calif., are all
pursuing new approaches to genetic therapy which are related to Dr. Anderson's.
With last week's National Institutes of Health ruling, more companies are
expected to enter the field.

   Applied Biotech, for example, is developing a polio vaccine as a delivery
vehicle for therapeutics in treating AIDS. This approach, called ''vectoring,''
uses an altered virus to ''infect'' a cell with a genetic component it lacks, or
to carry in a therapeutic agent, like a special protein.

   Somatix is using specially altered viruses as vectors to introduce new genes
into skin cells. Once inside, reseachers at Somatix hope, the altered skin cells
will produce specific proteins over sustained periods of time. This approach can
then be used to deliver human growth factors, which speed wound healing,
directly to the site of an injury.

   To venture capitalists, like Mr. Steinberg, the potential market for such
products is huge. For that reason, he approachedJU Dr. Anderson in 1986 and
proposed they start GTI as a way to research and market the work begun by Dr.
Anderson at the National Institutes of Health. At first, Dr. Anderson was
reticent about joining the venture, but was persuaded when cutbacks in spending
at the National Institutes of Health threatened his efforts there.

   Dr. Anderson, who is skeptical of researchers with close ties to business,
has no formal title at GTI, owns no stock in the company and will receive no
money for the commercialization of his efforts. He will receive, however,
financial support for his research at the National Institutes of Health. ''We
are very dependent on each other,'' Dr. Anderson said of the program. ''The gene
therapy experiment could not have been done within a year of the time it was
done, without GTI.'' The payoff for investors in GTI will not be product
revenues, said Mr. Steinberg, as GTI was set up specifically to be bought up by
a big drug company. ''The ultimate payoff will be when a large pharmaceutical
company realizes it needs a position in genetic therapy,'' he said. To that end,
Jim Barrett, GTI's president, is carefullyorchestrating a public stock offering
scheduled for sometime between now and early 1992. After that, GTI's investors
are hopeful that GTI can repeat what Genentech Inc. accomplished earlier this
year when it was acquired for $2.2 billion by Hoffmann LaRoche.

   The research Dr. Anderson pioneered was done with Steven A. Rosenberg and R.
Michael Blaese, both cancer specialists at the National Institutes of Health.
Dr. Rosenberg developed ways of using tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, a type of
white blood cell that attacks cancer cells, to shrink tumors.

   In their studies, the researchers isolated tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
from a patient and then incorporated a leukemia virus from a mouse into the
cells to serve as a genetic marker. The genetically altered lymphocytes were
then grown for a month in interleukin-2, a growth stimulator, in a technique
developed by Dr. Rosenberg. This caused the lymphocytes to multiply into 70
billion new cells. Each of the new cells carried the genetic marker from the
mouse virus. Those cells were then re-injected into the cancer patient.

   ''It is like hooking a radio transmitter to a dolphin,'' said Dr. Anderson.
The marker genes tell the researchers ''which lymphcytes are actually working to
stop the cancer,'' allowing them to more accurately target their effort.

   But many financial analysts, including Linda Miller of PaineWebber Inc.,
believe it is still too early to determine the potential of the market for such
products. Cloudy regulatory issues remain, despite the National Institutes of
Health ruling, and there is the prospect of lengthy clinical trials. ''We know
so little about this that it's premature to say there will be a major market in
three to five years,'' Ms. Miller said.

GRAPHIC: Photo: W. French Anderson, pioneer; diagram: procedure for implanting
genetically altered cells.


                             1762 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 2, 1990, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 621 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy won't go public for several years

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    With federal approval Tuesday for putting new genes into the body to treat
disease, the era of gene therapy officially has begun.

   But experts caution that it will take at least 10 to 20 years before the
experimental therapy becomes a treatment option for the general public.

   ''People were hoping that gene therapy would progress a lot quicker than it
has,'' says Dr. Mario Capecche, professor of biology and human genetics,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City. ''But it is not surprising that it won't be
clinically useful for roughly another 10 years. A lot of initial attempts will
have to be made before all of the bugs have been worked out.''

   Gene therapy involves inserting a new gene into the genetic material of a
cell. The idea is that the gene will correct a disorder caused by a missing or
defective gene.

   But Dr. French Anderson, gene therapy pioneer at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, Bethesda, Md., says before gene therapy can become a major
medical treatment procedure, three conditions must be met:

   - Researchers must develop a gene that can be contained in a vial, taken off
a shelf in the doctor's office and injected into a patient.

   - The injected gene must be able to recognize the defective gene, go to it
and replace it.

   - The product that the new gene makes must be controlled, so it doesn't make
too much or too little and cause problems of its own.

   ''None of these are feasible in any way now in mammals,'' Anderson says.

   Researchers, including Capecche, have shown that they can replace missing or
defective genes in mice and cure a disease. But so far in humans, they have
proven only that they can deliver new genes into cells.

   Anderson says the first trials, which can begin this fall, will determine
whether the new genes do their intended job:

   - In one study of children with an enzyme deficiency that affects the immune
system, a gene that makes the missing enzyme will be introduced.

   - In a study of patients with melanoma, a skin cancer, a gene that aids the
body's natural cancer-fighting ability will be introduced.

   But even if the experiments work, the genes will not become incorporated into
the basic DNA of the patient - they will live only as long as the cells into
which they are placed. This means patients must continue receiving the treatment
over a lifetime, Anderson says.

   The two studies approved involve the most basic form of gene therapy: a
''shotgun'' approach in which millions of genes are introduced randomly into
cells. This is done by removing the cells from the patient's body, introducing
the genes, basically in a test tube, then reinjecting the treated cells.

   The hope is that some of the genes will land in the DNA, where they will open
up shop and go to work.

   Anderson says there are two major reasons gene therapy won't come of age for
another 10 to 20 years:

   - The materials necessary for growing new genes and delivering them into a
person's cells are still made only at the laboratory level. That's equivalent to
Henry Ford making cars by hand before creating the assembly line. And even if a
major drug company stepped in today to provide an assembly line, it would take
10 years before a product would be available.

   - The current methods of delivering new genes into cells are in their
infancy. The goal of actually replacing a defective gene with a new copy is
probably 20 years away.

   Capecche is working on creating the technology for directly inserting a new
gene into a person's genetic makeup.

   Says Anderson: ''In the short term over the next two to three years it should
be possible to help a number of patients who have genetic diseases and cancers.
But we won't be treating millions of people.''


                             1763 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 2, 1990, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: Other uses for treatment

BODY:

    Gene therapy is being developed for four basic groups of diseases:

   - Inherited diseases in which a gene that makes a vital protein or enzyme is
missing. Approval for the first gene therapy treatments granted Tuesday involve
one of these - adinosine deaminase deficiency, a severe immune system disorder.

   Others likely to be targeted next for gene therapy include hemophilia, sickle
cell anemia, and a group of enzyme deficiencies called mucopolysaccharidosis.

   - Cancers in which a gene that promotes tumor growth has been turned on, or a
gene that suppresses tumor growth has been turned off. Melanoma is the second
disease approved Tuesday for gene therapy. In the melanoma study, genes will be
introduced that enhance the body's natural cancer-fighting ability. In the
future, genes may be inserted to knock out a cancer-promoting gene or turn on a
cancer-suppressor gene.

   Other cancers potentially amenable to gene therapy include tumors of the
breast, colon and brain.

   - Viral diseases, particularly AIDS. Strategies are under way now to engineer
genes that make soluble CD-4, an anti-AIDS compound. In this way, the body's
immune system cells could be armed to directly kill the AIDS virus. In the
future, herpes viruses, influenza and viruses that cause cancer could be
targeted.

   - Cardiovascular diseases, such as familial hypercholesterolemia, which
strikes 1 in 500 people and results in very high cholesterol levels. Studies are
under way to introduce genes that will make the body handle cholesterol more
efficiently.


                             1764 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 1, 1990, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

HEADLINE: HUMAN GENE THERAPY TEST RECEIVES KEY U.S. APPROVAL

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A key federal advisory panel Tuesday approved two ground-breaking research
experiments involving the first use of human gene therapy in this country to
treat life-threatening disease, including an often-fatal type of cancer.

   "This is truly an historic occasion," said Gerard J. McGarrity, chairman of
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health,
which evaluated and approved the proposals.

   The experiments must also be endorsed by the NIH director and the Food and
Drug Administration, but their approval is considered a virtual certainty.

   "This is the first step toward developing treatments that do not now exist
for incurable diseases," said Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung
and Blood Institute, a lead researcher on the projects. "There is a whole range
of diseases that can be affected, the most immediately obvious being genetic
diseases and cancer. Right behind them are AIDS and cardiovascular diseases."

   The proposed tests represent a milestone in genetic research. In the
experiments, normal genes developed in a laboratory will be inserted into the
cells of patients whose own genes lack the coding needed to stimulate production
of disease-fighting hormones or enzymes.

   The experiments will be performed on individuals suffering from melanoma, a
potentially lethal skin cancer, and in children with adenosine deaminase
deficiency, an inherited and incurable immune system deficiency.

   The melanoma treatment will be performed on patients who are in an advanced
stage of the disease, for which there are no effective therapies, and who would
otherwise be expected to live only about four months.

   The melanoma experiment will involve inserting a gene that causes cells to
produce tumor necrosis factor, a powerful hormone that kills tumors by cutting
off their blood supply.

   The gene will be put into white blood cells called tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes, which typically attack cancer. Scientists at the National Cancer
Institute have learned how to remove the critical white cells from the patient,
grow billions of them in the laboratory and return them to the patient's body
with the new genes.

   "This, to me, represents the logical progression of everything I've done for
the last 10 years," said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, a leading cancer institute
researcher who is conducting the study. "It will be very significant if this
works. Hopefully, if it works, it will be applicable to cancers other than
melanoma."

   Melanoma strikes about 28,000 persons annually and kills about 6,300. The
incidence of the disease is increasing at a rate of about 4% a year, according
to the American Cancer Society. It is curable by surgery only if detected very
early.

   Rosenberg said that he would begin the experimental treatments "within days
of when we have FDA approval."

   The proposed treatment for the immune deficiency involves replacing a gene
that stimulates production of adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that is crucial to
the proper functioning of the immune system.

   As with the cancer treatment, researchers plan to grow the patient's own
white cells in a laboratory, add the critical gene, then return the cells to the
patient's body with the hope that the new cells will stimulate production of the
enzyme, thus restoring the immune system.

   Anderson said that the experiments probably will begin in the fall with two
to four patients. The disease is rare, afflicting only about 30 children
worldwide at any time.

   Several treatments for the immune disorder already exist. These include bone
marrow transplantation, which is not often successful, and a new drug approved
by the FDA last March, PEG-ADA, that replaces the enzyme and has been effective
in many cases.

   Jeremy Rifkin, president of the Foundation on Economic Trends, a public
interest group that examines the social and ethical implications of
biotechnology, said that he has "serious reservations" about the immune disorder
gene experiment because other treatments are available for the disease. "I can't
understand why any parents would want their kids to try this," he said.

   Rifkin, who for many years has warned of the potential for abuse in human
genetic engineering, said that he does not oppose the melanoma experiment. "If
this is all these patients have, they should try it," he said.

   The tests will be the first in the United States involving insertion of genes
in human patients for therapeutic purposes.

   In May, 1989, genetically engineered cells were injected into human patients
for the first time, but not as therapy. The genes were used as "markers" to
track the movement of cancer-fighting white blood cells in the body.


                             1765 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words

HEADLINE: GENE TREATMENTS FOR HUMAN ILLNESS MAY BE TRIED SOON

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER, Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., July 31

BODY:

   The revolution in human gene therapy, so long ballyhooed and debated, began
today in earnest as a Government panel approved experiments with two therapies
designed to treat human disease by inserting new genes into cells.

   A gene therapy to treat children suffering from an extremely rare and
devastating immune disorder was approved in a 16-to-1 vote by the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee, which counsels the director of the National Institutes
of Health on all genetic-engineering projects.

   The panel then unanimously approved another gene-insertion therapy to help
victims of a deadly form of skin cancer who have advanced malignancies and who
otherwise have no hope of survival.

   Although it may be some time before human gene therapy is routine, the action
today was seen as ''a truly historic moment'' by Dr. Gerard J. McGarrity,
president of the Coriell Institute for Medical Research in Camden, N.J., and the
chairman of the advisory committee. ''Medicine has been waiting for this kind of
therapy for thousands of years,'' Dr. McGarrity said.

   Another panel member compared today's votes to the beginning of the era of
organ transplants.

Main Hurdles Cleared

   The votes today cleared the main hurdles in the long and often grueling
approval process to which both projects have been subjected.

   Dr. William F. Raub, the acting director of the institutes of health, is
expected to accept the advisory committee's recommendations and approve the
projects. The Food and Drug Administration's approval is also needed, but many
people familiar with the projects expect the agency's blessing within a month or
two.

   ''This is the culmination of years and years of preparation,'' said Dr. W.
French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, who is one of
the researchers who submitted the proposal to treat immune-deficient children.
''Now we can find out if gene therapy is really going to work.''

   Scientists say the projects will open an entirely new volume in the annals of
medicine. Although it is too early to talk about costs and who would pay if gene
treatments became routine, the scientists believe that human gene therapy has
potential in the battle against many hereditary diseases, cancer and even AIDS.

Cautious Enthusiasm Voiced

   Dr. Raub said he would not be a mere ''rubber stamp'' for the panel of
scientists, doctors, lawyers, ethicists and other experts. But he added that
''like most people,'' he had been ''intrigued and excited'' by the idea of gene
therapy.

   ''I'll consider the panel's judgment more than any other single thing,'' Dr.
Raub said. ''Of their competence, I have the greatest faith.''

   Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute, who with Dr. Anderson
and Dr. Kenneth Culver of the cancer institute presented the proposal for
treating children, said he hoped to begin trials of the new therapy sometime
this fall.

   The second proposal was submitted principally by Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg of
the National Cancer Institute. ''I'm ready to start within days of receiving
F.D.A. approval,'' said Dr. Rosenberg. ''I'm very enthusiastic that we can
really help cancer patients with this new tool.''

'Bubble Boy' Is Recalled

   Both therapies rely on similar methods for introducing genes into cells. Dr.
Anderson and his colleagues hope to treat children suffering from adenosine
deaminase (ADA) deficiency, an immune disorder similar to the disease that kept
the famed ''bubble boy'' of Texas confined to a sterile plastic chamber for his
brief life.

   Children with the disorder lack an enzyme necessary to break down dangerous
byproducts in the body that can destroy immune cells, leaving victims prey to a
host of infections and diseases. Although fewer than 20 people are thought to be
afflicted by the enzyme defect worldwide, treating it with gene therapy is
considered worthwhile because the experiment would be relatively simple and its
victims have little to lose.

   To treat the ailment, the researchers will use splicing techniques to insert
a copy of the gene that produces the missing enzyme into blood cells that have
been isolated from a patient. They will next reintroduce the treated cells into
the child through a simple blood transfusion. They hope the gene will ''flick
on'' inside the body and pump out the enzyme needed to rescue the child's immune
system.

   The scientists believe that the new therapy offers significant advantages
over current therapies, like enzyme-replacement treatment, for the disorder
because it should have a more lasting effect. They have identified five possible
candidates for gene therapy, including an East Coast boy of about 18 months. He
has not responded well to enzyme therapy and must take five medications and
receive infusions of antibody proteins simply to stave off common germs.

   ''He still suffers from chronic lung disease,'' said Dr. Culver. ''He is not
doing well at all.'' Dr. Blaese said that he believed that over the long term,
gene therapy could grant the boy and others like him a healthy and fully
functioning immune system.

Families Are Interested

   Dr. Culver said all families he had spoken with had expressed deep interest
in participating in the gene-therapy trials. He said one or two children would
be selected for the first stage of the project.

   The patients will continue receiving enzyme replacement in addition to the
novel treatment. The researchers predict that at first the children will need
monthly infusions of cells, and they hope to see improvements within a year. In
the future, doctors say, a permanent cure might even become possible by
inserting the gene into bone marrow cells that produce all the blood cells in
the body.

   In the second project approved today, Dr. Rosenberg plans to treat patients
with advanced melanoma, a lethal skin cancer, by isolating a type of blood cell
known as a tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte, which has been shown to zero in on
tumors and attack them. The infiltrating cells often fail to destroy tumors, but
Dr. Rosenberg hopes to lend the lymphocytes extra potency by inserting a gene
for tumor necrosis factor, a natural substance in the body that also fights
tumor cells.

   Dr. Rosenberg has fashioned a special construct of the gene that can generate
up to 100 times the amount of tumor necrosis factor normally found in the body.
Blood cells with the high-powered gene will be injected into the patient, with
the hope that they will invade tumors and release enough of the necrosis factor
to destroy them without harming any of the surrounding tissue.

   He said that he would start with melanoma patients, but that the technique
had the potential for treating breast, colon and other common cancers.

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Government panel yesterday approved experiments with two
therapies designed to treat human disease by inserting new genes into cells. Dr.
Kenneth Culver of the National Cancer Institute, left, who proposed one of the
therapies, talked with laboratory researchers in Bethesda, Md., after the
decision was announced. (Marty Katz for The New York Times) (pg. A12)


                             1766 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1322 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International    A2-8



   A hostage was released in Trinidad. Muslim gunmen freed the wounded Prime
Minister, but the rebels continued to hold other members of the Government who
were taken hostage last Friday.    Page A1



   Jamaica and Barbados offer troops to Trinidad    A6



   Two U.S. diplomats in El Salvador have been asked to testify in the
investigation of the killings of six Jesuit priests last November, prompting a
debate between American officials in San Salvador and in Washington.    A7



   Amazon unionists say phone death threats are collect    A6



   East Berlin's Defense Minister has asked the Bonn Government to pay at least
$626 million to meet East Germany's contractual obligations to Moscow, including
the costs of canceling orders for new weapons. West German officials are
outraged.    A8



East Germans tell how Bonn paid for prisoners    A8



   Vietnamese workers in Bulgaria, once a symbol of the Communist world's
solidarity and confidence, now illustrate the consequences of the Soviet bloc's
economic collapse.    A8



   Rebel forces in the Liberian capital of Monrovia seized a key section of the
city that includes the American Embassy, the State Department said. But later
press reports said Government forces recaptured part of the area in a fierce
counterattack.    A2



   Pretoria announces an end to unit accused in slayings    A2



   Communists win Mongolia ballot    A3



   The I.R.A. said that it killed Ian Gow, a Conservative member of Parliament,
because he was a close friend of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and helped to
develop Britain's policy in Northern Ireland.    A3



   Prisoners in France protest freeing of pro-Iran terrorist    A3



   Chung Hyun Ri Journal: A Korean spat over a wall    A4



   National    A10-12, B6-7



   Ever-weakening real estate markets and a near-record number of bank failures
will likely produce the third consecutive loss for the fund that insures
deposits at commercial banks, the chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation said.    A1



   A former aide to George Bush who used his Administration contacts to help the
buyers of insolvent savings and loan associations was able to review and suggest
modifications to internal government documents affecting his clients, documents
show.    A1



   Bill stiffens penalties for S.& L. crime    D1



   The Social Security Administration, facing a shortage of money at the end of
the fiscal year, has suspended hearings for people seeking disability benefits
in September.    A1



   Moynihan revises plan for tax cut    B6



   A revolution in human gene therapy, so long ballyhooed and debated, began in
earnest as a government panel approved experiments with two therapies designed
to treat human disease by inserting new genes into cells.    A1



   Panel urges sale of drug to fight a form of hepatitis    B7



   Major pollution-control measures for the Los Angeles area were proposed by
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. Some of the measures would be used
if new state and local efforts failed to bring pollution levels within legal
limits.    A10



   Secrecy tied to Hanford tanks' trouble    A12



   The oil spill by the Exxon Valdez off the Alaskan coast last year was caused
by drinking by the ship's captain, a fatigued and overworked crew and inadequate
traffic control by the Coast Guard, the National Transportation Safety Board
ruled.    A10



   Alcoholism cited in pilot's defense    A11



   Central figure is convicted in '85 killing of drug agent

        A10



   Grizzled Castro fighter still man with a mission    A10



   Abortion rights organizations are building major direct mail campaigns around
the nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the Supreme Court.    A12



   New test for Senate on outside fees    A12



   House panel votes to cut off bomber    B6



   Minority role yields far bigger effect on radio than TV    B6



   Regional    B1-4



   The New Jersey Attorney General said that a grand jury had not indicted a
Teaneck officer in the shooting of a black teen-ager in April, but that errors
had ''contaminated'' the case. He said the matter would go to a second grand
jury.    A1



   A defense lawyer in the jogger trial called his client to the witness stand,
rejecting furious pleas from lawyers representing the other defendants that he
not do so.    B1



   The string of shootings in New York over the last two weeks has made an
impact on the lives of many young residents of the city, according to interviews
with children from 6 to 12 years old.    A1



   Cuomo vetoes bill to keep children out of foster care    B2



   Three arrested in killing of infant in Bronx    B3



   An advertising executive was killed Monday night while talking on a public
telephone near his Greenwich Village apartment building, the police said. The
executive, John Reisenbach, was shot three times.    B1



   News analysis: A crime wave seems to be hitting New York City. The killing of
four children in nine days, by gunfire intended for others, has pierced New
Yorkers' instinctive imperviousness to the violence that increasingly surrounds
them.    B1



   Senate panel says U.S. headed for homicide record    B3



   The new dealers' guns: more bullets, going faster    B3



   Seven are indicted in ''narcotics terrorism''    B2



   The Talk of Greenwich, Conn.: A resident's beautification efforts have turned
ugly. The man, who has spent thousands to plant tulips and build a fence, was
arrested for spray-painting a For Sale sign.    B1



   Echoes of wars fade as beach is called safe    B2



   Court orders Blue Cross to pay for transplant in an AIDS case    B2



   Business Digest    D1



   Sports



   George Steinbrenner's son Hank wasofficially designated by his father as the
new general partner of the New York Yankees. The announcement came one day after
Commissioner Fay Vincent banned Mr. Steinbrenner from running the team.    A1



   Baseball: Vincent planned 2-year suspension    A13



   Ryan wins 300th    A13



   Column: Vecsey on Steinbrenner    A13



   Golf: Shoal Creek to admit blacks    A13



   Olympics: Steinbrenner's future on committee uncertain    A17



   The Living Section



   Food

Farming fish and their genes

        C1



   Wine Talk    C1



   Living

Lawyers by day, rockers by night    C1



   Education Page    B8



   Catholic schools turn to ads to fill classrooms

In school of other tongues, English to get a say, briefly

A plan aimed at improving schools

Obituaries    D21



   Albert Rose, scientist who developed television picture tube

Donald L. Ranard, official with the Foreign Service

Arts/Entertainment



   When the artist is the art form    C11



   The Prado gets organized    C11



   Music: New Rorem songs    C11



   Music: The Pop Life    C12



   Endowment policy called ''unwise''    C13



   Word and Image: Bearing witness on the bomb    C16



   ''The Man Who Beat the Blacklist: John Henry Faulk''    C16



   Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



   Editorials    A20



   Sound of two houses clapping

Slide of the Yankees

A choice on White House crime

Letters    A20



   Russell Baker: Melba this peach isn't    A21



   Roy L. Brooks: What about Souter's human resume?    A21



   Howard G. Goldberg: Casey Steinbrenner    A21



   Cynthia Janovy: Roseanne Barr's high art    21



                             1767 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                    August 1, 1990, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1056 words

HEADLINE: Testing of 2 gene therapies approved

SOURCE: Compiled from Wire Reports; New York Times; Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:


   The revolution in human gene therapy, so long ballyhooed and debated, began
Tuesday in earnest as a government panel approved experiments with two therapies
designed to treat human disease by inserting new genes into cells.

    The tests will be the first in the United States involving insertion of
genes in human patients for therapeutic purposes.

    A gene therapy to treat children suffering from an extremely rare and
devastating immune disorder was approved in a 16-to-1 vote by the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee, which counsels the director of the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) on all genetic-engineering projects.

    The panel then unanimously approved another gene-insertion therapy to help
cancer patients
 with advanced malignancies who otherwise have no hope of survival.

    The votes on Tuesday cleared the main hurdles in the long and often grueling
approval process to which both projects have been subjected.  x x    The acting
director of the NIH is expected to accept the advisory committee's
recommendations and approve the projects. The Food and Drug Administration's
approval is also needed, but many people familiar with the projects expect the
agency's blessing within a month or two.

    "This is the culmination of years and years of preparation," said Dr. W.
French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, one of the
researchers who submitted the proposal to treat immune-deficient children. "Now
we can find out if gene therapy is really going to work."

    "This is the first step toward developing treatments that do not now exist
for incurable diseases," Anderson said. "There is a whole range of diseases that
can be affected, the most immediately obvious being genetic diseases and cancer.
Right behind them are AIDS and cardiovascular diseases."

    One panel member compared Tuesday's vote to the beginning of the era of
organ transplants.

    "This is a truly historic moment," said Dr. Gerard J. McGarrity, president
of the Coriell Institute for Medical Research in Camden, N.J., and the chairman
of the advisory committee. "Medicine has been waiting for this kind of therapy
for thousands of years."

    The proposed tests represent a milestone in genetic research. In the
experiments, normal genes developed in a laboratory will be inserted into the
cells of patients whose own genes lack the coding needed to stimulate production
of disease-fighting hormones or enzymes.

    The experiments will be performed on individuals suffering from melanoma, a
potentially lethal skin cancer, and in children with adenosine deaminase
deficiency, an inherited and incurable immune disorder similar to the disease
that kept the famed "bubble boy" of Texas confined to a sterile plastic chamber
for his brief life.

    The melanoma treatment will be performed on patients who are in an advanced
stage of the disease for which there are no effective therapies and who would
otherwise be expected to live only about four months.

    The melanoma experiment will involve inserting a gene that causes cells to
produce tumor necrosis factor, a powerful hormone that kills tumors by cutting
off their blood supply.

    The gene will be put into white blood cells, called tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes, that typically attack cancer. Scientists at the National Cancer
Institute have learned how to remove the critical white cells from the patient,
grow billions of them in the laboratory and return them to the patient's body
with the newly inserted genes.

    "This, to me, represents the logical progression of everything I've done for
the last 10 years," said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, a leading NIH researcher who
is conducting the study. "It will be very significant if this works. Hopefully,
if it works, it will be applicable to cancers other than melanoma."

    Melanoma strikes about 28,000 people annually and kills about 6,300. The
incidence of the disease is increasing at a rate of about 4 percent a year,
according to the American Cancer Society. It is curable by surgery only if
detected very early.

    Rosenberg said he would begin the experimental treatments "within days of
when we have FDA approval."

    The proposed treatment for the immune deficiency involves replacing a gene
that stimulates production of adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that is crucial to
the proper functioning of the immune system.

    As with the cancer treatment, researchers plan to grow the patient's own
white cells in a laboratory, add the critical gene, then return the cells to the
patient's body with the hope that the new cells will stimulate production of the
enzyme, thus restoring the immune system.

    Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute, who with Anderson
and Dr. Kenneth Culver of the cancer institute presented the proposal for
treating children, said he hoped to begin trials of the new therapy sometime
this fall.

    They have identified five possible candidates for gene therapy, including an
Atlantic Coast boy of about 18 months. He has not responded well to enzyme
therapy and must take five medications and receive infusions of antibody
proteins simply to stave off germs.

    "He still suffers from chronic lung disease," said Culver. "He is not doing
well at all." Blaese said that he believed that over the long term, gene therapy
could grant the boy and others like him a fully functioning immune system.

    Culver said all families he had spoken with had expressed deep interest in
participating in the gene-therapy trials. He said one or two children would be
selected for the first stage of the project.

    Anderson said the experiments would likely begin with two to four patients.
The disease is extremely rare, only afflicting about 30 children worldwide at
any time.

    Several treatments for the immune disorder already exist, but scientists
believe that the new therapy offers significant advantages because it should
have a more lasting effect.
 Information from the New York Times and Los Angeles Times was used in this
report.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1992


                             1768 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 1, 1990, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy on humans clears crucial step

BYLINE: Dan Sperling

BODY:

    A government panel Tuesday approved the first attempt to use gene therapy to
treat humans - a move that could set off a medical ''revolution.''

   Scientists got the green light to try gene therapy on two diseases: melanoma
and an immune-system impairment.

   ''This is the first step for what will almost certainly be a revolution in
medical treatment,'' says Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, a co-developer of the technique.

   Approval by the National Institutes of Health panel was considered the
crucial hurdle. The Food and Drug Administration is expected to give final
approval. Studies can then begin this fall, says Anderson:

   - A gene crucial to the immune system will be injected into the white blood
cells of three or four children born without the gene and unable to fight off
germs.

   - Up to 50 patients with melanoma, a form of skin cancer for which there has
been no effective treatment, will be injected with a gene that helps in fighting
off cancer.

   Treating each patient likely will cost about $ 100,000 a year, Anderson says.
Researchers should know how well the treatment works after the first few months,
he says.

   ''Over the next five to 10 years, it is likely that a broad range of serious
diseases ... will be treated by gene therapy,'' says Anderson. These include not
only genetic diseases such as diabetes and cystic fibrosis, but also cancer,
AIDS and heart disease, he says.

   Critics have voiced concern that gene therapy could be used to manipulate
normal human development. But the vote Tuesday met almost no objections from
people attending the open meeting.


                             1769 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 31, 1990, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TRIALS OKD BY HEALTH PANEL

BYLINE: By United Press International

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   The first government-authorized attempts at human gene therapy cleared a
crucial hurdle Monday, and researchers said it meant that sick children and
cancer patients may be able to benefit from them by year's end.

   The National Institutes of Health's Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee granted,
12 to 1, permission for NIH researchers W. French Anderson and Michael Blaese to
use gene therapy to treat children stricken by the rare immune system disorder
that afflicted the famed Texas "bubble boy."

   The committee also unanimously approved a plan of Dr. Steven Rosenberg of the
National Cancer Institute to insert a gene that codes for tumor necrosis factor
-- a substance that has dramatically shrunk tumors in mice -- into
tumor-fighting immune cells removed from cancer patients, multiplied in the test
tube and then returned to the patients' bodies.

   Jeremy Rifkin, president of the nonprofit Foundation on Economic Trends in
Washington, criticized the NIH approval as premature.

   "We have a technology that is speeding into application without any of the
appropriate ethical and social issues being raised," said Rifkin, who has long
called for tight regulation of genetic research practices to guard against
abuses.

   Rosenberg said he could begin treating about five patients who have melanoma,
a deadly type of skin cancer, within a month of receiving final approval from
the Food and Drug Administration.

   Rosenberg's work, unlike Anderson's, is designed to find out if the treatment
would be safe, not if it would be effective.

   Although both researchers hope to use gene therapy to treat relatively rare
diseases, their work could lead to development of new treatments for a wide
variety of illnesses.

   Each human body has about 100,000 genes, which control everything from eye
color to tendencies to develop certain diseases. Gene therapy involves inserting
genes with correct information into cells that contain defective genes, or
inserting new genes to introduce coding for disease-fighting substances.

   "This committee, historically, has been our largest obstacle," Anderson said.
He added that he would not celebrate a victory until the full Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee of 25 votes on the plan today.

   The gene therapy plan also needs the approval of the director of the National
Institutes of Health and the FDA, but Anderson said that the NIH advisory panel
was the largest hurdle.

   If no further roadblocks are encountered, Anderson said, he expects to start
transferring genes into human patients by late fall.

   The NIH team wants to correct a rare childhood immune system deficiency,
caused by a defective gene that lacks coding for the enzyme adenosine deaminase,
by inserting correct copies of the gene into patients' blood cells.


                             1770 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                       July 31, 1990, Tuesday, P.M. Final

SECTION: Part P; Page 2; Column 1; Late Final Desk

LENGTH: 116 words

HEADLINE: NATION;
U.S. PANEL OKS 1ST GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By FROM TIMES WIRE SERVICES

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A federal committee today approved history's first use of gene therapy to
treat fatal diseases.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health
approved two procedures in which foreign genes will be inserted into the cells
of patients who have one of two fatal diseases.

   The therapies are for treatment of patients with a malignant skin cancer and
for children with an inherited immune system deficiency.

   "This is a historic decision," said Gerard J. McGarrity, the chairman of the
committee. "What we have done today is add gene therapy to vaccines, antibiotics
and radiation in the medical arsenal. Medicine has been waiting thousands of
years for this."


                             1771 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 6; Science Desk

LENGTH: 285 words

HEADLINE: A Gene Therapy Nears Approval

BODY:

   THE first attempt to treat seriously ill children by inserting new genes in
their blood cells neared final approval yesterday, as an important Federal
subcommittee voted 12 to 1 in favor of the proposal.

   Under the proposal, scientists hope to treat children suffering from a rare
inherited disease known as adenosine deaminase deficiency, a defect of the
immune system similar to the illness that afflicted the young Texan who became
known as the ''bubble boy'' because of the device used to protect him from
disease. Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute and their colleagues plan
to exploit recombinant DNA technology to implant a gene that the children lack
in their blood cells. The gene produces an enzyme necessary to prevent the
destruction of the young patients' immune systems.

   The Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee had granted provisional approval to the
gene implant project in June, with the stipulation that the researchers meet
eight criteria determined by the panel. Yesterday the researchers presented
their revised proposal to the subcommittee, meeting all the stipulations, and
were given the go-ahead as expected.

   Today the project is to be considered by the full Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, a panel of two dozen scientists, lawyers, ethicists and other experts
and citizens. The committee regulates all genetic engineering experiments
financed by the Government, and if it grants approval, the project needs only
the affirmation of the heads of the National Institutes of Health and the Food
and Drug Agency before proceeding. Both are expected to follow the lead of the
full committee.


                             1772 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 31, 1990 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1:4; A-3:5

LENGTH: 504 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy on patients gets crucial OK

BYLINE: From Tribune News Services

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- A federal committee today approved history's first use of gene
therapy to treat fatal diseases. The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the
National Institutes of Health approved two procedures in which foreign genes
will be inserted into the cells of patients who have one of two fatal diseases.
The therapies are to treat patients with a malignant skin cancer and children
with an inherited immune-system deficiency. "This is a historic decision," said
Gerard J. McGarrity, the chairman of the committee.

   "What we have done today is add gene therapy to vaccines, antibiotics and
radiation in the medical arsenal. "Medicine has been waiting thousands of years
for this," said McGarrity. The cancer therapy will involve putting a gene that
causes cells to produce a protein called tumor necrosis factor into special
white blood cells. These cells then will be injected into the patient, and the
tumor necrosis factor will attack the skin-cancer tumors. The immune-disease
treatment calls for placing a gene into white blood cells of patients who are
born without this gene.

   The gene in a normal person produces an essential enzyme for the development
of the immune system.

   Children born without this gene have virtually no immune system or defense
against disease. The most famous patient with this immunity disorder was a boy
in Houston, known only as David, who spent his whole life in a plastic bubble.
McGarrity said that the 17-member committee voted unanimously for the cancer
therapy and had only one dissenting vote for the immunity-disorder therapy. Gene
therapy has been controversial and a number of groups have resisted its
implementation.

   But the vote today met almost no objections from people attending the open
meeting. Some groups fear that gene therapy could be used to manipulate normal
human development and create genetic abnormalities. Dr. French Anderson,
director of the immune-deficiency treatment program, said that abuses of this
technique are guarded against by a complicated approval path.

   He said it has taken more than three years and presentations to more than a
dozen committees and hearings for the therapy to be approved. Despite
difficulties, Anderson said the therapy "is so powerful that it could be abused,
and there needs to be firm safeguards in place." In the cancer treatment, Dr.
Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute said he could begin treating
about five patients with melanoma, a deadly type of skin cancer, "within a
month" of receiving final approval from the Food and Drug Administration. Unlike
Anderson's work, Rosenberg's is designed to look only at the safety of the
treatment, not its effectiveness.

   But the researcher, who eventually hopes to expand his study to 50 melanoma
patients, said: "I wouldn't be doing this if I didn't think it would work."
Although both researchers hope to use gene therapy initially to treat relatively
rare diseases, the work could open the door to developing a new breed of
treatments for a wide variety of illnesses.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1773 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     July 31, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A3

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy in Humans Approved;
First Recipients Likely to Be Those With Lethal Skin Cancer

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Plans to carry out the first attempt at human gene therapy -- the
long-awaited attempt to cure diseases by inserting foreign genes into a
patient's cells -- received a green light yesterday from a key federal review
panel.

   The first patients to undergo the ground-breaking procedure, probably this
fall, will be people with a lethal form of skin cancer and children with an
inherited illness that robs them of an immune system.

   The approval was granted by a special panel of experts convened by the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health.
Although the full committee is to meet today to consider the plans, its approval
is considered a virtual certainty.

   In one set of experiments, a gene for a powerful hormone will be put in the
white blood cells of people dying from advanced malignant melanoma, a skin
cancer for which there is no effective treatment.

   The white blood cells, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, or TIL,
normally attack the cancer, but not well enough to destroy the tumor. The gene
to be inserted into the cells will command them to secrete a substance, called
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), that kills tumors by preventing them from
developing a blood supply.

   Physicians at the National Cancer Institute have learned to remove the TIL
cells, grow billions of them in the laboratory and return the cells to the body
to attack the cancer.

   About half the patients improve after treatment with massive amounts of TIL
cells; some completely recover. But the rest get worse and die.

   "There is a need to improve this form of therapy," said NCI's Steven A.
Rosenberg. "One way to improve it is to alter the TIL to improve their killing
capacity."

   The technique was developed in mice by Rosenberg, along with W. French
Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, and NCI's R. Michael
Blaese.

   "There is no more effective agent for tumor dissolution in mice than TNF,"
Rosenberg said. People, however, cannot tolerate injections of large quantites
of TNF, so another way is needed to get high concentrations of the hormone to
the cancer cell.

   Genetically altering white blood cells to produce TNF inside the tumors
should solve that problem and produce dramatic results, Rosenberg predicted.

   Blaese and Anderson also received approval to treat 10 children suffering
from an inherited malfunction of their immune systems that leaves them
susceptible to every passing germ. The best known case involved a boy known only
as David who spent his life in a sterile plastic bubble in Houston to protect
him from infections.

   The disease is caused by the victim's cells being unable to make a key
enzyme. Children with the disease now receive regular injections of the missing
enzyme, but it does not always rebuild their immune system. In the gene therapy
experiments, these children will have some of their white blood cells removed
each month and given the gene to make the missing enzyme inside the blood cells,
Blaese said.

   Although the gene-repaired cells will produce the enzyme, treatment is not
yet considered a cure since most of the white blood cells will die after a few
weeks, Blaese said. Enough of them may persist long enough, however, to restore
a normally functioning immune system.

   Gene therapy is the result of more than a decade of work to develop
techniques to splice specific bits of genetic material -- individual genes that
command cells to make specific substances -- into human cells. The treatment
turns cells into factories that can manufacture certain needed proteins anywhere
in the body. Genes provide the blueprints cells need to guide their
protein-making apparatus. The proteins function as enzymes that control chemical
reactions, or as powerful hormones that signal cells to carry out some action,
or, in still other cases, the proteins act like the girders of a building.

   Anderson said patients probably will not begin receiving the gene-altered
cells until sometime in the fall, though Rosenberg said he is ready to start
tomorrow.


                             1774 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     July 29, 1990, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 8; Column 1; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: MICE, MEN JOIN FORCES IN CANCER FIGHT

BYLINE: By ELAINE KURTENBACH, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: TOKYO

BODY:

   Scientists are melding the cells of mice and men in their search for ways to
combat cancer.

   Newly developed cells that are basically human but have a genetic factor
extracted from mice can deactivate the mechanisms in cancer cells that make them
resistant to chemotherapy, Takashi Tsuruo, professor of applied microbiology at
the University of Tokyo, reported at a conference in Tokyo.

   Cancer cells, like viruses, tend to develop a resistance to drugs used to
kill them. Resistant cancer cells also become immune to alternative drugs,
making effective treatment more difficult.

   Research presented at a conference in May organized by the Japan Foundation
for Cancer Research focused on progress in overcoming this resistance. Eighteen
leading cancer researchers from Japan, the United States, Canada, the
Netherlands and Italy attended.

   Genetic therapy and other biochemical techniques can be used to disarm cancer
cells' defenses while strengthening a patient's immune system, said Tsuruo, who
also is chief researcher at the Cancer Chemotherapy Center at the Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research.

   One new genetic technique involves injecting drug-resistant human cancer
cells into a mouse.

   In a reaction like that for a vaccination, the mouse then develops antibodies
to fight the illness. Antibodies are proteins formed by the body's immune system
to counteract foreign substances such as bacteria.

   From new mouse antibodies, Tsuruo isolated and produced monoclonal antibodies
-- genetically identical molecules that can be targeted at cancer cells and used
to destroy them.

   The antibodies, he said, bind to the outside of cancer cells and prevent them
from ejecting chemotherapy drugs before the cancer is destroyed.

   Conference participants gave a standing ovation to Tsuruo for sharing the
monoclonal antibodies he developed with researchers in Europe and the United
States, said Dr. Gregory Curt, clinical director of the U.S. National Cancer
Institute's cancer-treatment division.

   Also at the conference, Dr. Michael Gottesman, chief of the cell biology
laboratory at the U.S. National Cancer Institute, reported that cancer cells'
main line of defense against chemotherapy, called pump proteins because they
expel the drugs from the cancer cells, can be used to make other human cells
stronger.

   Gottesman isolated and transferred pump proteins from cancer cells into bone
marrow cells of mice, thus arming the mice's white blood cells with the
protective pump protein. Those white blood cells, which are normally destroyed
by powerful chemotherapy, remained unharmed, he said.

   "This is designer genes at their best," Curt said. "Gottesman's research
makes it possible to do this with men as well as with mice, making people immune
to the effects of cancer drugs."

   "Gene therapy is the key to the next step in medical treatment worldwide," he
said.

   Dr. Karen Antman of Harvard University and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
presented results of clinical studies indicating that very high doses of
chemotherapy coupled with bone-marrow transplants can increase chances for
survival in breast cancer patients whose cancer has spread to other parts of the
body.

   The transplants, using a reserve of the patients' own marrow, are used to
replace bone marrow destroyed by the massive chemotherapy doses, she said. Since
bone marrow is the source of white blood cells, a key factor in the body's
immune system, quick replacement of the destroyed cells is necessary to prevent
infection.

   A study from 13 cancer centers in the United States involving 258 women with
metastic breast cancer showed that 58% responded successfully to the treatment,
with 32% showing no signs of cancer for almost four years, Antman said.

   Chemotherapy in such cases usually yields only a 10% to 30% successful
response rate, she said.

   Bone marrow transplants are often used to treat cancers of the blood, such as
leukemia or myeloma, but have never been used in treatments for tumors like
breast cancer, said Dr. Shigeru Tsukagoshi, associate director of the Cancer
Chemotherapy Center in Tokyo.


                             1775 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                July 27, 1990, Friday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: SALK, UCSD AMONG TOP 10 PRODUCERS OF 'HOT' RESEARCH

BYLINE: By LINDA ROACH MONROE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Two San Diego research institutions are among the top 10 research facilities
worldwide, based on the number of "hot" biomedical research papers published by
their faculties in the last year, a newspaper for science professionals has
found.

   In the No. 2 spot, the Salk Institute in La Jolla ranked ahead of all
universities and private research institutes worldwide. UC San Diego was 10th on
the list.

   Published in the July 23 edition of The Scientist, the list was compiled by
looking at how many times scientific papers were cited by other researchers
during the first 18 months after their publication. The higher the number of
citations, the more important and influential a paper can be considered, the
method assumes.

   However, because of space limitations, The Scientist's list does not include
all papers that would meet this criterion, it says.

   Salk scientists authored four of 81 papers, or 4.9%, of those cited most
often, The Scientist reported. That was second only to the National Institutes
of Health, at 5.2%.

   But Salk officials note that NIH is a vastly better-funded institution, at
about $800 million a year, contrasted with the $34-million research budget at
Salk.

   "This ranking reflects the considerable talent of our faculty members and
their ability to contribute in substantial ways to the progress of science,"
said Renato Dulbecco, president of Salk. "We are a very small institution
compared to most of those on the list, so our contribution to the work of other
members of the scientific community is disproportionately large."

   Salk research that gained the institution this recognition was led by faculty
members Inder Verma, Marc Montminy and Tony Hunter. Other researchers involved
at Salk were Anne Murray Quinn, K. K. Yamamoto, Steven Hanks, Gustavo Gonzalez,
Paolo Sassone-Corse, John Sisson, Mark Kamps and William Lamph.

   Other institutions on the list, in order, were Stanford University, Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard
University, the National Center for Scientific Research in France, UC Berkeley
and UC San Francisco (tied for eighth place), Johns Hopkins University and
Cambridge University (tied for ninth), and UCSD.

   UCSD faculty members authored three of the 81 papers, or 2.2%. No information
was available Thursday on who the authors were.

   The Scientist's list was its second in the last year to note the scientific
prominence of San Diego's research establishment.

   In May, the newspaper placed three San Diego researchers -- one from UCSD and
two from Salk -- on its list of "Nine for the 1990s," the scientists under age
45 whose work was most cited by others from 1981 to 1988.

   They were Flossie Wong-Staal of UCSD, who has done key work characterizing
the AIDS virus; Ronald M. Evans, who studies hormones' influences in the body;
and Inder Verma, who studies cancer-causing genes and mechanisms that might be
used for gene therapy. Evans and Verma, in addition to their work at Salk, are
adjunct professors at UCSD.


                             1776 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      July 27, 1990, Friday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A25; THE FEDERAL PAGE

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Return to NCI's Cutting Edge;
Researchers, Citing Unique Opportunities, Rejoin Cancer Institute

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Susan Okie, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Seventeen months ago, Robert E. Wittes joined a stream of high-level
scientists fleeing the National Cancer Institute for better-paying jobs in the
private sector. He charged that federal officials had "bled cancer to feed AIDS"
research, and that tight budgets and staff shortages were making it impossible
for NCI to fulfill its mission.

   Next month, Wittes will be moving back into an office on the Bethesda campus
of the National Institutes of Health. He has resigned his post as vice president
for cancer research at Squibb Bristol Myers, and will take what colleagues
estimated will be a 70 percent salary cut to rejoin NCI as chief of its medicine
branch.

   Budgets are still tight and NCI still has plenty of vacancies. But what lured
Wittes back, according to his new boss Gregory A. Curt, another recently
returned scientist, was the realization that NCI continues to offer
opportunities for cutting-edge research that exist nowhere else.

   Curt said he reached the same conclusion one night in January 1989, six
months after leaving NCI to take a job at Brown University.

   He remembers turning on his car radio and hearing NCI's Steven Rosenberg
discussing his use of special killer cells to treat cancer. "I thought, 'God, I
used to be part of that,' " Curt recalled. " 'I used to know that was going to
happen before it was reported on the radio.' " Six months later, he was back at
NCI.

   Curt said part of the credit for his and Wittes' return goes to Samuel
Broder, the renowned AIDS researcher who became NCI director last year. Broder
succeeded Vincent DeVita, an aggressive, high-profile administrator whose
departure rocked the institute. Curt said Broder has provided stable, effective
leadership and that morale has improved greatly since he took over.

   "Sam's a real gentleman," said Curt. "We respect him not only because he's
approachable, because he says 'Thank you,' but because he himself has a record
of accomplishment." Broder's studies of the drug AZT led to the discovery that
it was an effective treatment for AIDS.

   "I attribute it all to me," Broder quipped when asked about the return of the
prodigal researchers. But he added that NCI still has problems. "Having them
come back is a good sign, but two swallows do not make a spring," he said. "We
still have considerable difficulty in recruiting senior-level scientists and
clinical researchers. Government service as a calling just doesn't seem to have
the same force that it might have had in another era."

   Annual salaries for top researchers at NIH have risen by an average of $
20,000 over the last two years, but are lower than those for comparable
positions at medical schools, and much lower than those offered by drug
companies, according to Bruce A. Chabner, director of NCI's division of cancer
treatment. In recent years, shortages of space and support staff have also
hampered the agency's ability to attract top-level scientists. And there is the
annual anxiety over what the next year's federal budget will bring.

   But to offset these shortcomings, NIH offers researchers unparalleled
opportunities to take discoveries quickly and easily from the laboratory to
testing in human patients. The studies that first proved chemotherapy could cure
some types of cancer, and those that first showed AZT prolonged the lives of
AIDS patients, were done in Building 10, the massive brick research hospital
known as the Clinical Center.

   Broder said such studies are becoming increasingly harder to perform outside
of NIH, because of shortages of research beds, difficulties getting human
studies approved and the unwillingness of insurance carriers to pay for
experimental treatments.

   He noted that Rosenberg, for example, probably could not have developed his
unorthodox new cancer treatments elsewhere, which have included conducting the
country's first gene-therapy experiment.  "The opportunities are unique," he
said.

   Curt, who left Brown to take Broder's old job as head of the NCI's clinical
oncology program, shares that view. "Half of the beds dedicated to clinical
research in the United States are in Building 10," he said. "At Brown . . . we
had two. The NCI here at Building 10 has 125. Those 125 beds can be used to test
the best ideas coming from our labs."

   He said he left the NCI for Brown because his wife had a job offer in
Providence, but that he quickly came to miss it. When he was offered Broder's
former post, he said, he told his wife, "I don't care if it costs us our house,
I really have to do this job. This is a place where things happen."

   Wittes, who left Bristol-Myers Squibb June 30, could not be reached
yesterday. Before leaving NCI, he served as acting deputy director of its
division of cancer treatment, coordinating multi-hospital studies of cancer
treatments.

   Chabner said that as chief of the medicine branch, Wittes will oversee a much
smaller program. But he will have complete control over studies conducted in
Building 10 to develop and test new drugs for cancer.

   "When you work for a drug company, you work on their product," he said. "The
goal is to get the drug approved . . . . Here, the goals are to find ways of
treating cancer. You're not restricted."


CORRECTION-DATE: July 28, 1990

CORRECTION:

   A story yesterday reported that salaries for top researchers at the National
Cancer Institute had increased by an average of $ 20,000 in the last two years.
Only a minority of physician-researchers have received that large a raise. Since
1988, the average salary for NIH research physicians has risen by about $ 7,300,
and for non-physician scientists, by about $ 6,000.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, SAMUAL BRODER, TWP


                             1777 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     July 26, 1990, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 147 words

HEADLINE: Kids could benefit from gene therapy

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, Maine

BODY:

    A promising new method of gene therapy called gene targeting has been used
in mice to cure an inherited human disease that causes mental retardation and
skeletal deformities.

   The experiment raises hopes that gene targeting may be used in the future on
children with the disease, caused by an enzyme deficiency, says Dr. Edward
Birkenmeier of the Jackson Laboratory.

   The research involved removing special bone marrow cells from mice with the
disease and inserting a human gene that makes the enzyme. Then the cells are put
back.

   The human gene began making the enzyme and ''the mice have been perfectly
normal,'' Birkenmeier said.

   But before it can be done in children, several major hurdles must be
overcome.

   Also, a new urine test has been devised to screen newborns for the disease,
called mucopolysaccharidosis. Usually it can't be detected until damage has
occurred.


                             1778 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1990 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             July 5, 1990 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. PAGE: E01

LENGTH: 1898 words

HEADLINE: ALARMING SKIN CANCER STATISTICS PROD QUESTS FOR NEW THERAPIES

BYLINE: NATALIE ANGIER, New York Times News Service <

BODY:

   Thursday, July 5, 1990 ALARMING SKIN CANCER STATISTICS PROD QUESTS FOR NEW
THERAPIES

   Summary: A New York dermatologist says malignant melanoma is nearing
epidemic proportions

   As swarms of unregenerate sunbathers head for the beach, scientists are
struggling mightily to undo the damage of profligate tanning.

   They are racing to devise new therapies against malignant melanoma, the
deadly skin cancer that is rising faster than any other cancer in the world.

   At several recent cancer meetings, epidemiologists and dermatologists
presented stark new figures that they said make melanoma the most troublesome
cancer they now confront.

   They reported that the incidence of the skin malignancy has doubled since
1980, and that it continues to soar by 4 percent or 5 percent a year  worldwide.

   In that same period, they said, malignant melanoma climbed from being the
third most common cancer among women between the ages of 25 and 29, to its
current status as No. 1 for the group, and the ninth most common cancer  overall
in the United States.

   Last year, 27,300 people were diagnosed with melanoma, and 6,000 died of  the
disease.

   ``It's a near epidemic,'' said Dr. Darrell S. Rigel, a dermatologist and
melanoma specialist at New York University Medical Center. ``To have something
double in 10 years is really amazing. No other cancer has this rate of
increase.''

   Faced with these statistics, many researchers are working to design new
therapies against the disease. When caught early enough, melanoma tumors,  which
resemble moles, can be surgically removed and the cancer completely  cured. But
once the malignancy has spread from the skin to other parts of the  body,
melanoma is among the most aggressive and lethal of cancers, resisting
traditional methods of chemotherapy and radiation.

   Researchers now believe that a far more promising approach to treating
advanced melanoma is to coax the immune system to recognize melanoma cells as
deadly and to destroy them.

   Some investigators have crafted vaccines that spur the immune system to
recognize melanoma cells and to produce antibodies and white blood cells to
fight them.

   Several of these vaccines are in or nearing large-scale clinical trials.
Other investigators are employing powerful hormones such as interferon and
interleukin-2 to stimulate an immune response in patients.

   Still other scientists are striving to understand why melanoma defies many
of the rules that apply to other cancers. They are scrutinizing the enzymes in
the tumor cells to determine why melanoma can infiltrate more organs than
almost any other type of malignancy.

   They also are learning how stray melanoma cells that have broken away from
the original tumor can lie dormant in the body for 10 years or longer before
suddenly exploding into a deadly tumor mass at a distant site.

   Scientists believe such insights will lead to dramatically improved cancer
therapies.

   ``One absolutely critical, important point that we have learned by studying
melanoma is that we can use a biological approach to alter a patient's immune
system and cause cancer regression,'' said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of
surgery at the National Cancer Institute, part of the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md.

   But dermatologists stress that new treatments for advanced melanoma are
still highly experimental. They say that the best treatment for the disease is
to catch it at its earliest stages, when surgery can rout it out. Better  still,
say doctors, is to avoid excessive sun exposure and to wear a strong  sun block
while outdoors.

   Melanoma is a cancer of the melanocytes, the cells that produce skin
pigment. It is less common than basal cell carcinoma, a relatively benign type
of skin tumor that usually appears on the face or hands and rarely spreads
beyond the skin.

   Most researchers say that the steep rise in melanoma began when the bronzed
``healthy'' look replaced the porcelain complexion as a physical ideal, a  trend
that began on a wide scale in the 1950s.

   ``It's insidious because there's a 20- to 30-year lag period before the sun
damage becomes clinically apparent,'' said Rigel. ``What we're seeing now are
the cancers that were initiated in the '60s and '70s, when people were  outdoors
more than they had been 20 years before, but when strong sunscreens  were not
yet widely available.''

   Buttressing the link between melanoma and recreational sunning are the
locations on the body where the first tumors usually appear.

   On men, melanoma tumors normally show up on the back, shoulders or belly,
places that are usually exposed to strong sun only sporadically.

   On women, melanomas most frequently occur on the legs, although they
increasingly are appearing on the torso, probably a result, say researchers,  of
the popularity of two-piece bathing suits.

   Wherever they crop up, the tumors usually are dark brown or black, slightly
raised, with irregular edges.

   Researchers say that the most dangerous type of exposure is binge sunning,
which frequently results in bad burns. According to the American Cancer
Society, people who have had three or more blistering sunburns before the age
of 20 have five times the risk of getting melanoma of those who have never  been
sunburned.

   But researchers say that the unusual danger of a bad sunburn does not mean
that gradual or mild tanning is harmless. ``There is no such thing as a safe
suntan,'' said Rigel.

   Other risk factors include a family history of the disease, a fair
complexion and blond or red hair, and a noticeably freckled back and  shoulders,
indicating excessive sun exposure.

   Researchers recently have determined the precise size of the tumor that can
spell the difference between life and death, Rigel said. When the vertical
thickness of the tumor is less than a 0.75 millimeters, or a 1/32 of an inch,
the removal of the tumor marks the end of the disease virtually 100 percent of
the time. But if the tumor is thicker than an eighth of an inch -- the width  of
a dime -- it very likely already has metastasized, or spread.

   Metastatic melanoma is one of the toughest of tumors to treat. For unknown
reasons, it is invulnerable to most types of chemotherapeutic drugs that kill
other cancer cells.

   Radiation is sometimes used to treat melanoma, but the therapy can do  little
beyond shrinking tumors enough to relieve a patient's pain.

   But scientists are optimistic that melanoma may be more amenable to new
immune therapies than are other cancers. They have found that a melanoma cell
has an unusually high number of antigens, or protruding proteins, on its
surface, which could provide easy targets for the immune system to assault.

   Researchers do not yet understand the function of the surface proteins, but
they are exploiting the bulging antigens to design new therapies.

   ``We believe that we can train the immune system to go out and destroy any
melanoma that's been left behind after surgery,'' said Dr. Jean-Claude Bystra,
director of the melanoma program at the New York University Kaplan Cancer
Center.

   Perhaps the most promising approach lies with a cancer vaccine, long a  dream
of oncologists. Researchers hope that by vaccinating a patient with  telltale
pieces of a cancer cell, they can spur the immune system to mount a  fierce
response against all cells in the body that bear those distinguishing  marker
proteins.

   Furthest along is a melanoma vaccine developed by the team of Dr. Marc K.
Wallack, chief of surgery at Mt. Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach, Fla.  They
took a harmless version of the vaccinia virus, which causes smallpox, and
infected melanoma cells with it in the laboratory.

   They then pulverized the membranes of the infected melanoma cells, emerging
with a combination of vaccinia particles and melanoma antigens. That mixture  is
injected into melanoma patients.

   ``The body knows how to react to viruses very well,'' said Wallack. ``This
vaccine calls attention to melanoma antigens, and therefore the immune system
reacts to the melanoma proteins as well as to the viral proteins.''

   The researchers have found that, in responding to the virus-melanoma shot,
the body generates a host of antibodies and white blood cells that recognize
specific melanoma targets.

   In early clinical trials, the scientists tested the vaccine on patients who
had melanoma that had spread to their lymph nodes, which put them at great  risk
for a recurrence of the disease after surgery.

   The researchers found that there was a 30 percent difference between those
who received the vaccine and those who did not.

   For example, in a group of patients with melanoma that has already spread  to
a lymph node, about half would be expected to remain free of melanoma for  two
years after surgery.

   With the vaccine, about 80 percent of the patients survived two years
without a recurrence.

   The Florida researchers now are in the midst of a large, three-year  clinical
trial involving six institutions and, eventually, 210 melanoma  patients.

   They plan to use the results to improve their vaccine, with the hope that
someday they can inoculate people who are at high risk of contracting melanoma
before they get the tumor. At least a half-dozen other anti-melanoma vaccines
also are being developed.

   Another immunological approach that is being tested against melanoma is the
use of hormones such as interleukin-2 and interferon, which work in the body  to
stimulate proliferation of immune cells.

   Most of these methods were developed by Rosenberg of the National Cancer
Institute. He and his researchers have found that about 20 percent of patients
with advanced melanoma who receive steady infusions of either interleukin-2 or
interferon have notable regression of their tumors for anywhere from several
months to over five years.

   Interleukin-2 is now being used against melanoma at 38 institutions
nationwide, and new studies are under way to determine whether a combination  of
interleukin and interferon may prove more effective than either alone.

   Rosenberg also has submitted a proposal to the National Institutes of  Health
to attempt treating melanoma with a highly experimental type of gene  therapy.

   Under that scheme, Rosenberg will isolate from patients a species of white
blood cell, known as tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, that he has found is  drawn
to tumors and somehow is able to degrade them.

   Natural stores of such lymphocytes are not sufficient in patients with
advanced melanoma to defeat the cancer, but Rosenberg plans to grow batches of
the isolated cells in culture.

   To lend the cells extra anti-tumor strength, he plans to insert through
recombinant DNA methods a gene that produces tumor necrosis factor, a natural
cancer-killing agent.

   When reinfused into the patient, the high doses of the manipulated
lymphocytes theoretically should seek out melanoma tumors, and, with the aid  of
the necrosis factor encoded within them, destroy the malignancies.

   Rosenberg's proposal was submitted recently and must make its way through a
long approval process, but preliminary tests in animals indicate the
gene-therapy technique has promise.

   If it is approved, it will become the first example of gene therapy used to
treat human cancer.

   ILLUSTRATION: Drawing  An approach to melanoma vaccine  sources ``Molecular
Biology of the Cell'', Mark K. Wallack, M.D.  by the New York Times News
Service

   The following fields overflowed: PAGE = PAGE: E01

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1779 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 29, 1990 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 952 words

HEADLINE: Magazine declares 3-year ban on UCSD researcher's articles

BYLINE: Rex Dalton, Staff Writer

BODY:

   A prominent UCSD genetics researcher has been banned from publishing articles
in a prestigious scientific journal for three years for violating the
publication's rules. The rare sanction recently was issued against Dr. Theodore
Friedmann by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, a journal
issued semi-monthly by the academy, the nation's most esteemed scientific group.
The gravity of the discipline is seen as by UCSD officials a symbol of the tense
climate in the nation's scientific community, which has been under fire by
Congress recently for failing to monitor adequately questions of misconduct
among federally funded researchers. As a pediatrics professor, Friedmann is one
of the nation's foremost researchers working to devise a method to insert genes
into human cells to correct hereditary diseases.

   Now on Congress' Biomedical Ethics Advisory Committee, he and a colleague
coined the term "gene therapy" in a landmark essay in 1972. Friedmann, 54, is
being penalized because a scientific article that was published in the academy's
journal in May 1987 also was published in another journal shortly thereafter,
without acknowledgment of the first article.

   The article was about splicing genes into cells. The duplicate article was
perceived as an attempt to pad the author's curriculum vitae (professional
history) with an additional publication to appear more attractive for research
funding, and a violation of the spirit of the Proceedings' regulations on
publication of original research, officials involved say. Frances R. Zwanzig,
the managing editor of the Proceedings in Washington, D.C., said that the double
publication was, in a manner of speaking, scientific misconduct. "I am not a
very bendable person," said Zwanzig, a former scientist.

   "I can't imagine having done something like that." "There were errors; errors
in judgment," said Friedmann.

   "It should be clear these errors were without ulterior motive.

   I had nothing to gain.

   I am not mistake-free. `Misconduct' might have pejorative overtones, implying
some evil or deliberate behavior.

   There wasn't any." The primary problem was that neither the Proceedings
article or the second manuscript in the July 1987 issue of Somatic Cell and
Molecular Genetics cross-referenced each other, officials said.

   The Somatic Cell article was submitted as part of an overview of a Denver
conference where Friedmann spoke in November 1986. Authorities say the technique
described in the two articles, for inserting genes into rat liver cells, was a
major scientific advance.

   It was quickly replicated by two other scientific teams, and now is used
widely. The six other co-authors on the article did not know that Friedmann had
submitted the second manuscript to Somatic Cell, authors and officials say. They
learned of it after publication. It is an unwritten rule at UCSD, and elsewhere
in the scientific community, that research articles are to be reviewed by
co-authors before submission to journals.

   This practice is to prevent errors and ensure proper oversight, authorities
say. Friedmann has taken full responsibility for the problem, absolving the six
co-authors, who all were at UCSD in 1987. Co-authors spoke highly of Friedmann's
research and his actions. "Ted (Friedmann) is an honorable guy," said Dr. Jon A.
Wolff, now a University of Wisconsin genetics specialist who was the article's
lead author.

   "He apologized and took full responsibility." After learning of the
publication snafu earlier this year, Dr. Paul J. Friedman, an associate dean at
UCSD's School of Medicine, conducted an internal inquiry and concluded recently
that no action was needed by the university. "The principle of consulting with
co-authors was certainly violated," said Friedman.

   "The other principle that was violated is the business of the lack of proper
citation. "Dr. Friedmann acted very honorably, gallantly.

   Judging the level of the error and the recognition of the error, we felt it
didn't warrant further investigation or punishment.

   We thought the journal punishment was fairly strong." Friedmann himself
declined comment on the Proceedings' decision: "I don't think it is appropriate
to comment on what they have done.

   I told them I recognized that there were actions ...which seemed to violate
the spirit of their guidelines.

   But they were just oversights." Authors of the article, UCSD officials and
Zwanzig explained how the problem was discovered: One of Friedmann's co-authors
on the research, UCSD pharmacologist Hyam Leffert, was being reviewed last
winter for promotion.

   When his research was checked in a normal manner, UCSD chemistry professor
Jack E. Kyte noticed that the two articles were listed as separate, original
research with different titles. Kyte then wrote a letter in January to
Proceedings. Friedmann said: "Kyte felt that this was a particularly blatant
example of a disregard of academy guidelines ...and a blatant padding of the
curriculum vitae.

   He has not changed his mind." Kyte is out of the country and could not be
reached for comment.

   University officials do not accuse Leffert of any impropriety. In May, the
editorial board of the Proceedings banned all seven authors of the article from
publishing in it for three years.

   Friedmann appealed to the journal that the fault was his alone.

   Sanctions against the other six co-authors then were dropped. UCSD biology
professor emeritus Morris E. Friedkin, the scientist in the 1,600-member
National Academy of Sciences who sponsored the article in the Proceedings, said:
"I don't think this was an intentional decision by Ted Friedmann to pull a fast
one and load up his curriculum vitae.

   He doesn't need that.

   There is nothing deep and dark about this; it was a lapse."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Theodore Friedman (B-3:2,3,5,6; B-12:1,4); PHOTOBY:
File photo

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1780 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     June 28, 1990, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 28; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE GENETICS;
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY ADVANCE REPORTED

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   For the second time in three weeks, researchers have reported promising
results in humans with a proposed new genetic therapy for Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

   At a Wednesday press conference, a Canadian researcher said that the unusual
therapy has been found to be both safe and feasible in tests on three young
boys, but that it is too early to tell if the treatment is effective in
reversing the course of the disease.

   The new therapy involves injecting healthy muscle cells alongside diseased
muscles. Experiments in animals suggest that the injected cells will fuse with
the patient's muscle cells and cause them to produce a protein that is missing
in victims of the degenerative disease.

   Three weeks ago, neurologist Peter J. Law of the University of Tennessee
reported that the therapy led to the production of the missing protein in a
small toe muscle of a 12-year-boy with the disease -- the first time that any
form of genetic therapy has been shown to work in humans.

   The new findings announced by neurologist George Karpati of the Montreal
Neurological Institute represent a significant step beyond Law's results,
experts said, because the muscle he studied -- the biceps of the arm -- is 30
times as large as the toe muscle and requires the injection of a much larger
number of cells, as many as 60 million.

   Wednesday's confirmation of the earlier results "gives us cause to be
optimistic" about the success of the therapy, said pediatric neurologist Leon I.
Charash, chairman of the Muscular Dystrophy Assn.'s medical advisory committee,
"but it is still very early in the game."

   But Karpati refused to reveal whether the treated muscles were producing the
missing protein. "We don't want to make any premature statements about efficacy
of the therapy because we don't want to raise false hopes," he said. But Karpati
is optimistic that the treatment will be found to be effective, and he is laying
the groundwork for studies in which the healthy cells will be fused with more
vital muscles, such as those that control breathing.

   Meanwhile, researchers in San Francisco plan to begin human trials of the new
therapy in August or September, and a separate group in Boston will begin by the
end of the year. Karpati said he hopes that his report of the safety of the
procedure will stimulate other researchers to try it, thereby increasing the
likelihood that an effective treatment regimen will be discovered.

   About one in every 3,500 boys born in the United States has the genetic
defect that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Females can be carriers of the
gene, but rarely contract the disorder.

   The affected babies appear normal at birth, but develop a progressive
weakening of the muscles that usually places them in a wheelchair by the age of
11. There is no current therapy and most die in their late teens or early 20s
when the muscles that operate the heart and lungs cease functioning.

   The new results are all the more surprising because it was only 2 1/2 years
ago that researchers discovered the defective gene that causes Duchenne MD. The
healthy gene is the blueprint for a protein, called dystrophin, that allows
muscle cells to function properly.

   The new therapy is possible because each muscle cell, unlike cells elsewhere
in the body, has hundreds to thousands of nuclei, each with its own genetic
information. Muscle tissue also contains immature cells, called myoblasts, that
can fuse with existing muscle cells, insert their own healthy nuclei and cause
the muscles to regenerate.

   Karpati has so far treated three boys 6 to 8. In each case, he isolated about
10,000 healthy myoblasts from the boy's father and grew them in the laboratory
until he had obtained more than 60 million.

   He then made a series of 55 injections along the biceps in one arm of each
boy, injecting about 1 million cells at each site. An equal number of sham
injections of salt water were made along the biceps of the opposite arm as a
control.

   Karpati noted that critics of the procedure argued that there were many
possible deleterious effects that could be caused by the procedure, including
rejection, infection, hemorrhage, scarring, prolonged pain and so forth. "None
of these things happened," he said.


                             1781 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                     June 28, 1990, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; NATIONAL DIGEST; Pg.  8A

LENGTH: 360 words

HEADLINE: Muscle-disease advance made

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA; WHITE PLAINS, N.Y.; NEW YORK; BATON ROUGE, La.; FORT
ORD, Calif.

BODY:


   Researchers have reported promising results in humans with a proposed new
genetic therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  At a Wednesday news
conference, Canadian neurologist George Karpati of the Montreal Neurological
Institute said that the therapy has been found to be both safe and feasible in
tests on three young boys, but that it is too early to tell if the treatment is
effective in reversing the course of the disease. The therapy involves injecting
healthy muscle cells alongside diseased muscles. Experiments in animals suggest
that the injected cells will fuse with the patient's muscle cells and cause them
to produce a protein that is missing in victims of the disease.
 Man's severed arm reattached
 PHILADELPHIA A man whose right arm was severed by a fence spike when he fell
from a scaffold announced the improbable at a news conference Wednesday: He
plans to go home Saturday, his arm reattached by surgeons at Thomas Jefferson
University Hospital. How much sensitivity and strength will return to Bill
Price's reattached arm and hand can't be immediately known, and recovery depends
on years of physical therapy, his surgeon said.
 IBM replacing power cords
 WHITE PLAINS, N.Y.  IBM notified customers and distributors Wednesday of a
potential safety problem with power cords intended for use on some of its
Personal System/2 computers. The problem prevents the PS/2 system unit from
operating. IBM is notifying its dealers and customers and will exchange all
affected cords.
 Elsewhere . . .
 NEW YORK A woman testified Wednesday that a gang of youths terrified her and
tried to pull her off a bicycle in Central Park on the night a female jogger was
gang-raped and beaten nearly to death in the same area of the park.
 BATON ROUGE, La.  The Legislature gave final approval Wednesday night to the
strictest state abortion bill in the nation and passed it along to Gov. Buddy
Roemer, who has promised a veto.
 FORT ORD, Calif.  Army Pfc. Mark McMonagle was sentenced to seven years in
prison Wednesday for murdering a Panamanian civilian during the U.S. invasion.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1992


                             1782 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2236 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Struggle to Undo Tanning's Deadly Damage

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   AS the sun arcs toward the summer solstice and swarms of unregenerate
sunbathers head for the beach, scientists are struggling mightily to undo the
damage of profligate tanning. They are racing to devise new therapies against
malignant melanoma, the deadly skin cancer that is rising faster than any other
cancer in the world.

   At several recent cancer meetings, epidemiologists and dermatologists
presented stark new figures that they said make melanoma one of the most
troublesome cancers they now confront. They reported that the incidence of the
skin malignancy has doubled since 1980, and that it continues to soar by 4
percent or 5 percent a year worldwide. In that same period, they said, malignant
melanoma climbed from being the third most common cancer among women between the
ages of 25 and 29, to its current status as No. 1 for the group, and the ninth
most common cancer overall in the United States. Last year 27,300 people were
diagnosed with melanoma, and 6,000 died of the disease.

   ''It's a near epidemic,'' said Dr. Darrell S. Rigel, a dermatologist and
melanoma specialist at New York University Medical Center. ''To have something
double in 10 years is really amazing. No other cancer has this rate of
increase.''

   Faced with these statistics, many researchers are working to design new
therapies against the disease. When caught early enough, melanoma tumors, which
resemble moles, can be surgically removed and the cancer completely cured. But
once the malignancy has spread from the skin to other parts of the body,
melanoma is among the most aggressive and lethal of cancers, resisting
traditional methods of chemotherapy and radiation.

   Researchers now say that a far more promising approach to treating advanced
melanoma is to coax the immune system to recognize melanoma cells as deadly and
to destroy them. Some investigators have crafted vaccines that spur the immune
system to recognize melanoma cells and to produce antibodies and white blood
cells to fight them. Several of these vaccines are in or nearing large-scale
clinical trials. Other investigators are employing powerful hormones like
interferon and interleukin-2 to stimulate an immune response in patients.

   ''Two years ago I wouldn't have said that I have much hope for new
treatments,'' said Dr. Alan N. Houghton, chief of the clinical immunology
service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. ''But now we have
a whole set of new agents and new approaches that I think are going to make a
difference in the future.''

   Still other scientists are striving to understand why melanoma defies many of
the rules that apply to other cancers. They are scrutinizing the enzymes in the
tumor cells to determine why melanoma can infiltrate more organs than almost any
other type of malignancy. They also are learning how stray melanoma cells that
have broken away from the original tumor can lie dormant in the body for 10
years or longer before suddenly exploding into a deadly tumor mass at a distant
site. Scientists say they believe that such insights will lead to dramatically
improved cancer therapies.

   ''One absolutely critical, important point that we have learned by studying
melanoma is that we can use a biological approach to alter a patient's immune
system and cause cancer regression,'' said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of
surgery at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   But dermatologists stress that right now the only good treatment for the
disease is to catch it at its earliest stages, when surgery can rout it out.
Better still, say doctors, is to avoid excessive sun exposure and to wear a
strong sun block while outdoors.

   ''The best thing to do about melanoma is not to get it,'' said Dr. Fred T.
Valentine, an immunologist at New York University Medical Center. ''That's the
lesson folks still have to learn.''

   Melanoma is a cancer of the melanocytes, the cells that produce skin pigment.
It is less common than basal cell carcinoma, a relatively benign type of skin
tumor that usually appears on the face or hands and rarely spreads beyond the
skin.

Dangers of the Healthy Look

   Some scientists blame part of the melanoma epidemic on the use of industrial
and commercial chemicals that are thought to be depleting the ozone layer, the
stratum of the atmosphere that blocks out many dangerous ultraviolet rays. But
the theory is hotly contested, and most researchers believe that a more
important cause is an obsession with tanning.

   They say that the steep rise in melanoma began when the bronzed ''healthy''
look replaced the porcelain complexion as a physical ideal, a trend that began
in the 1920's and accelerated in the 50's and later.

   ''It's insidious because there's a lag period before the sun damage becomes
clinically apparent,'' said Dr. Rigel. ''What we're seeing now are the cancers
that were initiated in the 60's and 70's, when people were outdoors more than
they had been 20 years before, but when strong sunscreens were not yet widely
available.''

   Buttressing the link between melanoma and recreational sunning are the
locations on the body where the first tumors usually appear. On men, melanoma
tumors normally show up on the back, shoulders or belly, places that are usually
exposed to strong sun only sporadically.

No Safe Suntan

   On women, melanomas most frequently occur on the legs, although they can also
appear on the torso.

   Wherever they crop up, the tumors usually are dark brown or black, slightly
raised, with irregular edges.

   Researchers say that the most dangerous type of exposure is binge sunning,
which frequently results in bad burns. According to the American Cancer Society,
people who have had three or more blistering sunburns before the age of 20 have
five times the risk of getting melanoma of those who have never been sunburned.
But researchers say that the unusual danger of a bad sunburn does not mean that
gradual or mild tanning is harmless. ''There is no such thing as a safe
suntan,'' said Dr. Rigel.

   Other risk factors include a family history of the disease, a fair complexion
and blond or red hair, and a noticeably freckled back and shoulders, indicating
excessive sun exposure. Blacks and Asians also develop melanoma, although at a
much lower rate than do fair-skinned whites.

   Researchers recently determined the precise size of the tumor that can spell
the difference between life and death, Dr. Rigel said. When the vertical
thickness of the tumor is less than a 0.75 millimeters, or one thirty-second of
an inch, the removal of the tumor marks the end of the disease virtually 100
percent of the time. But if the tumor is thicker than an eighth of an inch - the
width of a dime - it very likely already has metastasized, or spread.

Optimism Over Vaccines

   Metastatic melanoma is one of the toughest tumors to treat. For unknown
reasons, it is invulnerable to most types of chemotherapeutic drugs that kill
other cancer cells. Radiation is sometimes used to treat melanoma, but the
therapy can do little beyond shrinking tumors enough to relieve a patient's
pain.

   But scientists are optimistic that melanoma may be more amenable to new
immune therapies than are other cancers. They have found that a melanoma cell
has an unusually high number of antigens, or protruding proteins, on its
surface, which could provide easy targets for the immune system to assault.
Researchers do not yet understand the function of the surface proteins, but they
are exploiting the bulging antigens to design new therapies.

   ''We believe that we can train the immune system to go out and destroy any
melanoma that's been left behind after surgery,'' said Dr. Jean-Claude Bystra,
director of the melanoma program at the New York University Kaplan Cancer
Center.

   Perhaps the most promising approach lies with a cancer vaccine, long a dream
of oncologists. Researchers hope that by vaccinating a patient with telltale
pieces of a cancer cell, they can spur the immune system to mount a fierce
response against all cells in the body that bear those distinguishing marker
proteins.

Triggering the Immune System

   Furthest along is a melanoma vaccine developed by the team of Dr. Marc K.
Wallack, chief of surgery at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach, Fla.
They took a harmless version of the vaccinia virus, which causes smallpox, and
infected melanoma cells with it in the laboratory.

   They then pulverized the membranes of the infected melanoma cells, emerging
with a combination of vaccinia particles and melanoma antigens. That mixture is
injected into melanoma patients. ''The body knows how to react to viruses very
well,'' said Dr. Wallack. ''This vaccine calls attention to melanoma antigens,
and therefore the immune system reacts to the melanoma proteins as well as to
the viral proteins.''

   In early clinical trials, the scientists tested the vaccine on patients who
had melanoma that had spread to their lymph nodes, which put them at great risk
for a recurrence of the disease after surgery. The researchers found that there
was an improvement in those who received the vaccine. For example, in a group of
patients with melanoma that has already spread to a lymph node, about half would
be expected to remain free of melanoma for two years after surgery. With the
vaccine, almost 80 percent of the patients survived two years without a
recurrence.

   The Florida researchers now are in the midst of a large, three-year clinical
trial involving six institutions and, eventually, 210 melanoma patients. They
plan to use the results to improve their vaccine, with the hope that someday
they can inoculate people who are at high risk of contracting melanoma before
they get the tumor. At least half a dozen other anti-melanoma vaccines also are
being developed.

Hormones and Gene Therapy

   Another immunological approach that is being tested against melanoma is the
use of hormones like interleukin-2 and interferon, which work in the body to
stimulate proliferation of immune cells. Most of these methods were developed by
Dr. Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute. He and his researchers have
found that about 20 percent of patients with advanced melanoma who receive
steady infusions of either interleukin-2 or interferon have notable regression
of their tumors for anywhere from several months to over five years.

   Interleukin-2 is now being used against melanoma at 38 institutions
nationwide, and new studies are under way to determine if a combination of
interleukin and interferon may prove more effective than either alone.

   Dr. Rosenberg has also submitted a proposal to the National Institutes of
Health to attempt treating melanoma with a highly experimental type of gene
therapy. Under that scheme, Dr. Rosenberg will isolate from patients a species
of white blood cell, known as a tumor infiltrating lymphocyte, that he has found
is drawn to tumors and somehow is able to degrade them.

   Natural stores of such lymphocytes are not sufficient in patients with
advanced melanoma to defeat the cancer, but Dr. Rosenberg plans to grow batches
of the isolated cells in culture. To lend the cells extra anti-tumor strength,
he plans to insert through recombinant DNA methods a gene that produces tumor
necrosis factor, a natural cancer-killing agent. When reinfused into the
patient, the high doses of the manipulated lymphocytes should theoretically seek
out melanoma tumors, and, with the aid of the necrosis factor encoded within
them, destroy the malignancies.

   Dr. Rosenberg's proposal was submitted last month and must make its way
through a long review process, but if it is approved, it will become the first
example of gene therapy used to treat human cancer.

Cellular Wanderlust

   Other researchers study the basic mechanisms of melanoma in an effort to
understand its unusual complexities. In several recent studies, scientists have
learned that melanoma cells secrete potent enzymes capable of dissolving
collagen and other structural proteins in tissue that normally help to hold
cells together. That talent may explain why melanoma cells seem to wrest free of
a primary tumor mass when the malignancy is much smaller than most tumors that
spawn renegade metastases.

   Some scientists trace the ability to secrete enzymes to the early role of
melanocytes. They have learned that during the early growth of an embryo,
melanocytes move freely up and down the developing fetus, eventually covering
the body as part of the skin. ''The normal cell has the ability to invade and
travel,'' said Dr. Houghton, ''so melanoma cells may be using this trait that
the cells had during early embryogenesis.'' That same built-in cellular
wanderlust, he proposes, could explain why melanoma can spread to the lungs,
brain, liver, bone and even the heart. Researchers say that if they can use an
antibody to block the melanoma enzymes that degrade collagen, they may be able
to defeat the cancer before it breaks free.

An Approach to a Melanoma Vaccine
Researchers hope to coax the immune system into recognizing melanoma cells as
virulent and attacking them.

Vaccinia virus is used to infect the melanoma cell so that it has both melanoma
proteins and vaccinia proteins on its surface. These combination cells are
injected into patients to elicit a combined immune response.

Sources: ''Molecular Biology of the Cells,'' (Garland); Mark K. Wallack, M.D.)

CORRECTION-DATE: June 22, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

   An article in Science Times on Tuesday about a skin cancer, malignant
melanoma, included an incorrect reference from a researcher about the vaccinia
virus's disease-causing effect. Vaccinia is a close relative of the smallpox
virus but does not cause the disease.


                             1783 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1990 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 11, 1990, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 29 p

LENGTH: 1949 words

HEADLINE: Mice custom-designed for research;
Animals given flawed genes could provide clues to human diseases;
GENETICS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    At the top of medical researchers' wish list when they attack a mysterious
and untreatable human disease is the hope of finding an animal that has the same
condition.

   Having an "animal model" gives scientists a vital tool for carrying out
experiments - impossible or unethical in humans - that might pinpoint the cause
or suggest a promising treatment. Random genetic accidents have produced a few
such animals, but for many lethal diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and
Huntington's disease, no affected mouse, monkey or other creature has ever
turned up.

   Now, however, a dramatic technical development has cleared the way for
creating strains of mice having just about any genetic disease, once the
defective gene has been isolated.  Called "gene targeting," it's a tricky but
powerful method for making mice whose cells contain the desired disease gene:
Often this means inactivating or "knocking out" a normal gene in the mouse.

   The technique is still being refined, but it has already prompted a scramble
in laboratories worldwide to put defective genes in mice in hopes of creating
badly needed animal models. The greatest frenzy is over the cystic fibrosis
gene, which was discovered last year. With the gene in hand, scientists in many
labs are trying - so far without success - to create genetically altered mice
that exhibit CF's devastating effects on the lungs.

   There's high interest in other genes as well, including those for sickle cell
anemia and other blood diseases, immune system defects and neurological
disorders. Already, one entirely unexpected and puzzling result has shown up in
experiments: Sometimes the defective gene inserted into mice doesn't appear to
cause the same devastating symptoms that the gene defect does in humans.

   Gene targeting has much wider potential than just mimicking human disease.
Now that scientists can create desired mutations in mouse genes almost at will,
instead of working with mice that turn up occasionally with accidental
mutations, they are excitedly planning systematic experiments to resolve
longstanding questions in biology. One major mystery is how certain of the
50,000 to 100,000 genes in each cell govern the development of a simple embryo
into a complex adult; another is and how important systems such as immune
defenses and the brain are built through the action of many genes.

   "In terms of the power of what you can do, it's absolutely phenomenal," said
Allan Bradley of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.

   Researchers have isolated and learned the roles of only a small minority of
gene in mice and men. The most direct way of discovering their function is to
mutate, or change, a gene and see what happens to the animal when that gene no
longer functions.

   A simple analogy illustrates the value of gene targeting: Imagine that
automobiles were omnipresent in the world but no one had any idea how they
worked. If by chance the occasional car had a faulty spark plug or generator or
some other defective component, scientists could study how the flaw altered the
car's performance in order to learn something about how it worked.

   For 10 years or so, it's been possible to add genes to mice (transgenic
technology), but those genes inserted themselves randomly among the cell's
genes, rather than in their normal location. In the car analogy, it's as if
scientists were able to insert a flawed spark plug or carburetor or ignition in
the car, but it was only by a matter of chance if the gene found its way to the
proper location.

   What gene targeting offers is the ability to insert a mutated copy of any
gene into the mouse genome (all the genes in the cell) so that it seeks out the
normal copy of the gene and combines with it, knocking it out. Because the
mutated gene has to search among the 50,000 or 100,000 genes to find the right
location, this is no easy task.

   Gene targeting allows researchers to do experiments equivalent to
systematically disabling one spark plug after another, and then putting each
back where it came from to see how the motor runs. They can also install bad
parts and then experiment with different ways of replacing them with good parts
- the automotive equivalent of gene therapy.

   And it means that given enough time and enough car parts (or isolated genes),
scientists can learn an enormous amount about how the auto is put together and
the exquisite timing of different systems that are necessary for it to run
correctly.

   The method is extraordinarly complex. The few laboratories that can get it to
work reliably are receiving so many requests for help that they can scarcely do
their own experiments.

   "We're constantly being 'phoned up by people all over the world, saying, "Can
I come for the week?" to learn the technique, said Elizabeth Robertson, a
Columbia University geneticist who played a key role in developing it.

   Commercial interests are also on the trail. "A number of companies have
contacted me. . .," said Robertson. "They are interested in making model systems
of neurological disorders. It would be a nice way of testing drugs to see if you
could treat various diseases like this."

   Two hard-won technical breakthroughs made gene targeting possible. One was
the discovery that certain cells in a 3 1/2-day-old mouse embryo (called "embryo
stem" or ES cells) briefly have the potential to develop into any type of cell
in the adult mouse, making these "unspecialized" cells perfect carriers for an
inserted gene. It took several years of work, however, before researchers
learned to maintain these cells in the laboratory in the unspecialized state. In
the intact embryo, they quickly lose this potential.

   If a desired gene is put in an ES cell and that cell is transferred to
another mouse embryo, the gene will end up throughout the growing mouse.

   The other achievement was developing a way to insert a mutated gene into ES
cells so the gene would end up in its proper place among the 50,000 or 100,000
genes in the cell.

   Today, two years after the full scope of the new methodology became
available, the Whitehead Institute in Cambridge has a number of researchers
using gene targeting to knock out various mouse genes. A major goal is to learn
whether products of genes found in adult mice, and especially in disease states
like cancer or infections, have necessary roles in the developing young mouse.

   In April, Whitehead scientists reported a landmark experiment in gene
targeting. Rudolf Jaenisch and Maarten Zijlstra, along with David H. Raulet from
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and others, used the technique to
create a strain of mice lacking a key gene in the immune system, called the beta
2-microglobulin gene.

   The results were twofold: The mice developed normally, shooting down a
long-held idea that a protein made by that gene was crucial in embryonic
development. However, the mice lacked important defensive cells called killer
T-cells. This was evidence that, without the protein, the body's defenses
against infections and cancer are deficient.

   That one experiment illustrates how gene targeting can home like a rifle shot
on fundamental questions about how organisms develop that are hard to answer any
other way. Whitehead researchers are using the method to probe other conundrums
as well:

   - An eye tumor called retinoblastoma develops more frequently in people born
with one copy of a cancer-suppressing gene that most people have in two copies.
Researcher Tyler Jacks is creating mouse strains with only one copy of the
protective gene, aiming to understand how it gets mutated (knocked out) in
people susceptible to retinoblastoma, and whether there might be a way to
prevent that mutation. - Substances called lymphokines that stimulate blood cell
formation and help fight infections are plentiful when the body iss under
attack, but have never been found in healthy individuals. Post-doctoral fellow
Victor Tybulewicz is using gene targeting to make mouse strains lacking the
ability to make one lymphokine altogether, to see if it has any normal role.

   - Whitehead scientists also plan to study the effect of disrupting genes that
make cells resistant to anticancer drugs; oncogenes, which apparently are
runaway versions of growth-regulating genes; and recently discovered master
genes in the immune system whose roles are still unclear.

   There's one important limitation to gene targeting: Just as you wouldn't
learn much about the details of a car's workings by yanking out the entire
engine, scientists generally can't knock out a gene that has a widespread
"housekeeping" role in the animal. "You would end up with a dead mouse," said
Zijlstra of the Whitehead.

   As with most genetic research, however, gene targeting has run into some
problems and spawned some puzzling results.

   A major disappointment has been the slow progress in creating a mouse with
cystic fibrosis. After the CF gene was isolated last year by Dr. Francis Collins
of the University of Michigan and Lap Chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick
Children in Toronto, scientists began hunting for the mouse version of the gene.

   At every step of the way, the technical problems of extracting a usable form
of the cystic fibrosis gene and getting it to a mouse embryo have proven to be
far more difficult than scientists had hoped.

   "We've rarely encountered problems as obnoxious as this one" from a technical
standpoint, Collins said in a recent interview.

   With other diseases as well, using gene targeting to create animal models of
tragic human disorders may prove to be a daunting challenge.

   In Huntington's disease, for instance, scientists have identified the
defective gene but been unable to isolate it from the chromosome where it
resides, despite years of frustrating and tedious work.

   And even when the gene is in hand, it's turned out that inserting the mutated
disease gene into the mouse doesn't always result in an animal with symptoms of
the human disease.

   In one case, researchers used gene targeting to make a mouse strain deficient
in the enzyme called hprt. Human infants with this deficiency have a devastating
disease called Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, resulting in retardation and
self-mutilating behavior. The transgenic mice lacking hprt showed no such
symptoms.

   But researchers aren't necessarily discouraged when this happens. If the
mouse develops normally despite the defective gene, "perhaps it has a mechanism
that can compensate" for the flawed genetic instructions, said Joel Schindler, a
researcher at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. "If
we can figure out what the mouse is doing to compensate, then perhaps there is
something in humans that is similar."

"KNOCKING OUT" A MOUSE GENE TO LEARN ITS FUNCTION

    With new technique, any one of 50,000 genes can be mutated to create new
strain.
1. In lab, previously isolated gene is altered, or mutated, to make it inactive.

2. Copies of inactivated gene are inserted into cells taken from a 3.5-day-old
embryo of a brown-coated "donor" mouse.
3. Mutated gene seeks out normal counterpart in mouse embryo cell (ES cell) and
replaces it.
4. Cells with inactive gene are injected into another embryo taken from "host"
mouse with black coat. Embryo now has cells from black and brown mice.
5. Embryo with cell mixture is surgically implanted in uterus of foster mother
mouse.
6. Mouse gives birth to black and brown "chimeras," or blends of the two
strains, which shows mice contain mutated gene in some cells and normal gene in
others.
7. Chimeric mice are bred to host straira (left) and En Li with research mice at
the Whitehead Institute laboratories in Cambridge. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / BARRY
CHIN

GRAPHIC: DRAWING DIAGRAM PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1990


                             1784 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1990 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             June 6, 1990 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. PAGE: C11

LENGTH: 947 words

HEADLINE: IS PUBLIC EDUCATION SHORTCHANGING GIFTED AND TALENTED?

BYLINE: JOAN BECK

BODY:

   Wednesday, June 6, 1990 IS PUBLIC EDUCATION SHORTCHANGING GIFTED AND
TALENTED?

   Is it unfair to group public schoolchildren by ability? To allow some
youngsters to move ahead faster, to learn more than others?

   What if the children in the faster classes are more likely to be white and
middle class and most of those learning less are minorities and poor? Is
tracking by ability then unacceptable racial segregation?

   When the goal of providing all children equality of education conflicts  with
the goal of helping all children learn up to the level of their  abilities,
which should take precedence?

   Support for ability grouping -- by first-grade reading sections, by subject
matter, by across-the-board tracking, even by special schools for the gifted
and talented -- rises and falls as much in response to political pressures as
academic rationales.

   Now, opposition to grouping is growing, largely reflecting the desperate
concern for helping poor, minority youngsters at risk of academic failure.  Some
school systems are dismantling existing track systems. Other educators  are even
talking about phasing out the popular magnet schools so their  resources can be
diverted to struggling neighborhood schools.

   Opponents of ability grouping make several strong arguments. It can be
difficult, for example, to identify all the ``gifted,'' ``talented'' and
``bright.'' Formal tests are often inadequate. Teacher judgments can be biased
by family background, behavior and appearance. Some bright children will be
missed because they don't fit compliant, middle-class stereotypes or have
difficulty speaking English.

   Further, children left behind in slower tracks or groups suffer a serious
loss of self-esteem and from a lack of brighter classmates and role models  from
whom to learn. Because the ``bright'' groups move ahead faster, slower
youngsters can't ever catch up and are stuck forever in the academic pits.

   Bright kids draw the best teachers and the most resources, opponents  charge.
Slower youngsters get dull drill, plodding lessons, inexperienced  teachers.

   Some of the school systems backing away from ability grouping have found an
ally and an excuse in the Carnegie Foundation. Last year, a report by its
Council on Adolescent Development strongly condemned tracking as ``one of the
most divisive and damaging school practices in existence.''

   The Carnegie report cited ``the psychic numbing'' children in the lower
tracks experience from a ``dumbed-down'' curriculum, the widening gap in
achievement between faster and slower groups and the increased racial  isolation
of ability groupings.

   Instead, it proposed that schools deal with students of widely diverse
academic abilities by teaming them together in cooperative learning projects  in
which brighter students help slower classmates and ``students receive group
rewards.'' The report also advocates using capable students to tutor others.

   Such proposals do irreparable injustice and harm to bright children, who  are
just as entitled as other youngsters to an education appropriate to their
abilities. Yet the smarter children are, the more likely their classes will
leave them bored and unchallenged, with their great potential unfulfilled.

   Bright children already know most of what they are expected to learn during
an average school year, studies show. To expect them, as Carnegie does, to
spend much of their class time helping slower learners is an inexcusable waste
of their irreplaceable learning time. They need the challenge of new ideas and
new material and opportunities to learn at the accelerated speed most
comfortable for them.

   To expect them to sustain a love of learning while marking time waiting for
slower students to catch up, if ever, is like asking Michael Jordan to be
challenged by playing basketball indefinitely at a local Y.

   Bright children are much more likely to be middle class than minority poor.
(Some incalculable part of intelligence is assumed to be inherited and
fostering their children's learning is one mark of successful middle-class
families, white or minority.)

   But the remedies lie in protecting all children's developing brains through
good prenatal care and using proven early learning techniques to increase
intelligence long before first grade -- not in holding smart youngsters back.

   Instead of treating high intelligence and talent as a sort of shameful
secret, schools should be doing everything they can to find giftedness and
learning potential in all children, to nourish it, cherish it and encourage it
-- especially in youngsters from families that lack the resources to do so
themselves.

   Bright children aren't entitled to more resources or better teachers than
other youngsters. But they are due an equal share -- and an education that is  a
good match for their abilities.

   Educators who refuse to acknowledge the special needs of high-ability
children -- because of a preoccupation with at-risk youngsters, a misreading  of
research on the gifted or a lopsided focus on equality instead of  excellence --
need to look ahead to the nation's next century.

   The new drugs, genetic therapies, inventions, energy solutions,
transportation and housing systems, economic improvements, foreign policy
strategies, government and business expertise, environmental leadership and
human rights advocacy will have to come from today's children. We can't afford
to make their schooling a holding-back operation -- whatever the motivation.
Knight-Ridder News Service.

   Joan Beck is a columnist for the Chicago Tribune.

   ILLUSTRATION: Drawing By Newsday/ANTHONY D'ADAMO of Children climbing through
the systems

   The following fields overflowed: PAGE = PAGE: C11

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1785 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      June 5, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 279 words

HEADLINE: Human Gene Therapy Moves One Step Closer

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson

BODY:

   The first experiments to reverse a human disease by transplanting genes into
a patient's blood cells moved a step closer last week when a federal review
panel voted unanimously to approve the controversial project.

   The Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee voted provisional approval; a final vote
is scheduled for July 30. The Food and Drug Administration also must approve the
project.

   In the experiment, scientists from the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute and the National Cancer Institute will remove white blood cells from
four children suffering a genetic disease called severe combined immune
deficiency syndrome, or SCID -- best remembered as the disease that afflicted
David, the Boy in the Bubble.

   These children are missing the gene that makes adenosine deaminase, or ADA,
an enzyme. Without ADA, a toxic compound builds up in the children's blood and
destroys the immune system.

   NCI's R. Michael Blease and NHLBI's W. French Anderson plan to use a
genetically engineered virus to carry a normal copy of the ADA gene into the T
cells, a type of white blood cell, from the afflicted children. The repair gene
will become part of the cell and begin making ADA -- enough, the researchers
hope, to reverse the disease.

   The T cells then will be grown in the laboratory until there are large
numbers of them. They will then be returned to the children. The scientists,
however, will not immediately be able to determine whether the genetically
altered T cells make enough of the enzyme to cure the disease.

   For that reason, the children will continue to receive injections of ADA in a
preparation called PEG-ADA, which boosts their immune system.


                             1786 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words

HEADLINE: CELL TRANSPLANT FOUND EFFECTIVE IN MUSCLE DISEASE

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   The first attempt in humans to correct the muscle defect that is at the heart
of muscular dystrophy was a success, researchers reported yesterday.

   The therapy involves transplanting healthy muscle cells from another person
into the muscle of a patient with muscular dystrophy. The healthy cells began
making the protein that is lacking in patients with the disease.

   The work does not mean a treatment is imminent for muscular dystrophy, a
genetic disease that causes progressive and irreversible muscle deterioration
that almost always leads to death by the age of 30. Among other things,
scientists must determine whether the transplants will work on large muscle
groups and whether patients will reject the transplanted tissue.

A Ray of Hope

   Nevertheless, experts who cited the new results and previous work in animals
said the finding held out a real ray of hope, not only for muscular dystrophy
but also for other degenerative muscle diseases.

   The results were announced yesterday by Dr. Peter Law, a professor of
neurology at the University of Tennessee in Memphis, at a meeting of the
Muscular Dystrophy Association in Tucson, Ariz.

   Dr. Law's finding involved a single patient, Sam Looper of Pickens, S.C., a
9-year-old with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common form of the
disease. To avoid possible damage to more important muscles, the researchers
tested the treatment in one of his big toes.

   At least seven other patients in this country are undergoing the experimental
treatment, Dr. Law said in an interview yesterday, but those results are not yet
available. Dr. Leon Charash, chairman of the national medical advisory board of
the Muscular Dystrophy Association, said he believed another group of
researchers, at the Montreal Neurological Institute, had replicated the
treatment. Dr. Charash said he expected the group, which like Dr. Law is being
financed by the association, to announce findings tomorrow.

   Several calls yesterday to the home, office and clinic of the leader of the
Montreal group, Dr. George Karpati, were not answered.

   Two other groups are also pursuing the treatment, supported in part by the
association, which encouraged the concurrent studies to have a ''horse race,''
Dr. Charash said.

The Next Steps

   Dr. Charash added that the finding is promising enough to allow researchers
to move quickly to try the muscle cell injections in larger muscles of the leg
that help control balance.

   In addition, Dr. Law said, the method could be applied to other forms of
muscular dystrophy or to any disease of muscular degeneration, whether or not
the exact genetic defect causing the degeneration is known.

   ''I think it is of great importance,'' Dr. Charash said. ''This represents
the first time a treatment has been offered. It is a moment of great scientific
significance.''

   If the finding is confirmed, said Dr. W. French Anderson, a branch chief at
the National Institutes of Health who has devoted his 22-year scientific career
to designing human gene therapies, ''this would be a landmark.''

Hurdles Remain

   But investigators also sounded a note of caution. Dr. Francis Collins, a
gene-therapy researcher at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, said, ''It
is encouraging to see that there are some real possibilities here, but there are
a lot of hurdles ahead,'' before there can be an effective treatment.

   Dr. Collins said the research ''is a promising lead, but we ought to have our
eyes open. Patients with muscular dystrophy are in a desperate situation and I
think we should be very careful not to give them false hope.''

   Dr. Collins said it was not known how effective the treatment would be in
larger muscles, nor whether the body would reject transplants of huge numbers of
muscle cells. It is also not known how long the treatment will last. It seems to
correct muscle weakness and greatly prolong the lives of mice with muscular
dystrophy, but more work needs to be done to learn the effects on humans.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy occurs about once in every 4,000 births, Dr.
Charash said, and strikes boys almost exclusively. Few patients survive beyond
their early 20's, succumbing to breathing problems from weakened chest muscles.

Every Day Is Worse

   ''The disease is inexorable and progressive,'' Dr. Charash said. ''The
quality of life gets worse and worse, and the one thing you can be sure of is
that tomorrow will be worse than today.''

   Dr. Law and others have long thought that muscle cell injections might offer
real hope for patients with muscular dystrophy and other muscle-wasting diseases
because of the special way that muscle cells form. Unlike other cells, which
exist as separate entities in organs, touching each other like lilies in a pond,
muscle cells fuse together to form one giant cell with many nuclei.

   The idea that Dr. Law developed over the last 21 years in laboratory and
animal studies was to try to fuse healthy muscle cells with sick ones so that
the good genes of the healthy cells would correct the bad genes of the sick
ones.

   In his experiments with eight patients, all boys, he took the healthy cells
from the boys' fathers and injected them into a muscle of the foot that controls
the movement of each boy's large toe. The muscle of the other foot was given an
injection with a dummy substance and neither the parents nor the researchers
knew which foot got which treatment. The boys took the anti-rejection drug
cyclosporine to prevent their immune systems from attacking the transplanted
cells.

   Three months later, the muscle cells were biopsied to see whether the
transplant was effective. Dr. Law also tested muscle strength and in the case of
Sam Looper that was reported Friday, strength had increased 20 percent, he said.

   Lynn Looper, Sam's mother, said that while she was awaiting the results, she
kept asking her son to move his toes, looking for signs that the toe on one foot
was stronger. ''After maybe a month, Sam said, 'This one's stronger,' '' she
recalled yesterday. ''And he was right.''


                             1787 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

HEADLINE: New Genetic Treatment Given Vote of Confidence

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   In a surprising turn of events, the first proposal to treat children with a
severe genetic disease by inserting new genes into their cells has received an
enthusiastic vote of confidence.

   A Federal subcommittee approved the proposed human gene therapy unanimously
on Friday and recommended that the proposal be considered for final approval by
a full committee at the National Institutes of Health on July 30.

   The vote was a surprise because when the subcommittee first considered the
highly experimental therapy at a meeting on March 30, panel members raised so
many questions that it seemed the medical and ethical issues would take many
months to resolve.

   But since then the scientists have significantly altered their proposal. And
the speed with which the new therapy is moving through the intricate approval
process means that as early as midfall the researchers may be able to start
treating children who suffer from an rare immune disorder much like the disease
that killed David, the ''bubble boy'' from Texas.

   ''I thought we'd get approval, but I never thought it would be unanimous,''
said Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute who
is an author of the proposal.

   Dr. Anderson, Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute and
their colleagues have identified four children who are potential candidates for
the new gene therapy.

   The panel that gave its approval on Friday, the Human Gene Therapy
Subcommittee, a governing body of the National Institutes of Health, asked that
several minor modifications be made to the proposal before the summer meeting of
the full Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. Dr. Anderson said the changes would
be made.

   Dr. LeRoy Walters, chairman of the subcommittee, who is a bioethicist at
Georgetown University in Washington, said that while there were no guarantees,
the full committee was likely to accept the subcommittee's recommendation. The
gene therapy proposal still needs approval from the director of the National
Institutes of Health and from the Food and Drug Administration, but they, too,
are expected to go along and allow treatment of patients to begin.

   Under the proposal, Dr. Anderson, Dr. Blaese and their colleagues will try to
treat children who suffer from a lack of a critical enzyme, adenosine deaminase,
or ADA. Without the enzyme, toxins in the body build up and destroy the T-cells
and B-cells of the immune system, leaving the children prey to large-scale and
potentially lethal infections.

   The researchers will try to treat the children by isolating T-cells from the
patients' blood. Placing the cells in laboratory culture dishes, the researchers
will infect the T-cells with a special type of genetically engineered virus that
includes a copy of the ADA gene that the children lack. The virus has been
carefully doctored so that it is safe and cannot cause any disease.

   The researchers will return the modified immune cells to the children through
a simple blood transfusion. If all goes as planned, the T-cells will propagate
enough of the missing enzyme to help restore the children's immune system to
normal or near-normal.

   Among the changes that the researchers made to their proposal that persuaded
the 14 members of the subcommittee to approve it was a guarantee that the
children receiving the gene therapy would also remain on another type of therapy
in which they take a synthetic form of the ADA enzyme, known as PEG-ADA.

   In important new data that persuaded the subcommittee to approve the gene
therapy proposal, collaborators of the researchers in Milan, Italy, and at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York showed that when defective
T-cells from children with the immune disease were injected into mice, the
T-cells rapidly died. But if they first inserted the gene for the ADA enzyme
into the T-cells, the cells survived for months in the mouse's bloodstream.

   ''That's the best evidence that I know of in the world that this technique
may allow the T-cells to survive inside the body for a long time and carry on
the normal function of the immune system,'' said Dr. Walters.


                             1788 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      June 3, 1990, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A7

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: Cell Therapy for Muscular Dystrophy Shows Promise

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Malcolm Gladwell, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   An experimental cell therapy has shown early promise in treating muscular
dystrophy (MD), a degenerative fatal muscle disorder that afflicts one in every
3,500 males born in the United States.

   University of Tennessee researcher Peter Law reported that the first of eight
children with muscular dystrophy given an experimental treatment known as
myoblast transfer had shown improvements in muscle function and structure. The
patient also had elevated levels of the protein critical to healthy muscle
development known as dystrophin, which, due to an inherited genetic defect, MD
patients normally cannot produce, Law told the annual meeting of the Muscular
Dystrophy Association in Tucson.

   "Myoblast transfer holds great promise as a potential therapy for muscular
dystrophy and other devastating hereditary muscle diseases," said Leon Charash,
chairman of the Muscular Dystrophy Association's medical advisory committee.
"Many more questions must be answered and much remains to be done before the
procedure becomes a treatment, but Dr. Law's finding is an exciting first sign
of success."

   Researchers also stressed that the therapy is not a cure for muscular
dystrophy but could buy valuable time for MD sufferers while more complete
therapies are developed.

   The idea behind myoblast therapy dates to the breakthrough discovery in 1987
that the basic defect in the muscles of children afflicted with the Duchenne
variant of MD -- the most common form of the disease -- was the absence of
dystrophin. Dystrophin acts like a kind of scaffolding in muscle tissue,
reinforcing and stabilizing the structure of muscle tissue, and without it MD
patients are typically put in wheelchairs before they reach adolescence and die
in their early twenties.

   Myoblast therapy consists of taking muscle cells from healthy people -- who
are capable of making dystrophin -- and injecting them into the muscle of MD
patients. Because muscle cells are constantly regenerating, fusing with other
"satellite" cells outside muscle fiber, the theory is that the injected cells
will join with the abnormal MD cells and produce hybrids capable of producing
dystrophin.

   This procedure had been shown to work in mice. But the results presented
yesterday by Law mark the first time that there has been any evidence the
procedure could work in a human. Three weeks after the first injection, Law said
he found new muscle fibers containing dystrophin in the big toe of his first
patient, where the injection had been given.

   "We also found significant improvement in muscle structure and modest
improvement in muscle function," Law said.

   Law has 10 other patients, three who are waiting for injections and seven who
are in the middle of the treatment.

   He said he expects a wider range of results soon. Three studies involving the
same procedure are either underway or about to begin at other medical facilities
in North America.

   Muscular dystrophy researchers cautioned about making too mucb of the study.
They stressed that the findings were preliminary and that only one child has
completed the therapy.

   They also said it is not clear that the myoblast therapy, even if it proves
successful in the early experiments, will be effective on all muscles effected
by MD. For example, many MD patients eventually die from heart failure because
of a degeneration of coronary muscle. But injecting muscle cells into the heart
would be difficult. And in any case it is highly likely that because of the
different way heart muscle grows and functions, myoblast therapy will not work
there in the same way it does with skeletal muscle.

   "This hopefully will be a stopgap procedure that might stop, slow or even
reverse the degeneration of skeletal muscle, until such time as more effective
gene therapy could come into play," said Lawrence Stern, research director of
the Muscular Dystrophy Assocation. "This is not potentially a cure."


                             1789 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 283 words

HEADLINE: Gene Transfer Test Opens New Strategy For Fighting Cancer

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 22

BODY:

   Experiments have shown for the first time that human blood cells carrying
foreign genes will zero in on tumors, researchers said today. The findings could
open a new strategy for treating cancer.

   The preliminary tests, conducted on seven patients, is the first approved
attempt at human gene therapy - inserting potentially helpful genes inside the
body. The experiment was intended to demonstrate that the approach was feasible.
In it, physicians introduced a bacterial gene that had no effect on the
patients' cancer.

   Soon, however, they plan to equip patients' blood cells with a gene that
delivers a powerful natural cancer-killing substance, tumor necrosis factor. The
researchers say they hope the procedure will cure the disease by flooding the
tumor with extremely high levels of toxic proteins.

   ''This is the first study in which foreign genes have been introduced into
humans with survival of those cells,'' said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg. ''This is
meant to pave the way to introducing genes that can improve the survival of
cancer patients.''

   His pilot study showed that not only did the cells survive, but they also
homed in on tumors and produced a foreign protein there.

   Dr. Rosenberg outlined his results at the annual meeting of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. A more detailed report is to be published in The
New England Journal of Medicine.

   At today's meeting, Dr. Rosenberg described the results of experiments on his
first five patients in the last year.

   All the patients treated were expected to die within three months. Two of
them responded well to the increased levels of tumor-infiltrating cells, and the
melanoma has disappeared in one for 10 months.


                             1790 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1990 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 21, 1990, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BONUS

LENGTH: 1766 words

HEADLINE: Past All-USA scholars stick to their award-winning ways

BYLINE: Donna Gable

BODY:

    In 1987, USA TODAY picked the first All-USA High School Academic Team. Since
then, 60 high school students have made the first team.  USA TODAY's Donna Gable
tells what they're doing now.

1987
- Alison Begleiter , Half Hollow Hills East High , Dix Hills, N.Y. ; junior,
Yale. Major: biology; assistant editor, Yale science magazine; summer: research,
Yale Medical School.
- Christine Burrows , Villa Walsh Academy , Morristown, N.J. ; junior, Duke.
Major: neuroscience; writes for science magazine; summer: study at Oxford.
- Louise Chang , University of Chicago Laboratory High . Graduates after three
years at Harvard with degree in biochemistry; violinist, Harvard- Radcliffe
Orchestra; next: graduate school at U. of California-San Francisco.
- Teresa Chen , Shaker High, Latham, N.Y. ; in six-year medical program at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, N.Y. , and Albany (N.Y.) Medical College
, bachelor's degree this summer, medical degree, 1993.
- David Cohen , South Kingstown High, Wakefield, R.I .; junior, Yale. Major:
math; science magazine writer; summer: geophysics research.
- Gretchen Cowman , Miami (Fla.) Killian High; junior, Washington U., St. Louis.
Major: chemical engineering; summer: bike tour of Eastern states; works with
underprivileged kids, homeless.
- Zayd Eldadah , Rockville (Md.) High .  Graduates after three years at U. of
Maryland, biology; next: Johns Hopkins U. Medical School, Baltimore.
- Laura Hengehold , ArchbishopAlter High, Kettering, Ohio ; 1989 graduate,
University of Dayton, bachelor's in philosophy; awarded Junior and Senior
Philosophy Awards (1988 and 1989); attended Penn State graduate school; summer:
working, reading and writing.
- Stephen Hise, Davenport (Iowa) Central High; junior, U. of Michigan. Major:
electrical engineering; works in nuclear engineering lab; summer: taking
classes, working in nuclear engineering lab and working with a band, Tao
Puppies.
- Brian Hooker , Benjamin Mays Academy of Science and Mathematics, Atlanta ;
junior, Stanford. Major: electrical engineering; summer: AT&T Bell Labs.
- Derek Lundberg , Downers Grove (Ill.) South High ; junior, U. of Chicago.
Major: biology; summer: research at U. of Chicago Hospital.
- Yu-Shen Ng , Palos Verdes (Calif.) High . Graduates from Stanford in December
as electrical engineer.
- Edward Pallesen , Lincoln (Neb.) Southeast High ; junior, Harvard. Major:
government; varsity rowing team; summer: U.S. Senate intern.
- Stephen Racunas , Valley High, New Kensington, Pa .; in five-year program at
Carnegie-Mellon U., Pittsburgh. Majors: physics, electrical engineering; summer:
taking classes and working on an honors research program.
- Katherine Shaver , Shadow Mountain High, Phoenix ; junior, Princeton. Major:
politics; managing editor, Daily Princetonian; summer: intern, American Society
of Magazine Editors.
- Christine Stoffel , Bettendorf (Iowa) High ; junior, Harvard. Major: biology;
summer: working at the Concord Field Station investigating the oxygen
consumption and metabolic rates of animals.
- Muneesh Tewari , Cass Technical High, Detroit . Graduates after three years at
Case Western Reserve U., Cleveland, biochemistry; named to 1990 All- USA College
Academic First Team; next: U. of Michigan Medical School.
- Frank Tota , Patrick Henry High, Roanoke, Va .; junior, Harvard. Major:
English, American literature; summer: writing short stories in Alaska.
- Jody White , Melbourne (Fla.) High ; junior, MIT. Major: physics; summer:
research for thesis in astrophysics.
- Kathryn Wooten , Strom Thurmond High, Johnston, S.C .; junior, Furman U.,
Greenville, S.C. Major: English; summer: undecided.

1988
- Pamela Abshire , Salem (Va.) High ; sophomore, CalTech. Major: physics;
studying for pilot's license; summer: research at CalTech.
- Deborah Cheng , Rolla (Mo.) High ; sophomore, Stanford. Major: undeclared;
summer: resting.
- Charles Doran , Walt Whitman High, Bethesda, Md. ; sophomore, Harvard. Major:
mathematics; summer: statistical analysis and math research.
- Nathan Gilliland , Northwest High, Omaha ; sophomore, U. of California-
Berkeley; active in environmental, anti-apartheid movements. Major: political
science; summer: auditor, U.S. General Accounting Office.
- Tracy Goldsmith , Falmouth (Mass.) High ; sophomore, College of William &
Mary, Williamsburg, Va. Major: government; summer: study in Switzerland.
- Jonathan Gross , Miami (Fla.) Killian High ; sophomore, Harvard. Major:
philosophy; inner-city tutoring program; summer: computer programming, travel
and working in a genetics research lab.
- Katrin Jellema , Grand Haven (Mich.) High ; sophomore, U. of Michigan. Major:
history/anthropology; Amnesty International; Feminist Women's Union; summer:
uncertain.
- David Kaufman , Altoona (Pa.) Area High ; sophomore, U. of Pennsylvania.
Major: economics; on student board of trustees; summer: operate a business.
- Alice Kim , Pittsford-Mendon High, Pittsford, N.Y .; sophomore, Harvard.
Major: English; summer: job with Eastman Kodak Co.
- John Miller , Salesianum School, Wilmington, Del .; sophomore, Princeton.
Major: engineering; reporter, Daily Princetonian; summer: uncertain.
- Beth Noveck , Lakewood Prep, Howell, N.J .; junior, Harvard. Major:
international relations; research assistant, Ford Foundation; freshman adviser;
elected to Board of Directors of Harvard Coop; summer: doing European studies
research in Vienna.
- Jennifer Patience , Thousand Oaks (Calif.) High ; sophomore, Stanford; works
with shelter to feed the hungry; teaches junior high chemistry. Major: physics;
summer: job at Hughes Aircraft.
- Erik Phelps , Durand (Ill.) High ; sophomore, Beloit (Wis.) College. Majors:
economics, management; basketball; summer: work with computers for Rockford Park
District.
- Marybeth Rizzo , Upper Arlington High, Columbus, Ohio ; sophomore, Ohio State.
Major: mechanical engineering; summer: summer school.
- Derek Walker , Benjamin Mays Academy of Science and Mathematics , Atlanta;
sophomore, MIT. Major: electrical engineering; National Society of Black
Engineers; summer: working for Bellcore (Bell Communication Research facility).
- Rebecca Walkowitz , Stuyvesant High , New York City; junior, Harvard. Major:
history, literature; reporter, Harvard Crimson; summer: intern, The Atlanta
Journal and Constitution.
- Jason Wang , University High, Irvine, Calif .; sophomore, MIT. Major:
molecular biology; research in human gene therapy; summer: work at Whitehead
Institute of Biomedical Research.
- Seth Watkins , Blind Brook
High, Rye Brook, N.Y .; sophomore, Duke. Major: mechanical engineering, public
policy; summer: unknown.
- Ruth Wolbert , Flint (Mich.) Central Community High;sophomore, Michigan State.
Major: violin, English composition; plays in Midland Symphony; actress; teaching
Suzuki; summer: attending school.
- Wayne Yu , Stillwater (Okla.) High ; sophomore, Harvard. Major; chemistry;
student government; summer: attending school.

1989
- Stacey Arberg , Hilton Head (S.C.) High ; freshman, Princeton. Major:
undecided; summer: molecular biology research at Roche Institute (N.J.).
- Rolf Barth , Upper Arlington High , Columbus, Ohio ; freshman, Duke. Major:
biochemistry; awarded full scholarship to Duke; summer: working in the
neurobiology lab at National Institutes of Health.
- Steven Castle , Gaither High , Tampa ; freshman, Brigham Young. Major;
chemistry; in June begins two years as Mormon missionary in Okinawa .
- Divya Chander , Pascack Valley High , Hillsdale, N.J. ; freshman, Harvard.
Major: physics, biology; actress; Indian dancer; summer: undecided.
- Jacqueline Chang , Williamsville (N.Y.)North High; freshman, Harvard. Major:
undecided; plays clarinet in orchestra; summer: undecided.
- Linda Chang , Phillips Exeter Academy , Exeter, N.H. ; freshman, Harvard.
Major: economics, East Asian languages; violinist in chamber music group;
summer: attending school.
- Emmett Chiles IV , Rivercrest High , Wilson, Ark. ; freshman, Hendrix College
, Conway, Ark . Major: English; writer for student newspaper and magazine,
Student Senate, Student Host Committee; summer: undecided.
- Weihsueh Chiu , Atholton High School , Columbia, Md. ; freshman, Harvard.
Major: physics; summer: job at NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center .
- Scott Ellis , Poudre High , Fort Collins, Colo. ; freshman, Harvard. Major:
social sciences; summer: work as computer programmer for Eastman Kodak Co.
- Oliver Goldstein , Lawrence High , Cedarhurst, N.Y. ; freshman, Duke. Major:
undecided; American-Israel Political Action Committee; four-year scholarship
provides for study at Oxford, summer 1991; summer: undecided.
- Robert Ingram , Cedar Creek School , Ruston, La. ; freshman, U. of the South ,
Sewanee, Tenn. Major: history; track, cross-country, violinist in orchestra;
summer: writing a grant proposal.
- David Joerg , Illinois Mathematics & Science Academy , Aurora, Ill. Enters
Harvard in September after a year developing his computer software business;
summer: running the business; major: undecided.
- Ali Mesiwala , Monta Vista High , Cupertino, Calif. ; freshman, Johns Hopkins
U. , Baltimore. Major: biomedical engineering; crew; summer: working at a
biomedical engineering firm testing samples, computer programming.
- Eric Oberthaler , Good Counsel High , Wheaton, Md. ; freshman, Oberlin (Ohio)
College ; plays trumpet. Major: music composition; summer: rock band tour.
- Michael Rothbart , Community High , Ann Arbor, Mich. ; freshman, Swarthmore
(Pa.) College. Major: undecided. He and friends plan a walk around the world to
promote peace, international cooperation.
- Scott Schiamberg , Okemos (Mich.) High ; freshman, MIT. Major: material
science, engineering; varsity baseball; shelter, soup kitchen volunteer; summer:
visiting Japan.
- Kannon Shanmugam , Lawrence (Kan.) High ; freshman, Harvard. Major: classics;
newspaper sports writer; plays clarinet in band; Big Brother; summer: intern in
U.S. Senate or with federal judge.
- Aaron Stutz , Pine View School , Sarasota, Fla. ; sophomore, Harvard. Major;
anthropology; summer: archeological dig in Israel.
- Allene Whitney , Capital High , Helena, Mont. ; freshman, Montana State .
Major: microbiology; writes for science magazine; summer: science camp counselor
in Montana.
- Channing Yu , Gateway High , Monroeville, Pa. ; sophomore, Harvard. Major:
biochemistry, molecular biology; orchestra violinist; summer: research at
Carnegie Mellon U., Pittsburgh.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; b/w, Joe Stewardson (USA TODAY Academic All-Stars, Derek
Walker); PHOTO; b/w, David M. Jennings, AP ( USA TODAY Academic All-Stars,
Teresa Chen)

CUTLINE: DEREK WALKER: ''Study is not the ... key in college.  Your extra
curriculars are also important.  If you only study and do nothing outside
studying, it's just as detrimental to your progress as if you didn't study at
all.'' CUTLINE: TERESA CHEN: ''Take it one day at a time.  If you don't worry
about what's going to happen next, you'll do a better job.  Do what you like
best. You'll be better motivated and you'll enjoy yourself.''


                             1791 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      April 29, 1990, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Magazine; Part 2; Page 9; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2974 words

HEADLINE: GOOD HEALTH MAGAZINE;
MEDICINE;
COMING TO GRIPS WITH HEREDITY;
SCIENTISTS ARE CREATING A DETAILED ROAD MAP OF THE ENTIRE HUMAN GENE SYSTEM, AND
THERE IS NOW A REALISTIC POSSIBILITY THAT MEDICAL ADVANCES MAY GENERATE NEW
TREATMENTS FOR GENETIC DISORDERS

BYLINE: By MYRA VANDERPOOL GORMLEY, This article was excerpted from the book,
Family Diseases: Are You at Risk? by Myra Vanderpool Gormley, 1989, $14.95,
published by Genealogical Publishing Co., 1001 N. Calvert St., Baltimore, Md.
21202.

BODY:

   Few families are not affected in some way by genetic disorders, whether a
crippling and devastating disease such as cystic fibrosis, a chronic condition
like high blood pressure or a predisposition to alcoholism or mental illness.
Yet most of us know very little about genetic diseases -- what they are, how
they are transmitted, how they may be screened or treated, even how to find
information about them. Indeed, few of us know whether we or our children are at
risk from such afflictions.

   While geneticists have long been interested in genealogy, and genealogists in
genetics, only recently have the two fields become linked in a way that promises
dramatic advances in our understanding of the relationship between genetic
disorders and ancestry.

   For the first time there is a realistic possibility that medical advances
eventually may correct, cure or result in new treatments for genetic disorders.
Today, new methods of genetic detection and advances towards various forms of
gene therapy offer hope.

   U.S. scientists plan to create a detailed road map of the entire human gene
system that they hope will lead to improved diagnosis of hereditary diseases,
development of new drugs and an assortment of unforeseen benefits. There is
great enthusiasm for the project. It would make possible the mapping of genes
responsible for muscular dystrophy, neurofibromatosis and the genetic sequences
related to manic depression. Only recently, with the development of specialized
automated technologies, has a high-resolution map showing every human gene
become feasible.

   If you are like most people, you probably think that genetic diseases are
rare. Although it is true that each of the more than 3,000 genetic disorders is
relatively rare, taken as a group they are quite common. Innumerable people
suffer from conditions due wholly or in part to defective genes or chromosomes.
For example:

   Between 12 million and 15 million Americans have a genetic disorder of one
kind or another.

   A total of 20 million Americans are carriers of true genetic defects.

   One of every 250 newborn babies has a genetic disorder.

   One of every three babies or young children admitted to a hospital is there
because of a genetic problem.

   Each of us carries an average of between four and seven abnormal recessive
genes that do not affect us but may cause disease in our offspring.

   MOREOVER, IT IS now recognized that the major cripplers and killers of adults
-- diabetes, heart disease, various psychiatric illnesses and some cancers --
all have significant genetic components. Current genetics research in these and
other areas is blazing frontiers almost undreamed of a generation ago.

   The human genetics revolution is providing precise information on who is most
vulnerable to what kind of illness and who particularly should avoid certain
environmental agents. It is providing fresh insights into the function of
regulatory genes that affect all human growth and development, from birth to
death.

   As scientists discover the genetic risk factors of certain diseases, people
who find that they are susceptible may be able to reduce their chances of
illness simply by altering specific aspects of their behavior and environment.
As research advances, it is enabling doctors to help millions of people control
or prevent inherited diseases, including some diseases that have been identified
only in the past 20 years.

   The recent wave of genetic research has already brought about the following
discoveries:

   Research continues on human gene therapy in which doctors transplant copies
of a normal gene into the cells of a patient whose own body lacks the gene or
has it in an abnormal form. Eventually, this process may be used to effectively
treat patients with cystic fibrosis, various forms of hemophilia and possibly
muscular dystrophy.

   A genetic test, still in a preliminary state, has been devised for a kidney
disease that affects about 400,000 Americans and is responsible for one in 10
kidney-dialysis patients. This test would enable doctors to diagnose the disease
before symptoms appear, which is usually in middle age. The affliction,
polycystic kidney disease, is a dominant disorder, meaning that those who carry
the disease gene will pass it on to half of their children, who will then
develop the condition.

   Scientists have developed a simple blood test to diagnose alcoholism that may
offer a way to screen people to see if they have inherited a risk of alcoholism.

   Although a long way from solution, sickle-cell anemia, common in blacks, and
Cooley's anemia -- common in Greeks, Italians and others of Mediterranean
descent -- may some day be treatable as a result of work now in progress.
Scientists have developed a faster method to detect the defective genes
responsible for these disorders.

   Doctors are able to use a new genetic test to tell couples what their chances
are of having a child with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a fatal disease. The
technique can also track through families the faulty genes that causes cystic
fibrosis and 10 other inherited diseases.

   Scientists have identified the genetic defect responsible for Gaucher's
disease, a rare disorder that most commonly affects Jews of Eastern European
descent. The encouraging findings should improve testing for the disease and may
eventually lead to a treatment.

   In a major advance toward human gene therapy, research scientists late in
1988 successfully transplanted new genes into animal cells at the precise
locations of defective ones, and the healthy genes replaced or repaired the old.
That research has brightened the prospects for treating fatal hereditary
illnesses such as sickle-cell anemia and cystic fibrosis at the genetic level.

   THIS GENETICS revolution is already affecting your life, whether you realize
it or not. The family doctor who once took your family health history by asking
what childhood diseases you had, and whether your parents or grandparents had
suffered from diabetes or heart disease, has expanded the medical pedigree. The
doctor now asks questions about your ethnic origins, dates and causes of death
of all four grandparents, and the kinds of diseases suffered by other relatives.

   Most of us are not sufficiently knowledgeable about the medical histories of
our relatives. And simply knowing the cause of death of family members is not
enough, for your grandfather may have died of what was termed "old age" on his
death certificate, but he may also have suffered from diabetes or arthritis,
which may have been the primary reason for his decline. As the science of
genetics becomes even more refined in future years, the recording of
comprehensive and well-documented family health histories will be a necessity if
grandchildren and great-grandchildren and later generations are to benefit.

   In addition to enhancing the accuracy of diagnosis, a complete family health
history is necessary for effective genetic counseling. Such counseling concerns
itself not only with the probability of other family members being affected but
also with aspects of prognosis, treatment and emotional adjustment.

   You needn't become a genealogist to compile a medical pedigree; concern
yourself only with gaining accurate medical information about your families as
far back as your four grandparents and the siblings in each generation. But you
will need to do this on your spouse's side of the family as well to provide your
children with a complete family-health tree.

   The major records you need to locate, analyze and compile for a medical
pedigree include death certificates, newspaper obituaries, insurance company
records, hospital records, medical records, census records, mortality schedules,
military records.

   Once you have obtained information, compile it, listing your ancestors'
names, dates of death, ages and causes of death. The compilation often reveals
patterns. You may discover that on your father's side most of your ancestors
died of heart-related disease and that on your mother's side cancer was
prevalent. Or you may discover that most of your family died simply of "old age"
or accidental causes.

   To get an overview of what your family's medical history looks like,
construct a chart to show family members' ages at death and their major health
problems and causes of death. It is often difficult to determine genetic
disorders in a family without the aid of a geneticist, but for most purposes
what is important is to record the various diseases that have plagued your
family over the years. That can serve to alert family members to their
predisposition toward certain health problems. The resulting information should
be given to all family members so they can share it with their family doctors.

   There are genetic diseases that are characteristically found in one group and
not in the others. For example, if you are of Jewish origin, your doctor should
know whether you descend from Sephardic, Oriental or Ashkenazi ancestors.
Frequently, it is necessary to examine numerous members of a patient's family
before diagnosis of a genetic disorder can be made with certainty.

   A thorough history is crucial if you are about to start a family. You should
always be concerned about the presence of congenital anomalies in your family,
as well as the clustering of any traits or diseases, and should tell your doctor
about them.

   Determining a genetic link for a disease can be extremely complex, especially
where one inherits the disorder through a recessive gene. Individuals affected
with a recessive diseases will often find no pattern or precedent for the
disease in their family history. You yourself may not suffer any medical
problems stemming from it, but if your spouse also carries the same recessive
gene, the disorder can manifest itself in your children or show up in your
grandchildren -- provided that your children's spouses have the same recessive
gene.

   It is believed that genetic factors may be involved in 25% of diseases.
Frightening as that figure is, many genetic disorders once thought to be
incurable can now be controlled or treated successfully if they are diagnosed
early.

   Moreover, within the next 10 years, scientists expect to identify between
2,000 and 3,000 genetic markers -- which indicate a defective gene is present in
a particular site on a chromosome -- that could lead to predictive tests for
thousands of illnesses, from stroke to heart attack and cancer to Alzheimer's
disease.

   You probably know that hemophilia, sickle-cell anemia and cystic fibrosis are
genetic diseases, but do you know that obesity, some forms of cancer, some forms
of early heart disease, and some blindness, deafness and birth defects are
inheritable? Some genetic disorders are very rare, but others, such as diabetes,
are among the most common illnesses.

   There are four mechanisms by which genetic defects may be transmitted from
one generation to another: (1) autosomal dominant inheritance, where the trait
is inherited from one parent and from the previous generation; (2) recessive
inheritance, where both parents are unaffected; (3) X-linked (or sex-linked)
inheritance, in which the gene for the characteristic is known to be on the X
chromosome, and (4) multifactorial inheritance patterns.

   Autosomal Dominant Inheritance: Autosomal means that the gene pair is present
in a chromosome pair other than the sex chromosomes. Chromosomes are threadlike
structures within the nuclei of cells that carry the inherited genetic
information that directs the growth and functioning of the entire body. In
dominant inheritance an affected child usually has a parent with the same
disorder. When a parent has a dominant gene for a disease, there is a 50% risk
that each child will manifest the defect, although it may not be evident at
birth. Among the 2,000 confirmed or suspected autosomal dominant disorders are:
Huntington's disease polydactyl (extra fingers or toes), achondroplasia (a form
of dwarfism), chronic simple glaucoma (some forms), hypercholesterolemia ((high
blood cholesterol levels, with propensity to heart disease).

   Recessive Inheritance : Both parents of an affected child appear essentially
normal, but by chance both may carry the same harmful gene, although neither may
be aware of it. Recessive inherited diseases tend to be severe and often cause
early death. When both parents are carriers of a harmful recessive trait, each
of their children will run a 25% risk of manifesting that genetic disease, and
each has a 50-50 chance of receiving only a single defective gene and becoming a
clinically normal carrier of the genetic trait, like the parents. The chance of
inheriting a recessive disorder is increased in a child whose parents are
consanguineous (blood related).

   Among the more than 1,000 confirmed or suspected autosomal recessive
disorders are: cystic fibrosis, galactosemia, phenylketonuria, sickle-cell
disease, thalassemia, Tay-Sachs disease, Gaucher's disease.

   X-Linked (also called sex-linked) Inheritance: In X-linked inheritance, a
clinically normal mother carries a faulty gene on one of her X chromosomes. Each
son has a 50-50 chance of inheriting that gene and manifesting the disorder.
Each of her daughters has an equal chance of being a carrier, like her mother,
and is usually unaffected by the disease but capable of transmitting it to her
sons. No male-to-male transmission of X-linked disorders can occur -- that is, a
father cannot pass the disorder on to his son.

   Among the some 250 confirmed or suspected disorders transmitted by a gene or
genes on the X chromosome are: colorblindness, hemophilia, agammaglobulinemia
(lack of immunity to infections), muscular dystrophy (some forms), spinal ataxia
(some forms).

   Multifactorial inheritance: The pattern of transmission in this group is less
well-defined, but these genetic disorders result from the interaction of many
genes and with other genes or with environmental factors. Thought to be
multifactorial are: cleft lip and/or palate, clubfoot, congenital dislocation of
the hip, spina bifida, hydrocephalus (water on the brain, occurring with spina
bifida), pyloric stenosis (narrowed or obstructed opening from the stomach into
the small intestine), congenital heart defects, diabetes mellitus (abnormal
sugar metabolism).

   Certain genetic diseases are widespread in the population; others, such as
sickle-cell anemia and Cooley's anemia, primarily affect certain ethnic or
racial groups. Cystic fibrosis is one of the most common genetic diseases among
Americans because it largely affects whites of Northern and Western European
ancestry. Tay-Sachs disease is a recessive-gene disorder that often strikes
infants of Central and Eastern European Jewish descent.

   The major diseases that strike American families today -- heart disease,
cancer and diabetes -- all show a tendency to "run in families." That does not
mean you are doomed to have one of them if a parent or relative suffered from
the condition, but you should be aware of the risks where there is a precedent
for the disease.

   Early heart attacks do run in families. If you have a relative who had a
heart attack before reaching 65, your risk of having one before that age is five
to seven times the normal risk for your sex. Moreover, some of the leading
factors known to contribute to coronary disease -- high cholesterol levels, high
blood pressure, diabetes and obesity -- have been found to have a genetic link.

   Several types of cancer are known to be directly inherited, such as
retinoblastoma of the eye. There are common forms of cancer that tend to run in
families -- stomach, endometrium (uterine lining), lung, colon, bladder and
breast cancer and malignant melanoma of the skin.

   Researchers have established recently that you are likely to develop Type II,
or non-insulin-dependent, diabetes, the most common form of this disease, if one
or both parents have it.

   What good does it do to know if you are at risk for a genetic disease? People
who know about a predisposition toward a disease can do a lot to prevent that
disease, either by changing high-risk behavior or by detecting health problems
early. If you are alerted to the genetic liabilities you carry, you can develop
corrective habits, or at least be treated at the earliest possible stage.

   The March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundations recommends genetic counseling if
you or family members have a disease with a genetic component; if you are a
member of an ethnic group with a high risk of certain genetic diseases; if you
have produced an affected child; if you are an expectant mother 35 years of age
or older.

   HOW RECESSIVE INHERITANCE WORKS

   Both parents, usually unaffected, carry a normal gene (N) that takes
precedence over its faulty recessive counterpart (r).

   CARRIER FATHER: CARRIER MOTHER

   The odds for each child are:

   1. A 25% risk of inheriting a "double dose" of r genes which may cause
serious birth defects.

   2. A 25% chance of inheriting two Ns, thus being unaffected.

   3. A 50% chance of being a carrier, as both parents are.

   HOW X-LINKED INHERITANCE WORKS

   In the most common form, the female sex chromosomes of an unaffected mother
carry one faulty gene (X) and one normal gene (x). The father has normal x and y
chromosome complement.

   CARRIER MOTHER: NORMAL FATHER

   The odds for each male child are:

   1. A 50% risk of inheriting the faulty X and the disorder.

   2. A 50% chance of inheriting normal x and y chromosomes.

   The odds for each female child are:

   1. A 50% risk of inheriting one faulty X, to be a carrier like the mother.

   2. A 50% chance of inheriting no faulty gene.

   HOW DOMINANT INHERITANCE WORKS

   One affected parent has a single faulty gene (D) that dominates its normal
counterpart (n).

   AFFECTED FATHER: NORMAL MOTHER

   Each child's chance of inheriting the D or the n is 50%.

GRAPHIC: Drawing, COLOR, STEVE MAYSE ; Chart, COLOR , National March of Dimes
Foundatio


                             1792 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 36, Column 1; The Good Health Magazine

LENGTH: 3263 words

HEADLINE: Battling the Legacy of Illness

BYLINE: By Harold M. Schmeck Jr.; Harold M. Schmeck Jr., who covered biomedical
science for The Times for many years, is at work on a book about genetics.

BODY:

   TWO SISTERS HAD A TRAGIC problem. Their older brother was dying of Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, a genetic disease that destroys its victims slowly. From
early childhood onward, the muscles deteriorate. The process is agonizing and
inexorable. Most patients are unable to walk by the time they are in their
teens, and few live beyond their mid-20's. The brother was reaching that age.

   ''The two girls were incredibly devoted to him,'' recalls Dr. C. Thomas
Caskey, director of the Institute for Molecular Genetics at Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston. ''When they were growing up, he was the guru of the family.
They would come in and talk to him, and he would be their counselor.'' The
sisters knew he was dying, but that was only part of their despair. Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, which occurs almost exclusively in males, is caused by a
defect in one gene inherited from the mother. The sisters might be carriers of
the defective gene. Should they risk having children? If they became pregnant,
should they have prenatal tests to detect the disease trait? And, if it was
present in the fetus, could either sister bring herself to have an abortion?

   ''They had this great psychological confusion,'' says Dr. Caskey, who is
president of the American Society of Human Genetics. ''If they did use prenatal
diagnosis to avoid the disease in their own children, they felt, they were
basically rejecting their brother. So they went in to see him one day and
brought this up.''

   The brother's response was concise and unflinching. He said he loved them and
was grateful that he had had the opportunity to grow up with them. But if he had
been able to choose, he would have chosen not to live. He urged his sisters to
have diagnostic tests in order to avoid having sons doomed in the same way he
was. Not long after this conversation, he died.

   Years later, when each sister became pregnant, she had prenatal tests.
''Fortunately, everything worked out well for them,'' Dr. Caskey says. ''They
ended up with children who did not have this disease.''

   This is one of many stories that reflect the anguish caused by inherited
diseases and the growing ability of medical science to diagnose them. There are
more than 3,000 different diseases caused by genetic flaws. Most are rare, but
together they affect thousands upon thousands of people. Until about a decade
ago, doctors could do little beyond observing the symptoms of these illnesses
and tracing their patterns of occurrence in families. That has changed
dramatically as scientists have developed tools to identify defective genes.

   It is now possible to detect the genetic abnormalities responsible for
several hundred diseases. Some tests can be done on a fetus when it is just a
few weeks old. But before these tests are performed, doctors must take extensive
family histories in order to know precisely what to look for. The total number
of human genes is estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000, and the ability to
scan them all at once for defects is far beyond geneticists' grasp.

   The aim of genetic medicine is to help couples have healthy children. While
the emphasis is primarily on the diagnosis of genetic diseases, even today
damage from some diseases can be prevented if they are found early enough. In
the future, doctors hope to be able to cure some inherited diseases by
transplanting copies of a ''good'' gene into a patient to carry out the function
that the flawed gene can't. It might even become possible to turn off the
activity of a bad gene and halt its damage. When and if this happens, doctors
would have a powerful technique for curing some forms of cancer that are caused
by genetic abnormalities.

   Contrary to the contention by antiabortionists that prenatal genetic testing
increases the demand for abortion, many geneticists say that it actually has the
opposite effect, because most people discover that their chance of having a
child with a serious illness is much less than they had feared. ''Ninety-eight
percent of all the prenatal diagnoses done in this country lead to the birth of
a child unafflicted with the genetic disorder for which the family was at
risk,'' said Dr. Michael M. Kaback, chairman of the pediatrics department at the
University of California, San Diego, and president-elect of the American Society
of Human Genetics, speaking at a meeting of the society late last year. ''It is
a very pro-life technology.''

   NONE OF THE RECENT ADVANCES in genetic medicine would have been possible if
it were not for the discovery nearly 40 years ago by James D. Watson and Francis
H. C. Crick of the structure of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), the stuff of genes.
The finding earned them a Nobel Prize in 1962 and ushered in a revolution in
biology by revealing the form in which the messages of heredity are conveyed.
The structure that Watson and Crick discovered revealed that these messages are
written in an alphabet of four substances called bases, which are repeated many
millions of times in different sequences along strands of DNA. The bases always
occur in pairs that join the two strands of the DNA molecule. The strands take
the shape of a double helix.

   By the mid-1960's, scientists had broken the genetic code, and learned to
read the messages written in the strands of DNA. They discovered the way in
which the sequences of DNA base pairs serve as instructions for making proteins
and defining biochemical functions. These sequences are, by definition, genes,
which govern the chemistry of life and determine all inborn characteristics,
from eye color to blood type. Genes are packed densely into the 23 pairs of
human chromosomes.

   Genetic diseases are caused by mutations, either abnormalities in a
chromosome or gaps or ''spelling errors'' in a gene. Often the error is as
subtle as the substitution of one base for another in a sequence of many
thousands. Before the mutations that cause particular illnesses were known,
genetic counselors could give people only what amounted to crude betting odds on
their risk of developing a genetic disease or having an afflicted child.
Counselors deduced the risk chiefly by looking at the occurrence of a disease in
a family over several generations. ''Twenty years ago the field was devoted
almost entirely to couples who had already had one affected child and came to
the clinic to see what the odds were for another,'' says Dr. Kaback.

   Scientists now understand the precise chemistry of the mutations that cause
hundreds of genetic disorders. For example, gaps in or abnormal repetitions of
the base pairs that make up one gene in the X chromosome cause Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. An extra copy of all or part of chromosome 21, giving an individual
three of these chromosomes instead of the normal two, results in Down syndrome,
a disorder involving mental retardation. These and other mutations can be
identified through studies of fetal cells. When properly done, the tests are
nearly 100 percent accurate.

   Today, couples typically seek genetic counseling before they have their first
child. Most go to a clinic because they know they are at risk of having a child
with a particular illness, either because of family history or the mother's age
- after 30 a woman's risk of giving birth to a baby with Down syndrome increases
significantly. For a 35-year-old woman, the risk is 1 in 380; for a 45-year-old,
it is 1 in 30.

   For several dozen inherited diseases, blood tests can reveal whether a
prospective mother or father is a carrier. Among these conditions are sickle
cell disease, a severe form of anemia that affects mostly blacks, and Tay-Sachs
disease, which primarily strikes Jews of Eastern European ancestry and usually
causes death by the age of 5. For couples who fall into these categories, a
blood test is often the first step in finding out whether the risk of having an
afflicted child is high enough to warrant fetal testing.

   To determine whether a child will have one of hundreds of genetic diseases,
doctors test DNA from fetal chromosomes. One widely used test is amniocentesis,
generally performed between the 14th and 20th weeks of pregnancy, in which fetal
cells are gathered from the fluid of the amniotic sac. Another test, chorionic
villus sampling, is done between the 8th and 11th weeks of pregnancy and
involves analyzing genetic material from the developing placenta.

   A COUPLE HOPING to start a family came to the Prenatal Genetics Center at
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston for advice. Both were in their 40's and
feared that their baby might have Down syndrome. The couple had decided that if
the chance was as great as 1 in 10, they would not risk pregnancy. They were not
willing to consider abortion. It turned out that the odds were about 1 in 33.
The woman soon became pregnant. The couple waited and hoped. ''They had a baby
girl and she was normal,'' says Karen Copeland, their genetic counselor. ''Had
they not come in to hear the information, they probably would never have had a
child.''

   The same was true for a young woman who sought help from the clinic because
she was worried about a family history of Norrie's disease, a rare disorder that
causes blindness, deafness and severe mental retardation. The woman feared her
only choice was to remain childless. But Copeland offered her a new DNA test
that can detect the genetic flaw that causes Norrie's disease. The woman found
she was not even a carrier.

   Most couples who go to a genetic counselor come away with good news, because
the diseases caused by abnormal genes or chromosomes are relatively rare. But
the bad news, when it comes, can be devastating. ''The human impact on many of
these families is enormous,'' says Dr. Kaback.

   Genetic counselors try to give couples both emotional support and information
about their options, but they are careful to leave the final decision to their
patients. Perhaps most important, the counselors stress that the outcome is
nobody's fault. ''Sometimes it is simple hand-holding or crying with them or
giving them information, giving them some sense of control,'' says Copeland.

   EVEN THOUGH GENETIC diseases cannot be cured, a few can be treated in fetuses
or newborns.

   One couple who came to the Baylor clinic for amniocentesis learned that their
baby would have Down syndrome. They decided to continue the pregnancy. But there
was another problem: further testing revealed that the infant would be born with
a life-threatening heart defect that affects about 40 percent of those with Down
syndrome. The baby would need heart surgery immediately after birth. The couple
lived a long way from a major medical center where this delicate operation could
be performed, but because they had been alerted to the danger, the woman went to
Houston late in her pregnancy to deliver the baby at Texas Children's Hospital.
The surgery was done promptly. ''This probably saved its life,'' says Copeland.

   Many genetic disorders are caused by a failure to produce one or another of
the myriad enzymes that do the body's metabolic work. These disorders include
most of those that are treatable. Among the best known is phenylketonuria, or
PKU, a condition that leads to severe mental retardation unless preventive steps
are taken soon after birth. Newborns are routinely screened for the condition,
and those afflicted are put on a strict diet that prevents brain damage. Other
metabolic defects can be treated in a fetus by giving the mother heavy doses of
biotin or vitamin B-12, both of which are able to correct certain chemical
imbalances that would otherwise prove deadly.

   SCIENTISTS' ABILITY TO GLEAN insights into health and illness from human
genes is a source of hope where there was once only tragedy. But some of the
most dramatic advances in genetic medicine have also spawned controversy.

   Some of the disagreement concerns cystic fibrosis, one of the most common
diseases caused by faults in one gene. At least 30,000 Americans have the
illness, and about 12 million are thought to be carriers. Cystic fibrosis
produces a devastating spectrum of symptoms, including serious digestive and
respiratory problems. Half of the patients die by early adulthood. Last year,
after years of searching, scientists finally found the gene that causes the
disease. And there is now a blood test that can detect it; when used on someone
with a family history of the illness, the test is nearly 100 percent accurate.
Given that cystic fibrosis is so common, there is a debate over whether it would
be beneficial to screen the entire population, so that healthy carriers would
know they possess the defective gene.

   Biotechnology companies with products to sell have been promoting widespread
testing. But many geneticists say this is premature. For one thing, the test is
expensive. In addition, when used on people without a family history of the
disease, it can identify only about 75 percent of the carriers. About a quarter
of all cases of cystic fibrosis appear to result from mutations that the test
can't pick up unless doctors know precisely which ones to search for. Screening
the general population, therefore, might give many thousands of people a false
sense of security.

   Another disorder that has sparked controversy is Huntington's disease, a
particularly cruel genetic time bomb. The symptoms - including personality
changes, dementia and jerking and writhing movements - don't show up until
middle age. The mind and body continue to fail, leading to death after years of
decline. Genetic testing can often tell with a high degree of accuracy whether a
person with a family history of the disease will be affected. But should anyone
learn that tragic truth when nothing can be done about it?

   The genetic clinic at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine has
tested about 65 people at risk of Huntington's disease. Each case involves
painstaking family studies, including analysis of DNA samples from parents,
uncles, aunts and other close relatives. The clinic also insists on thorough
psychological testing and counseling, to make sure a person seeking the tests
will be able to cope with a grim result. If the person is found to be severely
depressed, for example, the doctors advise that the tests be postponed until the
psychological condition improves.

   When informative DNA samples from enough relatives can be obtained, the tests
are more than 90 percent accurate. But sometimes the information available
simply is not sufficient. This is because the gene that leads to Huntington's
disease has not been discovered - the tests can only search for certain
signposts on the DNA in chromosome 4 that are common to people with the disease.
In some families there are not enough of these signposts. In those cases, people
can do nothing more than wait until middle age to see whether the symptoms of
the disease appear.

   Today, a person at risk of Huntington's disease who is expecting a child
faces the most painful of all dilemmas. The fetus can be tested to see if its
DNA matches that of the parent at risk. If it does, and if, perhaps a decade or
more later, the parent develops the disease, it is more than 90 percent certain
that the child will eventually get it, too.

   Like other genetic clinics, the one at Johns Hopkins is scrupulous in leaving
to the parents the decision about what to do when fetal testing reveals a deadly
disease trait. But in this particular circumstance, doctors and genetic
counselors at Johns Hopkins suggest that parents consider ending the pregnancy.
Even so, Dr. Haig Kazazian, the clinic's director, recalls one couple who, after
learning that their unborn child had the same DNA profile as the parent at risk
of Huntington's disease, decided to have the baby.

   MANY TERRIBLE DILEMMAS, like those facing people at risk of Huntington's
disease, would be eliminated if genetic medicine achieves its ultimate goal:
gene therapy, a way to treat or cure genetic diseases by transplanting normal
human genes into patients whose comparable genes are flawed. Medical researchers
have been working toward this end for years, and have had many setbacks. But
last month, scientists at the National Institutes of Health proposed a human
gene therapy trial that could begin within a year.

   Leaders of the project, Drs. W. French Anderson, R. Michael Blaese, Kenneth
Culver and Steven A. Rosenberg, want to treat children suffering from a rare
illness called adenosine deaminase deficiency, which renders them defenseless
against infection. This condition is as devastating to the immune system as the
one that afflicted the ''bubble boy,'' a child in Texas who had to live in a
sterile enclosure to shield him from germs. Most patients die in early childhood
because they lack an enzyme crucial to the development of a normal immune
system. The doctors hope that by transplanting the gene that codes for the
production of this enzyme into some of the white blood cells of these patients,
they will be able to manufacture it on their own. The treatment will be coupled
with a promising drug called PEG-ADA, which was recently approved by the Food
and Drug Administration.

   Last year, N.I.H. researchers led by Drs. Anderson, Blaese and Rosenberg took
an important step forward by transplanting genes into six cancer patients, not
to treat them, but to gauge the effectiveness of an experimental treatment they
were receiving. In March, the N.I.H. biosafety committee decided that this work
with cancer patients, in addition to extensive animal studies, had established
that the gene therapy proposed to treat adenosine deaminase deficiency would be
safe.

   Several other committees must rule on the gene therapy proposal, and the
review process is expected to take most of this year. Even though it is just a
step toward the goal, the project proposed by the N.I.H. scientists could open
the gates to a new era in medicine.

   The rapidly advancing field of genetic medicine will bring a host of new
opportunities, but it will also raise a host of ethical issues. DNA contains
intimate details about a person's health and even life expectancy. Many
geneticists fear that this information may be misunderstood and improperly used
by society. They say that each person's book of heredity must be kept private
and confidential. The challenge will be to use the great storehouse of genetic
knowledge for the public good while still preserving each individual's rights.
But few want to halt the search for knowledge. From her own experience as a
genetic counselor, Karen Copeland says, ''People in society as a whole are not
only very accepting of this science, the majority of them want it.''

THE DOUBLE HELIX: CODE FOR SICKNESS OR HEALTH

   Genes, which are codes, or blueprints, for cell construction, exist in
tightly organized packages called chromosomes. A defective gene in the X
chromosome causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy, one of thousands of inherited
diseases, which occurs almost exclusively in males.

   The Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene contains mutations, which are gaps or
''spelling errors'' in the sequence of its four bases, indicated by the letters
A, C, G and T. This diagram shows the beginning of the flawed sequence.

   A portion of the double-helix structure of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, the
chemical stuff of genes. Each of the 50,000-plus genes in the body consists of
the same four bases - (A) adenine, (C) cytosine, (G) guanine and (T) thymine -
in a specific sequence or pattern that determines a gene's function.

(Source: Dr. Louis M. Kunkel, Harvard Medical School)

GRAPHIC: Graphic: The Double Helix: Code for Sickness or Health (attached)


                             1793 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                      April 27, 1990, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: PASCO TIMES; COLUMN; Pg. 2

DISTRIBUTION: PASCO TIMES; CITRUS TIMES; HERNANDO TIMES

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: Walk for children who may never get the chance

BYLINE: BILL STEVENS

BODY:


   In Pasco County, commissioners on Tuesday are likely to satisfy the wishes of
a strong band of community leaders and agree to give voters the opportunity to
consider forming the Childrens Services Council.

    Getting to this point has been difficult. To demonstrate the need for this
council, which would use money from a special property tax to bolster services
to children at risk, the advocates have had to assemble volumes of depressing
statistics.

    The problems aren't unique to Pasco, but its leaders have determined
correctly that it would be foolish to believe the state and federal governments
are going to adequately care for the local children who need day care, mental
health treatment, food and shelter.

    Whether the fortunate will chip in for the less fortunate will be determined
in the fall.

    In the meantime, there is one important annual event that seeks to
accomplish the same goal to give all babies a fighting chance to have a normal,
happy life. On Saturday morning throughout the nation, men, women and children
will lace up their sneakers and set out to raise money for the March of Dimes
simply by walking in an event called WalkAmerica. Most of the money is gathered
through pledges per mile, but the hike also is a way for people to demonstrate
support and get others motivated toward helping the fight against birth defects
and prematurity.

    In this area, marchers will assemble at Sims Park in New Port Richey, Zephyr
Park in Zephyrhills and Citrus Hills in Citrus County and begin walking at 8
a.m. The Hernando County event is a bit different, as most walkers and those who
want to run the 12-mile course at J.D. Floyd Elementary School in Spring Hill
will leave at 7 a.m. Shorter walks for seniors will begin at 8, and a youth walk
is scheduled for 9.

    My interest in the March of Dimes has grown steadily since 1982 when my
first daughter was born. She has accompanied me on the walk for five years,
while my second daughter, now 4, will make her first trek on Saturday. We have
discussed as a family how fortunate we all are to be healthy, and it makes me
proud to hear my older daughter explain to her sister that it is important to
help those who aren't.

    These two girls were lucky to have a mother who knew the importance of
caring for them before birth.

    More than 8 percent of all the babies born in Florida are dangerously
underweight, generally because their mothers failed to receive proper prenatal
care. Low birth weight babies are 40 times more likely to die in infancy than
normal weight babies, and those who do survive often have physical disabilities
and learning disorders, according to the March of Dimes research.

    The March of Dimes, which helped battle polio and rubella, is now
concentrating on genetic therapy and the prevention of pre-term labor. One of
the nation's oldest health organizations, founded in 1938, coordinates
scientists in research programs. In this area, health departments receive March
of Dimes money for programs designed to teach women how to prevent premature
birth.

    Most of us like to sleep in on Saturdays. But this weekend, make an
exception. You'll feel good about it, even if your feet ache a bit.


LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1992


                             1794 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 April 24, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2022 words

HEADLINE: Cultures in Conflict: M.D.'s and Ph.D.'s

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   KENNETH Culver, M.D., and Richard Mulligan, Ph.D., both work at the vanguard
of human gene therapy, the grand new scientific enterprise to treat patients
afflicted with genetic diseases by inserting foreign genes into their cells.

   Both men happen to be tall, rangy, bearded and to bear a vague resemblance to
Vikings. But there the similarities end and the troubles begin.

   Dr. Culver is a pediatrician at the National Cancer Institute who has treated
desperately ill children, including patients suffering from the severe immune
deficiency disease that is the proposed target of the first gene therapy trials.
''I've held these kids in my arms while they died,'' he said. ''I've cried
together with their families.''

   Dr. Culver is anxious to plunge ahead with human trials of the new approach
to conquering disease, which he believes holds the best promise of assuring his
young charges a long, vigorous life. He is collaborating with researchers who
have presented the first gene therapy proposal to the Federal Government, a
project now wending its way through a thicket of review boards.

   Dr. Mulligan is a molecular biologist at the Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass. He is pure scientist - cerebral, acerbic
and deeply skeptical of anything not buttressed by hard data. He works, not with
patients in hospitals, but with pipettes and petri dishes in the laboratory.

   Although Dr. Mulligan has invented some of the viral shuttles that very
likely will be used to install foreign genes into cells in the future, he has
said that he entered the field for its intellectual challenge and spare
elegance. And he does not want that elegance sullied in a mad, messy rush to
apply the new science to human patients too soon.

   ''We're trying to do gene therapy in a rigorous scientific fashion, to show
that it's feasible and effective,'' he said. ''But we're not there yet, and I
don't think anybody else is either.''

   During a recent meeting on human gene therapy, when Dr. Mulligan heard one of
Dr. Culver's physician colleagues refer colloquially to a piece of important
scientific data as ''this big blot over here,'' he bristled. ''One person's blot
on a gel is another person's band on a gel,'' he shot back. He then recommended
that the physicians proposing the gene therapy project would do well to have
their basic data reviewed by a panel of experienced scientists. ''This is very
complicated material,'' he said sternly, ''and it should be examined by people
who know what they're looking at.''

   Thirty years ago, the British scientist and novelist C. P. Snow wrote of
''two cultures,'' the humanities and the sciences, and he despaired of the chasm
between them ever being bridged. Today there is another sort of cultural rift
that seems to defy union or even comity: the gap between the doctor and the
scientist. In the biomedical community, physicians and Ph.D.'s alike are probing
the fundamental mechanisms that underlie human disease, health and development.
Sometimes the doctors and the scientists work side by side in a research
laboratory, or at least on the same university floor.

   But by training, philosophy, motivation and research style, doctors and
scientists might as well be from different phyla. And they are forever arguing
about which is the more highly evolved. ''Each defends its own approach as the
exemplar of good or noble science,'' said Stephen Hilgartner, a sociologist at
the Center for the Study of Society and Medicine at Columbia University in New
York.

   Doctors who temporarily or permanently abandon the hospital for the
laboratory insist that they are in research for reasons that are both humane and
pragmatic: to devise better therapies for real human beings with real diseases.
''Doctors are the engineers of biomedical science,'' said Paul J. Friedman, a
radiologist and dean for academic affairs at the School of Medicine of the
University of California at San Diego. ''They're practical and goal-oriented,
and they want results that will help their patients.''

   Physicians argue that scientists are like cloistered monks and nuns, divorced
from the needs of patients, and that even scientists who are working in fields
related to human disease, such as the study of genes that cause cancer, often
regard human patients as little more than sources of cells, blood and enzymes
for their experiments.

   ''The physician-researcher focuses on finding treatments for individual
patients, and the scientist focuses on the abstract mechanisms of an abstract
disease process,'' said Dorothy Nelkin, a sociologist of science at New York
University. ''That can make scientists seem awfully cold and ivory-towerish
sometimes.''

   For their part, scientists view research-oriented doctors as interlopers in
the lab, whose effects on experiments range from annoying to dangerous. They
contend that most physicians lack sufficient training in basic research, and
that as a result their experiments are often poorly designed, sloppily executed
and naively interpreted.

'Too Free and Easy'

   ''I have to admit I sometimes look down on M.D. research,'' said Martin
Eglitis, the lab director at Genetic Therapy Inc., in Gaithersburg, Md., where
some gene therapy tools are designed. ''I go through medically oriented
publications and see they don't have enough controls, and they ignore relevant
interpretations of their data. You can get the idea that doctors are too free
and easy with science.''

   Scientists are quick to point out that the majority of known cases of fraud
and misconduct in biomedical research seem to have been committed by physicians,
rather than by researchers with doctoral degrees. However, only recently have
experts been gathering any firm evidence to document the apparent difference in
fraud rates, and the reasons for the disparity, if it exists, remain hotly
contested.

   The doctor-scientist clash is becoming ever more visible as the differences
between applied and basic biological research narrow, and the time lag between a
fundamental discovery and its clinical application continues to shrink. Only a
decade ago, molecular biologists discovered that there were subtle chemical
differences between the genes of one person and the next. Now those differences,
or polymorphisms, are being used for prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling.

   Basic scientists were the first to isolate and analyze oncogenes, genes that
control the growth of cells and are thought to help catalyze cancer when mutated
into a more perilous form. Now physician-researchers are trying to apply
oncogene studies to the diagnosis and treatment of human tumors.

   Clinicians are struggling mightily to transform basic knowledge of the AIDS
virus into a new arsenal against the disease.

   Yet for all the convergences of their fields, basic scientists and physicians
remain at psychic loggerheads. Dr. James Lupski of Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston, who holds both a medical degree and a Ph.D., says that he has gotten
heat from both factions. ''During my training, the physicians considered me a
snotnose uppity kid, and the scientists who didn't know me assumed I was a lousy
scientist,'' he said. ''I was a man without a country.''

   In fact, said Dr. Lupski, the discrepancies between scientists and physicians
are shaped during training. Scientists are taught to question their superiors;
physicians learn to respect authority and hierarchy. Doctors must absorb huge
amounts of known data; scientists are supposed to delve into the unknown. ''The
mindset is completely different,'' said Dr. Lupski.

The Art of Research

   What is more, scientists spend 5 to 10 years of postgraduate training
learning to conduct research. ''You get it beaten into you that you can never
have enough controls, and that you can always do one more experiment,'' said Dr.
Eglitas. Physicians devote the bulk of their training to the mastery of patient
care, often spending only a year or two on a research fellowship in a lab. Few
would deny that, as a result, scientists are more adept at the art of basic
research.

   Some scientists believe that such discrepancies in training explain the
prevalence of fraud and misconduct in medical research. In a document published
by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, one of the few
formal attempts to analyze research skulduggery, Patricia Woolf, a sociologist
at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, studied the total number of cases of
all types of scientific fraud that had been reported to various review boards
from 1980 to 1987. Of the 26 reported instances, she found, 17 had been
committed by people with medical degrees. The other perpetrators had Ph.D.'s or
lesser degrees.

   ''If you look at the known cases of fraud, M.D.'s clearly outnumber
Ph.D.'s,'' said Dr. Hilgartner, who is now trying to extend Dr. Woolf's
analysis.

   Certainly many of the infamous examples of chicanery have been committed by
medical researchers, among them the case of William Summerlin, a
doctor-researcher at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan who
painted mice with a black marker to mimic the appearance of successful skin
grafts; and John Darsee, a cardiologist who was caught falsifying
electrocardiogram data at Harvard and Emory Universities.

   Experts offer many explanations for the apparent overrepresentation of
doctor-researchers among the swindlers. They say that the pressures are greater
and the financial and academic stakes higher in medically oriented research;
medical schools frequently demand high productivity and a blizzard of
publications of their researchers, who also often have clinical duties.

   Or it could be that it is easier and more tempting to cheat in medically
oriented research, where the data points often are human beings, with all their
built-in anomalies. ''It can be easy to fudge your results with human subjects,
to throw out a few cases that just didn't fit your thesis, and it's hard for
someone else to cry foul,'' said Robert L. Sprague, a psychologist at the
University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana who studies fraud in research.
''That's more difficult to do with basic data, where the technique is described
in the paper and can be easily replicated.''

   But physicians retort that they do not commit more fraud than anyone else.
They say that their cases are simply more visible and publicized - and that,
they add, is because their research so often is relevant to society at large.
They are the ones who study the link between cholesterol and heart disease, for
example, or the epidemiology of cancer, or the effectiveness of a new treatment.
''You have to be careful about interpreting fraud statistics,'' said Dr.
Sprague. ''If you only cite well-known cases, or those that have been in the
press, you're not getting a representative sample.''

Extra Income Cited

   Physicians believe that a lot of scientists' complaints about their work are
based on sour grapes. After all, doctors say, medical researchers in medical
schools and hospitals usually command higher salaries than scientists in
universities - not to mention the extra income physicians can earn by treating
patients.

   Further defending their research style, doctors say that if it were not for
their emphasis on applied, goal-oriented studies, there might never have been
such biomedical milestones as heart transplants and CT scans.

   Scientists respond that basic research and its serendipitous, meandering but
always rigorous approach to discovery has, in the long run, yielded far more
insights into human disease than have single-minded searches for cancer cures
and other elusive dreams.

   The National Institutes of Health sees a possible resolution to the conflict
in training more researchers who hold both medical and graduate degrees, and
thus who grasp subtleties of both the body and the test tube. But that sort of
joint program demands 12 or more years of post-graduate schooling, as well as an
unusual spin of mind. ''The M.D.-Ph.D. route is definitely not for everyone,''
said Dr. Lupski. ''There are times when I feel like I'm a complete
schizophrenic.''

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. C1); photos: Kenneth Culver, M.D., left, a pediatrician,
and Richard Mulligan, Ph.D., a molecular biologist. (The New York Times/Rick
Friedman; Marty Katz) (pg. C9)


                             1795 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     April 24, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z12

LENGTH: 2857 words

HEADLINE: FINDING A MATCH IS NOT ENOUGH;
THE GAMBLE OF BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTS

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The 7-year-old boy lay on his belly in an anesthetic sleep, the white flood
of operating room lights illuminating a square of skin on his lower back.

   The surgeon, Wyndham Wilson of the National Cancer Institute, approached the
boy with two long steel needles with gold-colored handles curved like ornate
walking sticks. With a scalpel, he nicked the skin on the right side of the
boy's back, deftly sliding a needle into the wound, which bubbled with blood.

   Probing, the surgeon settled the steel rod against the iliac bone that forms
the pelvis and then pressed hard while slowly rotating the needle. It crunched
through the calcified surface, penetrating to the marrow -- the wellspring of
the body's blood supply.

   Wilson twisted off the handle, attached a large, empty syringe to the needle
and pulled on the plunger. Out flowed a small amount of gooey, red bone marrow.

   For many patients with cancer and other diseases, a bone marrow transplant
like this one, performed at the clinical center of the National Institutes of
Health, is the only hope for survival.  It is also at the center of a growing
public controversy that involves families desperately searching for compatible
donors, competing registries of potential donors, less than favorable odds that
seasoned gamblers might eschew and, most recently, the attention of Congress.

   But what often gets lost in the public debate is the fact that finding a
match is not always enough.

   Donor Roulette

   The desperate, highly publicized appeals for a potentially lifesaving
treatment often leave the public with the impression that bone marrow
transplants are a simple, straightforward procedure that depends only on finding
the right donor.

   "Lots of people think that if you find a matched donor, you are home free,
that that is it," said Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute (NHLBI). "Well, that is not it. It is just the beginning . . ."

   Bone marrow transplants are expensive, ranging from $ 175,000 to $ 225,000,
according to NHLBI's Paul McCurdy. They are also complicated, risky and painful.
Even before the transplant is performed, leukemia patients are bombarded with
massive doses of radiation and toxic chemotherapy drugs. The entire process
leaves the patient critically ill, in danger of death from infections and
immunological disorders. Because of the danger, the patient is then isolated for
weeks, pumped full of antibiotics, treated with regular blood transfusions and
constantly monitored for the same kinds of rejection problems that occur after
any organ transplant.

   "Twenty to 25 percent of the patients [receiving bone marrow from an
unrelated donor] do not live through the transplant," said Ronald Gress, an
immunologist at the National Cancer Institute who designs new bone marrow
transplant treatments.

   The success rates vary because bone marrow transplants are done for different
diseases in various stages of severity.  In general Gress and other experts say,
about half of bone marrow recipients do well and survive for at least several
years after a transplant. For the lucky few, it is a cure -- maybe even a
miracle.

   No Longer Experimental

   The initial uses of bone marrow transplants were fairly limited. Doctors
tried to reverse diseases such as aplastic anemia, which occurs when the bone
marrow shuts down because of infections or other causes. These patients require
routine blood transfusions and other treatments, but the prognosis is poor;
according to a recent report by the Congressional Office of Technology
Assessment 75 percent of the patients die, more than half in the first six
months of illness.

   A bone marrow transplant restores patients' ability to make blood cells.
"When we transplant them, we cure them," says George Santos, chief of the bone
marrow transplant program at Johns Hopkins Hospital, where 72 percent of
aplastic anemia patients recover.

   In the past two decades, nearly 60 blood disorders have been identified that
can be treated with bone marrow transplants, including different kinds of
cancers, disorders of the red blood cells, certain inherited diseases and even
AIDS.

   Currently most bone marrow transplant patients are suffering from cancers of
the blood, usually acute myelogenous leukemia or acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Both can be treated with traditional chemotherapy, but the cure rates are low.
When bone marrow transplants are performed after the first remission of the
disease, patients with acute myelogenous leukemia achieve a 65 percent success
rate at Hopkins, according to Santos. "That means people are surviving with no
evidence of their disease in a medium follow-up of about three years. The
longest survivors are at 10 to 15 years now."

   For acute lymphoblastic leukemia, 45 to 50 percent of the patients
transplanted after their first or second remission are free of the disease after
the procedure. Transplants also are being used to treat Hodgkins and
non-Hodgkins lymphomas, another cancer of the white blood cells, with an initial
success rate of 50 to 60 percent. And for chronic myelogenous leukemia, 50 to 60
percent of patients younger than 40 do well, but older patients generally do
not.

   Scientists also have begun studying the prospect of using bone marrow
transplantsfor the treatment solid tumors, such as breast cancer. The idea is
simple: the drugs used to kill the breast cancer also destroy the bone marrow,
limiting the dose. If the doctor can "rescue" the bone marrow with a transplant,
then a massive, lethal dose of drugs can be given to eradicate the cancer.
Although still experimental, the treatment is considered promising.

   A number of inherited diseases also have been treated with bone marrow
transplants, including severe combined immune deficiency, in which a child has
no immune system, and "storage" diseases such as Hurler's syndrome in which
missing enzymes cause metabolic waste products to build to toxic levels.

   In addition, researchers expect to use bone marrow transplant technology to
transfer genes into patients as a way to treat genetic disease -- a process
known as human gene therapy. Preliminary experiments are expected to begin later
this year. The patient, who lacks an enzyme at birth because of a defective
gene, will have some bone marrow removed, a normal version of the gene placed
into the bone marrow cells, and then the treated marrow transplanted back into
the body.

   Kith, Kin -- and Strangers

   The bone marrow is an organ like the heart or the liver. It contains stem
cells that transform themselves into a variety of different blood cells, just as
caterpillars turn into butterflies. Among the kinds of blood cells the body
needs are red cells, which carry oxygen, five types of white blood cells
including T-cells that defend the body against infection, and platelets, which
play a central role in clotting blood.

   The marrow is found within all of the body's long, hollow bones -- in the
legs, arms, chest and hips. Unlike a heart transplant -- when the organ is
removed, bone marrow regenerates. That means enough bone marrow can be taken
from a donor to help another person, and what's left can reconstitute itself --
just as blood does after a donation.

   The transplant itself is simple. Bone marrow cells are collected from a donor
or the patient. After the cells are processed, and in some cases mixed with
drugs to destroy any malignant cells if the marrow is from a cancer patient,
they are infused into the patient as in a simple transfusion. The bone marrow
cells migrate from the blood vessels to the center of the bones, where they take
up residence and begin making new blood.

   There are five types of bone marrow transplants: allogenic transplants, in
which the marrow comes from an identical twin, or matched sibling or matched
unrelated donor; partially matched marrow from an unrelated donor, and an
autologous transplant, in which the patient's own bone marrow is removed,
usually treated and then returned to the body.

   The more similar the bone marrow of the donor and recipient, the fewer the
complications from the transplant.

   The first successful transplants were performed on three children in 1968.
The children were born with immune deficiencies, but each had an identical twin
with a normal immune system.

   "Those three kids are still alive," says Mary Horowitz, a physician and
assistant scientific director of the International Bone Marrow Transplant
Registry. The registry, located at the Medical College of Wisconsin in
Milwaukee, collects data on the successes and failures of some 180 bone marrow
transplant teams in 40 countries.

   Those transplants worked so well because identical twins share an identical
set of genes that control the body's defense system. Normally the immune system
destroys any foreign cell that is placed in the body, just as transplanted
organs are rejected. Because the twins had identical immune systems, they were a
"perfect match" and the transplanted marrow was not rejected.

   But matching immune systems between donor and recipient is complicated. A
person's immunity is controlled by a family of genes on chromosome 6 called the
major histocompatibility complex, which regulates the production of human
leukocyte antigens, or HLA.

   Like flags flying on a sailboat to identify the country or yacht club from
which the boat comes, the HLA are recognition signals. The immune system uses
these signals to tell distinguish between normal body cells and foreign,
invading cells, such as bacteria.

   The first step in determining a good match is to examine three types of
HLA's, designated A, B and DR. There are other HLA signals, but these are the
most important.

   Each person carries two A's, two B's and two DR's -- one of each from the
mother and the father. The transplanted marrow must match the patient's marrow
in each of these six recognition sites.

   That's not easy, because there are at least 20 different types of A's, 40
types of B's and more than 20 types of DR's.

   As a result, siblings only have about a 1 in 4 chance of a good match. "Given
the current family size in Europe and North America," Horowitz says, "only about
30 to 40 percent of people will have a matched sibling donor."

   Patients without a related donor search for an unrelated one through the
half-dozen major bone marrow registries worldwide, which contain the names of
individuals who have volunteered to be donors and had their HLA type identified.

   But finding a match in the general population is like dropping a quarter into
a one-armed bandit in Las Vegas. In this slot machine, there are six spinning
wheels, and each one has from 20 to 40 or more possibilities to come up with a
string of "jackpots" that would make a perfect match. The odds of hitting on
this real-life wager are estimated at 20,000 to 1.

   To improve the odds, the pool of potential donors must be enlarged. The
federally funded National Marrow Donor Program in St. Paul, Minn., currently
lists more than 100,000 potential donors. The smaller American Bone Marrow Donor
Registry in Mandeville, La., contains an additional 30,000.

   "You need more than 200,000 [donors] just to find fully matched, unrelated
donors for half of the eligible patients," Horowitz says. "You may need a donor
pool in the millions to find a match for everybody."

   Immune Wars

   Sometimes, a patient simply cannot wait any longer for a perfect match; the
family and physicians choose to transplant partially matched marrow. In these
cases, the donor's marrow matches some of the A's, B's and DR's of the
recipient, but not all of them.

   This leads to a titanic struggle between the armies of two immune systems:
the remnants of the recipient's system and the warriors of the donor's. Cells
from each army can recognize each other as different and fight to the death
until one is beaten.

   If the donated marrow has the edge in this battle, an illness called
graft-versus-host disease occurs, in which the transplanted white cells not only
attack the resident white blood cells but other tissues in the body as well.  In
essence, the transplanted bone marrow attacks the patient from the inside --
sometimes lethally.

   But if the transplanted bone marrow is not particularly powerful --
especially if it has been treated to remove mature T-cells that are the core of
immune defense -- then an illness called host-versus-graft disease occurs. In
these cases, the patient's own immune system may destroy the transplanted bone
marrow, defeating the purpose of the procedure.

   Physicians try to control the battle by suppressing both immune systems with
drugs such as cyclosporin -- the principal medication to prevent the rejection
of transplanted organs such as hearts and kidneys. It can take months before the
two immune systems can tolerate each other. Sometimes, the process of
accommodation never occurs, leading to a chronic immune war.

   Meanwhile, drug treatments that shut down both immune systems also leave the
body more vulnerable to attacks by bacteria and viruses. More than 70 percent of
patients develop infections after the procedure; about 10 to 15 percent die,
most from viral pneumonia.

   At the same time, some of this immunologic warfare at the time of the
transplant is a good thing.  NCI's Gress thinks that in leukemia patients, the
incoming immune cells from the transplant could kill any cancer cells remaining
after treatments with chemotherapy and radiation.

   Self-Help Transplants

   Because of the problems many transplant candidates face in finding a matching
donor, researchers have turned to a relatively new approach: autologous bone
marrow transplants. Basically, like the boy on the NIH operating table, the
patient transplants himself.

   The treatment is experimental but promising.  At Johns Hopkins, most bone
marrow transplants performed on cancer patients are autologous. In this
technique, the bone marrow is extracted, purged of all tumor cells and then
transplanted back into the patient. Meanwhile, the patient is given high doses
of chemotherapy or radiation. This approach cannot be used to treat inherited
disorders.

   Although this approach eliminates the graft-versus-host problems because the
patient's own bone marrow is used, the chief drawback has been recurrence of the
original cancer. Some fear that the bone marrow continues to be contaminated
with cancer cells; others believe the recurrence is caused by cancer cells
remaining in the body that were not killed by the drugs and radiation.

   Gress and others have been working with a technique to improve this approach,
using different combinations of powerful drugs to kill any cancer cells
remaining in the body and trying new approaches to cleansing bone marrow.

   In the case of the 7-year-old cancer patient at NIH, the boy subsequently
went through three days of radiation treatment to scrub away any remaining
cancer cells as well as his remaining bone marrow. He was lethally irradiated
like the victims of Hiroshima and Chernobyl and would have died without his own
clean bone marrow to rescue him and restore his blood supply.

   The approach is experimental because of the drugs used. Gress has only
treated a handful of patients with this technique, and work by other groups has
achieved mixed results. Even so, patients receiving their own marrow tend to
tolerate the transplant better than those receiving marrow from unrelated
donors.

   Donors' Second Thoughts

   The idea of having a surgeon stab steel spikes through their bones has caused
some potential donors to reconsider.

   Marc Smith, a 36-year-old Tarzana, Calif., attorney with leukemia, learned to
his horror that a woman with bone marrow matching his own had changed her mind
because she was afraid of the procedure, leaving Smith without a match. Instead,
he had an autologous transplant several weeks ago and is expected to leave the
hospital in a few weeks.

   Yet bone marrow donation is safe, says Milwaukee's Horowitz. There is only
one reported case of a donor death caused by an allergic reaction to the general
anesthesia. Although general anesthesia is usually used, an epidural, commonly
given to women during childbirth, can be used to numb the lower half of the
body.

   Most donors only experience discomfort for a few days, and it can usually be
managed by taking Tylenol with codeine, Gress says.

   In the future, donors may be spared the bone puncturing process. Researchers
have discovered that the bone marrow's stem cells can be found floating in the
circulating blood, especially when the bone marrow is stimulated into activity
by certain drugs -- usually the chemotherapy medication used to kill cancer
cells, said Elizabeth Read, an NIH transfusion medicine expert.

   In gathering blood, as for a transfusion, some of the stem cells will be
captured. By placing these stem cells in a laboratory culture and using a number
of agents called white blood cell growth factors, scientists one day hope to
generate enough bone marrow cells to transplant into a patient.

   If this technology is successful, Read says, bone marrow donation could
become as simple as giving blood.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, SURGICAL TEAM AT THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH CLINIC BEGINS
BONE MARROW EXTRACTION ON YOUNG PATIENT. HOLLOW NEEDLE IS IN PLACE TO BEGIN
MARROW EXTRACTION FROM PELVIC BONE. FRANK JOHNSTON; PHOTO, CAROL GUZY;
ILLUSTRATION, PETER SIS; ILLUSTRATION, TOBEY


                             1796 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 April 19, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

HEADLINE: Gene Swap in Mice Offers Hope for Medical Gains

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   After years of half-steps, missteps and fears that it could never be done,
researchers have fashioned a strain of mouse harboring a specified genetic
alteration in every cell of its body.

   The novel rodent strain is the first reported demonstration that scientists
can precisely swap one form of a gene for another in mammals and breed the
engineered animals through several generations.

   The redesigned mouse represents the most advanced example of a technique that
has been painstakingly developed over the past decade by many investigators.
Scientists say that the new gene-switching method offers almost limitless
possibilities for analyzing the genes that cause cancer, immune deficiencies and
hereditary disorders like cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, and for
devising therapies against those and other human diseases.

   ''This is one of the most exciting technologies in biology developed in the
last 10 years,'' said Dr. Leroy Hood, a professor at the California Institute of
Technology in Pasadena and one of the nation's leading molecular biologists.
''It's really an absolutely, uniquely powerful technique for understanding the
role of genes that are essential to life.''

'Revolutioninzing Biology'

   The approach also has potential application to the nascent field of human
gene therapy, in which doctors hope to treat disease by inserting new genes into
the cells of patients. Researchers say that if they can get the new
gene-targeting method to work in humans as it now does in mice, it will be a
vast improvement over current, less precise human gene therapy approaches.

   ''The technology is revolutionizing biology,'' said Rudolf Jaenisch, a
molecular biologist at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and the
senior author of the report of the new strain that is being published today in
the journal Nature. ''In principal, you can use it to study any gene you have
isolated.''

   Dr. Jaenisch proposes that his particular strain of genetically engineered
mouse could be exploited to create new ways of performing skin grafts, bone
marrow transplants and even whole organ transplants.

   Other labs have created and bred strains of mice bearing specific genetic
mutations in all their tissues, but have not yet published their findings. The
researchers elsewhere are applying the new method to study genes that, among
other things, have been implicated in brain cancer, leukemia and the development
of the nervous system.

   ''The list of genes is as long as my arm,'' said Dr. Elizabeth Robertson, a
molecular biologist at Columbia University in New York who has helped invent the
technology. ''Everybody is phoning me up saying, 'I want to do this. How long
will it take? What's the first step?' ''

Two Recent Breakthroughs

   The results reported by Dr. Jaenisch's team take advantage of two recent
breakthroughs in manipulating mouse genes and cells. One advance allows
researchers to home in on a particular gene out of the 100,000 or so genes in
the mouse cell, and replace the native gene with a copy of the gene that the
scientist has specially doctored.

   Scientists have long been able to perform this precise genetic operation in
simple organisms like yeast, but only lately have they managed to make exacting
swaps in the far more complex setting of a mouse cell.

   Dr. Jaenisch's team chose to study a gene called beta-2 microglobulin, which
is found in most body cells and is known to be important to the immune system.
The gene helps the immune system distinguish cells of the body from foreign
tissue. It also stimulates the activity of a type of immune cell, the killer
T-cell, when the body is attacked by a pathogen.

   Scientists had further speculated that the beta-2 gene might have additional
tasks, like allowing cells to interact with one another, and even encouraging
mouse mating by producing a distinctive odor in urine.

   To determine the precise role of the beta-2 gene, Dr. Jaenisch and his
colleagues decided to see what would happen to a mouse that lacked the gene.
They first crafted a copy of the gene that had a piece of it knocked out, to
deactivate it.

New Type of Cell

   They next sought to insert the doctored gene into mice by turning to the
second recent research breakthrough, a type of cell isolated from early mouse
embryos. The cells are unusual because they can be freely manipulated in
laboratory dishes and still retain the ability, under proper conditions, to
proliferate into mouse fetuses.

   Using the laboratory embryo cells, Dr. Jaenisch and his co-workers swapped
the native copy of the beta-2 gene for the copy they had deactivated. Getting
the doctored copy into the right place in the cells demanded a tricky series of
biochemical machinations.

   ''It's amazingly complicated,'' said Dr. Mario R. Capecchi, a geneticist at
the University of Utah and a gene-swapping pioneer. ''Essentially you're trying
to go into what amounts to 1,000 volumes worth of genetic information to find
one little sentence and make one specific editing change.''

   Once they knew they had made the proper swap, the biologists grew a supply of
the altered embryo cells, and combined them with normal embryo cells taken from
a foster mother mouse that were needed to help the altered embryo cells bloom
into living mice.

   The researchers then reimplanted the mixture of doctored cells and helper
embryo cells back into the uterus of the foster mother.

Visible Result: Striped Pups

   Together the two types of embryo cells flourished to form baby mice. That
litter of pups, known as mosaics, possessed both normal cells, with working
copies of the beta-2 gene, and doctored cells, with the special nonfunctioning
gene, scattered throughout their body.

   The combination was easy to spot. The manipulated embryo cells had been taken
from dark mice, and were mixed with the embryonic cells of white mice, so the
pups emerged with dark and white stripes.

   After breeding several generations of the mosaic mice, the researchers
obtained all-black mice with no beta-2 genes whatsoever.

   The scientists then were able to examine the effects of the genetic
deficiency. They found that the mice are almost normal in their development and
sex habits, indicating that the beta-2 gene probably does not influence crucial
cell interactions or mating scents.

   The mice possess almost no killer T-cells to fight infections, however, and
must be housed in sterile boxes. Most interesting of all, the body cells of the
engineered mice have no molecular markers on them to signal the immune system of
their identity, as normal body cells do. ''It's as though their cells were
invisible,'' said Dr. Jaenisch.

   He believes that the result has important clinical implications. ''I can
think of a scenario in which you take a line of skin cells, knock out the beta-2
microglobulin genes, and end up with skin cells that could be accepted by many
patients, like burn victims,'' he said. The same could hold true for developing
an all-purpose line of bone marrow cells for transplanting, he added.

GRAPHIC: Diagram showing the redisigning of a mouse from the genes up (source:
Science)


                             1797 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1990 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 11, 1990 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: COAST ZONER; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 109 words

HEADLINE: GRANT AIDS GENETICS RESEARCH

BYLINE: From correspondent and wire repo

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   Wednesday, April 11, 1990 GRANT AIDS GENETICS RESEARCH

   The University of Washington has received a $7.5 million private  grant to
establish a medical genetics research facility with the Fred  Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center.

   The grant, announced Monday by the Lucille P. Markey Charitable Trust of
Miami, Fla., is to be used to ``expand the research at both the UW and the
Hutch,'' said Dr. A. Dusty Miller, a Hutchinson researcher nationally
recognized for his work in gene therapy, an experimental technique that treats
ailments by replacing defective genes in the body.

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = From correspondent and wire
reports

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1798 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1305 words

HEADLINE: News Summary

BODY:


   International    2-6

The Kremlin stepped up its pressure on the Lithuanian Government, sending troops
to seize the prosecutor's office and the plant in Vilnius where the republic's
main independence newspapers are published.    Page 1

President Bush has sent a letter to Mikhail S. Gorbachev appealing for a
peaceful end to the Kremlin's dispute with Lithuania and assuring the Soviet
President that the U.S. is ''not trying to make things difficult'' for either
side.    1

U.S. easing on exports of computers to the Soviet Union    31

Chancellor Kohl of West Germany is becoming the dominant leader of the 12-nation
European Community. He seemed confident after two days of talks with the
community's biggest skeptic, Prime Minister Thatcher.    6

New courses and even votes at Czechoslovak universities    6

Nelson Mandela canceled plans to meet in public on Monday with the chief of
South Africa's Zulu tribe. The meeting had been called to try to halt the
warfare between black factions loyal to the two leaders.    5

Thousands of Africans could starve this year unless additional donations of food
and money reach Ethiopia, Angola, Mozambique and the Sudan, a U.N. agency
warned.    5

Rival Christian forces battled for control of Lebanon's Christian heartland as a
splintering truce between the factions finally crumbled, leaving at least 26
people dead, the police said.    3

The Libyan chemical weapons plant may still be functioning. The Bush
Administration said it was possibile that the fire there was the result of a
hoax by Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader.    3

Baker's tone on Jerusalem settlement softens    3

In India, a pro-independence militant was killed in fighting in Jammu and
Kashmir and 10 other people died in a separate incident. The fighting followed
clashes on Thursday in the region's capital.    4

The recent slide in the Tokyo market is the first big downturn experienced by
millions of Japanese investors. But the decline has not yet prompted widespread
withdrawals.    31

Plans for World Cup soccer finals in Rome in June are fraught with perils,
newspaper columnists warn. There have been complaints about appalling cost
overruns, cup-related deaths, yawning construction sites and roadwork delays.
    4

Colombo journal: Killing stirs a land cowed by deaths    4

National    7-10, 26

An Idaho abortion bill was vetoed by Gov. Cecil D. Andrus, who is an opponent of
abortion. The bill would have given the state the most restrictive abortion law
in the country.    1

The new flag-burning law will receive a speedy review by the Supreme Court. The
Justices are expected to rule on the law's constitutionality by early summer.
    1

A standard identification card for all American workers is gaining support in
the Senate as a means of preventing job discrimination against Hispanic people
and members of other ethnic minority groups.    1

Drug treatment can reduce paralysis and other disability in people with serious
spinal cord injury, researchers at the National Institutes of Health announced.
    1

Gene therapy plan faces national hurdle    10

F.D.A. panel urges AZT for children    10

Jurors in the Iran-contra trial of John M. Poindexter heard each side's closing
arguments. Jury deliberation begins Monday.    7

H.U.D. has opened an investigation of nearly $200,000 in no-bid Government
contracts awarded to three former Reagan Administration officials, including the
former chief of staff to Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp.    7

The Senate Banking Committee voted to send to the full Senate the nomination of
T. Timothy Ryan Jr. as the nation's next top savings and loan regulator. The
vote followed lobbying by Treasury Secretary Brady.    31

Lee Atwater's central preoccupation is no longer politics. The Republican
leader's enemy is not some Democrat he can slash away at, but a small cluster of
errant cells in the right forward part of his brain.    7

The first execution in California in 23 years was blocked when a Federal appeals
court judge said Robert Alton Harris, convicted of the murders of two
teen-agers, may not have had adequate psychiatric help in his trial.    7

Trial is delayed in Omaha scandal    8

U.S. urged to resolve problem at arms plant    26

Regional    27-30

Schools Chancellor Fernandez moved to strengthen his authority over New York
City's local school boards by appointing three trustees to take over the
financial operations of a Brooklyn district.    1

At P.S. 92: A hope that money will flow again    28

More people were slain in New York last year than ever before, and the killings
in the city in 1990 will eclipse that record if the trend set in the first two
months continues, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said.    27

A city police officer was indicted by a Brooklyn grand jury on a manslaughter
charge in the fatal shooting of an unarmed 14-year-old robbery suspect on Jan.
31.    27

The eerie nightworld of social clubs has become the target of a task force of
112 police officers, many of whom were transferred from narcotics work, and
scores of Fire and Buildings Department inspectors.    27

U.S. lifts rules so eight can grieve in Honduras    30

Grand jury votes to indict suspect in social club fire    30

Public assistance for students at four-year colleges is the thorniest issue
facing legislative negotiators in Albany. They are deciding how New York should
comply with a welfare reform law passed by Congress in 1988.    27

State Senate Republicans in Albany set up special ''900'' numbers for citizens
to register their opinions on New York's budget problems.    29

Legislators say rises in tuition are on the table    29

Free-form station fights to keep its watts up    28

Business Digest    31

Arts/Entertainment

Author's affection for Lyndon Johnson    13

Film: Murals and morals    14

''The Women on a Roof''    14

Music: James Graseck, subway violinist    13

Dutoit and the Philharmonic    15

Circus: Ringling is back    13

Dance: Morningside Festival showcase    16

Book: ''Roosevelt: A Rendezvous With Destiny''    17

Television on the cheap    48

Consumer's World    50

A.T.&T. credit card offers new connection

Bargains are few at U.S. auctions

Coping with spring gardening

Sports

Baseball: Injury wave hits Mets    47

Basketball: Knicks lose in overtime    45

Duke a mirror of coach    45

Hurley leads Blue Devils    45

Shoot-'em up in making    46

Column: Berkow on U.N.L.V. and gamblers    45

Football: Rutledge a Redskin    45

Golf: King leads; Lopez misses cut    47

Tennis: Gilbert loses in Davis Cup    46

Obituaries

Harry Bridges, docks leader    11

Barbara Capitman, created Miami art deco district    12

Helen Hoke, book publisher and writer of children's stories    12

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials    24

For Mexico, it's no fad

New York's example for juries

Putting national interest first

The case for the mentally ill

Letters    24

Flora Lewis: People and groups    25

Russell Baker: Buddy, can you spare a bomb?    25

John B. Oakes: Will Albany save our heritage?    25

Janelle M. Diller: Bush's blind eye on Nepal    25


                             1799 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 718 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Weighed by U.S. Panel

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER, Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., March 30

BODY:

   The first formal proposal ever made to treat children with severe hereditary
diseases by inserting foreign genes into their cells entered the most important
phase today in the long effort to win Government approval.

   The proposal had passed two preliminary review boards, but this was the first
time it was considered by a national panel of scientists, lawyers, ethicists and
lay people, the Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee at the National Institutes of
Health.

   If the sometimes febrile emotional pitch of today's initial presentation was
any indication, the scientists who proposed the experiment have much work ahead
of them before they will be permitted to treat a single young child with the new
gene therapy.

A Welter of Questions

   The subcommittee is part of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee at the
health institutes, which reviews all Government-financed projects involving the
use of genetic engineering. Had the subcommittee voted to approve the gene
therapy project, it would been passed along for consideration to the full
committee, which met today to consider another genetic experiment.

   But the 16 subcommittee members, as well as people in the audience, peppered
the two presenting scientists with such a welter of questions and concerns that
it was clear midway through the meeting that another subcommittee meeting would
be needed.

   Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute, Dr. W. French
Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and their colleagues
have proposed that they attempt the first human gene therapy trials on children
suffering from a severe immune disorder. In this rare disease, which is thought
to afflict fewer than two dozen people worldwide, children are born without a
working copy of the gene for the critical enzyme ADA, or adenosine deaminase.

   As a result of the enzyme deficiency, toxins build up in the body that
destroy T-cells and other components of the immune system. Victims of the
illness often fall prey to a host of infections and can die within the first
years of life.

   Dr. Blaese and Dr. Anderson propose that they treat children deficient in the
enzyme by isolating T-cells from their blood, growing millions of T-cells in the
laboratory and then infecting the cells with a specially designed virus. The
virus would contain a copy of the human gene for the ADA enzyme and a powerful
genetic switch originally taken from a mouse leukemia virus.

   The virus would settle into the T-cells and the ADA gene would flick on,
generating the life-saving enzyme. The T-cells could then be reintroduced into
the young patients by a simple blood transfusion. If all went well, the T-cells
propagating the ADA enzyme would help cure the immune disorder, or at least
markedly control it.

   Until very recently, human gene therapy might have seemed a potentially
revolutionary advance for the treatment of ADA deficiency. But last week the
Food and Drug Administration approved another novel treatment for the hereditary
ailment, a drug known as PEG-ADA. This medication is a form of the ADA enzyme,
isolated from cow tissue, that has been chemically manipulated so it does not
break down quickly in the bloodstream, as normal ADA enzyme does, and can thus
dissolve cell-killing toxins.

   In clinical trials, 12 ADA-deficient children have been treated with PEG-ADA,
and the drug has helped all of them gain weight, fight off infections and even
attend school.

   Dr. Blaese was asked if gene therapy really necessary now that the new enzyme
drug was available. He replied that PEG-ADA did not cure patients and that gene
therapy could be a significantly better treatment for them in the long term.

   In the most dramatic outburst, a subcommittee member asked Dr. Michael
Hershfield of Duke University, who has been in charge of PEG-ADA trials, for his
opinion about the new gene therapy. Dr. Hershfield heatedly replied that he had
not been sent the protocol to review and that he did not have time to present
his side of the story.

   Other participants in the meeting pointed out that Dr. Hershfield is a paid
consultant for Enzon Inc., a New Jersey company that is marketing PEG-ADA. But
he insisted that he had his patients' best interests in mind and that Dr.
Anderson and Dr. Blaese had many questions left to answer.


                             1800 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    March 31, 1990, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A16

LENGTH: 603 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Team to Expand Genetic-Therapy Testing;
In One Patient, Altered Cells Attack Tumor

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The first attempt to transfer foreign genes into human beings, though not
intended to confer any benefit to the patients, has produced some unexpected
therapeutic effects and will be expanded beyond the 10 cancer patients to which
it originally was limited.

   During yesterday's meeting of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the
National Institutes of Health, Steven A. Rosenberg of the National Cancer
Institute (NCI) described how the experiment may actually provide a surprising
new way to make the treatment more effective against cancer.

   In the experiment, Rosenberg, along with NCI's R. Michael Blaese and W.
French Anderson of the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, surgically
remove pieces of a patient's melanoma tumor, a form of skin cancer. They then
isolate many different kinds of white blood cells already in the tumor -- cells
of the immune system that are thought to be attacking the tumor.

   Next they install a foreign gene into the cells, a gene derived from bacteria
and which makes the cells resistant to an otherwise lethal toxic compound called
G418. Then they allow the cells to proliferate in the laboratory.

   Several billion of these genetically altered white blood cells, called
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, or TIL cells, are then put back into the patient
to attack the tumor. Initially, the bacterial gene was added merely to mark the
cells so that researchers could determine how long the TIL cells lived in the
body.

   In one of the six patients treated so far with modified TIL cells, Rosenberg
removed still more of the tumor and extracted another group of TIL cells. By
growing these in the lab with the drug G418, only the cells carrying the
protective bacterial gene survived. These surviving TIL cells were grown until
there were billions of them and were then put back into the patient.

   "The patient had a dramatic remission" of a tumor in his throat, Rosenberg
said.

   Although Rosenberg cautioned that this was seen in only one patient, it
appears that some kind of a selection process using G418 to kill all but the
genetically altered TIL cells in the tumor somehow enriches the TIL population
with those cells that are the most powerful cancer killers.

   "We are trying to let the patient's body select the most effective cells
itself," Rosenberg said.

   The NIH committee gave the Rosenberg team permission to expand this study to
as many patients as it wants, although the scientists said it is unlikely to be
tried in more than 50 patients.

   The NIH team has its sights set on other ways to make TIL therapy more
effective. Early this summer, it will seek permission to put into TIL cells a
gene that produces tumor necrosis factor, a protein that can kill cancer cells
by itself.

   Blaese and Anderson also are seeking permission to begin a completely
separate set of gene-therapy experiments to treat children with "bubble boy
disease," which destroys the immune system.

   The researchers hope to reverse the disease by inserting an enzyme missing at
birth into the white blood cells.

   While this has been described as the first true gene-therapy experiment, it
probably will not provide a cure for this rare disease because the genetically
altered cells do not persist in the body more than a few weeks. The children in
the experiment would require repeated blood transfusions with genetically
altered cells.

   Several technical questions were raised by members of an NIH subcommittee
that must approve human gene-therapy experiments. The subcommittee will meet in
June to hear the scientists' answers, and the experiment could be approved by
Oct. 2.
