
                             1801 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1990 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 29, 1990, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1 p

LENGTH: 842 words

HEADLINE: Genes that curb cancer reported;
Findings may help dictate therapy

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

DATELINE: DAYTONA BEACH, Fla.

BODY:

   Scientists are finding a new class of genes that inhibit the ability of
cancer cells to spread throughout the body.

   Three or possibly four such genes have been discovered in recent months,
opening up new avenues for understanding cancer's deadliest characteristic.

   Dr. Patricia Steeg, a National Cancer Institute researcher who recently
discovered the first such gene, said at an American Cancer Society seminar here
this week that her finding should soon lead to an antibody test that predicts if
a newly diagnosed cancer has already spread. If positive, such a test would
signal the need for more aggressive therapy.

   Two companies already have licensed the federal patent on the gene that Steeg
discovered with a view toward devising and marketing such a test.

   Beyond that, Steeg said the gene may lead to novel new therapies for keeping
cancer in check.

   The new genes are part of a fast-growing list of biochemical switches in the
genetic heart of human and animal cells that act in concert and independently to
initiate cancer, suppress it and keep specific cell types in their place.
Scientists have found nearly 50 so-called oncogenes, or cancer-causing genes,
since the mid-1980s.

   More recently, attention has shifted to anti-oncogenes, of which four are
known.  The loss or mutation of these genes in a cell permits it to become
malignant, or at least sets the stage for malignancy.

   The genes that inhibit cancer spread, or metastasis, constitute a new
subgroup of anti-oncogenes.

   Acting in various ways yet to be understood, the anti-metastasis genes
suppress cancer cells' ability to escape from their initial sites and start new
colonies in other tissues. It is this trait that makes cancer deadly; patients
almost always die from the metastasized tumors rather than from the primary, or
original, malignancy.

   Steeg has found her gene, called NM-23, in a wide variety of human and animal
cells, cancerous and normal. Cancer cells consistently contain reduced levels of
the small protein for which it is the blueprint, suggesting that this protein
normally keeps cells in check.

   The other newly found antimetastasis genes are called TIMP-1 and TIMP-2,
which direct the production of a substance that inhibits the breakdown of
connective tissue. Malfunction of these genes may permit cancer cells to break
free of normal barriers and invade nearby tissues and blood vessels.

   A fourth gene, called 18-Q and reported in January by Dr. Bertram Vogelstein
of Johns Hopkins University, seems specific to colon cancer.

   Dr. Alfred Knudson of the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, an
oncogene pioneer, noted that 18-Q codes for a protein normally found on the
surface of cells. Loss or inactivation of the gene is one of several "events"
contributing to colon cancer, he said. This suggests that 18-Q might have
something to do with the way such cells are normally kept in order.

   Knudson speculated in a telephone interview yesterday that antimetastasis
genes such as NM-23 and 18-Q act late in the cancer process, while other
oncogenes and anti-oncogenes act in earlier stages, even before birth.

   Steeg believes NM-23 plays a vital role in orderly embryonic development
because it is remarkably similar to a fruit fly gene.  When scientists
deliberately mutate the fruit fly gene, the embryonic fly fails to develop and
dies in a way that resembles late-stage metastatic cancer cells.

   Steeg said she has developed several lines of evidence that indicate NM-23's
antimetastasis role and its relevance to human cancer.

   For instance, she has shown that NM-23 activity was consistently low in
breast cancer cells taken from women whose malignancy had spread to nearby lymph
nodes.

   Among women who had no evidence of breast cancer cells in lymph nodes, 75
percent had high levels of NM-23 activity. This is consistent with the
hypothesis that the gene's normal role is to keep cells in check.

   The rest had low NM-23 levels, a finding Steeg said was "particularly
interesting" because 25 percent of breast cancer patients without evidence of
lymph node involvement at the time of diagnosis later develop metastatic
disease. A test for NM-23 levels would identify these high-risk women and permit
chemotherapy to be focused on them, sparing the other 75 percent.

   Steeg also found that women with low levels of NM-23 activity had breast
cancer cells of a type that is more aggressive and likely to spread. The cells
did not have estrogen receptors on their surfaces, a bad sign, and they were
more primitive in appearance.

   The Cancer Institute researcher has recently found that many human tumors
have lost one copy of the NM-23 gene, which resides near the center of
chromosome 17. "This is a hallmark for a suppressor gene," she said.

   Currently, Steeg is attempting to put NM-23 back into metastatic mouse cancer
cells to see if it inhibits their ability to spread. She plans the same
experiment with metastatic human cancer cells and foresees the possibility that
gene therapy might someday tame human malignancies.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1990


                             1802 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 March 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: Government Approves Novel Drug To Treat Immune System Disease

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration approved a novel type of drug yesterday for
the treatment of a rare genetic disease that devastates the immune system.

   Beyond helping children afflicted with the disorder, adenosine deaminase
deficiency, the drug could be used against many severe enzyme diseases that now
defy therapy, scientists said.

   The new drug, PEG-ADA, is a chemically altered form of the ADA enzyme, which
is partly or completely deficient in children who suffer from the hereditary
ailment. In the absence of ADA, toxins build up in the body and destroy many
critical white blood cells of the immune system. As a result, patients often
fall prey to massive infections and die in the first few years of life.

   The disease is very similar to the disorder that afflicted the ''bubble boy''
from Texas, who had to live in a sterile plastic enclosure as a shield against
infections.

Early Attempts Failed

   Doctors have long wanted to treat ADA-deficient children by administering
replacement doses of the enzyme, with the hope that the introduced ADA would
break down enough of the accumulated toxins to rescue the immune system. But
early attempts at injecting natural forms of ADA, which were isolated from
humans or cows, proved fruitless. Once in the body, the enzyme degraded too
rapidly to perform its intended task.

   Researchers at Enzon Inc., a biopharmaceutical company in South Plainfield,
N.J., who developed the drug, solved the problem by chemically attaching strands
of a polymer called polyethylene glycol to ADA purified from cow intestines. The
investigators found that the plastic stabilized the ADA and prolonged its life
span in the bloodstream without disrupting its enzymatic muscle. Despite its
bovine origin, the ADA worked exactly as the human enzyme does.

   Since clinical trials began in 1986, doctors have treated 12 children with
PEG-ADA: 9 in the United States and 3 in Europe. The young patients receive
intramuscular injections of the modified enzyme once a week. All have shown
signs of improvement, gaining weight, growing taller and fighting off
infections.

   Once confined to isolation, either in the hospital or at home, the children
have even been able to attend school, free of fears that they would expose
themselves to potentially lethal pathogens like chickenpox and influenza.

'First Effective Example'

   ''This is first effective example of enzyme replacement therapy for any
genetic disease,'' said Dr. Michael Hershfield of Duke University Medical
School, a clinical investigator of PEG-ADA.

   But not all the children have experienced a restoration of the immune system
to normal or near-normal levels.

   Another team of researchers, headed by Dr. W. French Anderson and Dr. R.
Michael Blaese at the National Institutes of Health, recently proposed that they
try to treat ADA-deficient children by inserting the gene for ADA into the
patients' blood cells.

   The scientists said they would use such human gene therapy techniques in
conjunction with PEG-ADA therapy. They hope that the combined approach will
result in a genuine cure for the disorder.

   Researchers at Enzon and elsewhere are now striving to apply the PEG
stabilizer to other enzymes. Among the more promising candidates are enzymes
able to dissolve dangerous metabolites that result from stroke or lung
infections and enzymes that could selectively attack childhood leukemia cells.

   ''PEG-ADA will serve as a prototype for other agents and enzymes that are
ordinarily too short-lived in the bloodstream to be of clinical use,'' said Dr.
Roger Kobayashi of the University of California at Los Angeles. ''It's really
quite astonishing how well the modification works.''


                             1803 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                March 23, 1990, Friday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH FIRM TAKES THE SIMPLE ROUTE TO GENE THERAPY SUCCESS

BYLINE: By LINDA ROACH MONROE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The experiment was so elementary, and the results so surprising, that
researchers working with San Diego's Vical Inc. couldn't really believe what
they were seeing. It all seemed too simple.

   They had been injecting submicroscopic fatty globules containing DNA or RNA
into mice to see what would happen. The idea was that the fat globules, called
liposomes, would be taken up by cells. The cells would use the genetic material
inside to make proteins they couldn't otherwise make.

   The researchers found moderate success with that, but the rigors of science
demanded that the experiment have a "control" portion -- injecting the raw DNA
or RNA into the mice to show that the liposomes themselves were making it
possible for the new genes to be incorporated into the cell's processes.

   It turned out the cells like the raw material even better and began making
the new proteins for as long as six months.

   "This was a big surprise, and that's really what you're looking for in this
area," said Philip L. Felgner, director of product development at Vical. Felgner
worked on the experiment with Dr. Jon Wolff and others at the University of
Wisconsin at Madison.

   Researchers spent several months longer trying to find flaws in their methods
or their conclusions. The literature of science is littered with examples of
experimental results that deserved the label of too good to be true, explained
Dr. Karl Y. Hostetler, vice president for research and development at Vical.

   "We didn't want any fiascoes," he said.

   Vical hopes that the results of this checking and double-checking, reported
in today's issue of the journal Science, will convert the company from a
bare-bones start-up to a major player in the ranks of San Diego's biotechnology
community.

   The company, which was founded in 1987, hopes to find financing to more than
double its scientific staff of 22 as a result of the study. It is talking with
several large drug companies to see if any would like to buy into the follow-up
studies on the new gene transfer method, said Vical President Wick Goodspeed.

   Some familiar names in San Diego science and business have played a role in
Vical. Among them:

   Hostetler, who is on leave from his longtime post as professor of medicine in
residence at UC San Diego. His specialties include investigating ways to use
lipid chemistry to improve the effectiveness of drugs.

   Dr. Douglas D. Richman, a founder and scientific adviser to the firm. Richman
is a professor in residence of medicine and pathology at UCSD, specializing in
virology and clinical trials of AIDS treatments.

   Dr. Dennis A. Carson, also a scientific adviser to the firm. Carson recently
resigned as head of the division of clinical immunology at Scripps Clinic to
become head of UCSD's new institute for research on aging.

   Timothy Wollaeger, chairman of the board. Wollaeger formerly was senior vice
president in charge of finance and administration for Hybritech Inc., the
monoclonal antibody firm whose success was capped in 1986 with its $485-million
acquisition by Eli Lilly & Co.

   Howard E. (Ted) Greene, a director of Vical. He formerly was chief executive
officer for Hybritech. Greene and Wollaeger were the driving forces behind
Biovest Partners, a venture capital firm that financed several San Diego biotech
firms.

   W. Larry Respess, a Vical director. A leader in biotech patent law, he
formerly was general counsel of Gen-Probe and Hybritech.

   Until now, the best combination of science and business for Vical has been
the multi-year research contract it received last summer from Burroughs Wellcome
Co. to develop new forms of AZT for AIDS therapy. The study is investigating the
idea that encasing AZT in fat globules would make it more powerful within the
body.

   The gene-insertion technique reported in Science this week is being suggested
as a way to cause the body to generate proteins that would block persistent
viral infections, ranging from AIDS to herpes. It also is seen as having
potential use as a way to trigger cells to immunize the body against diseases,
researchers say.

   Vical is calling the new method "gene therapeutics," to distinguish it from
the traditional goal of gene therapy, which uses viruses to insert missing genes
into the genetic codes of people with genetic diseases.

   The so-called retroviral method has proved difficult and slow, despite
several years of intense effort by research groups around the country, including
a group led by Dr. Theodore Friedmann at UCSD.

   Because retroviruses insert their own genetic code into the cells of their
host, the method is also expected to be problematic as a gene therapy technique
-- since some scientists worry that this could harm the patient irreversibly in
some unforeseen way.

   Inserting the genes themselves into muscle cells -- without any retroviral
carrier -- avoids this stumbling block entirely, Felgner said. The genes do
their work of producing proteins, called expression, but they don't seem to
affect the cell's own genetic structure, he said.

   "People have worked in the gene therapy area for years assuming that a rather
complex viral delivery system would be required in order to get expression. And
we have found that you can do it very simply," Felgner said.

   It was the slowness of the gene therapy field that led Felgner's
collaborator, Wolff of the University of Wisconsin, to decide less than two
years ago to get out of it altogether, Wolff said in a telephone interview.

   Wolff was an assistant professor and a researcher in Friedmann's UCSD lab
before going to Wisconsin as an assistant professor of pediatrics and medical
genetics in 1988.

   "I had pretty much planned to get out of the gene therapy field because I got
discouraged with the retroviral approach. Scientifically, it wasn't very
challenging," he said. "Everybody was doing the same thing, and nothing was
working that well."

   The results of the research contract with Vical, begun in January, 1989, have
rekindled his enthusiasm, Wolff said.

   He believes that, in the end, genetic therapies will involve a variety of
techniques, not just the Vical method. But he and Felgner acknowledge that they
expect some resistance to their ideas from the traditional gene therapy
community.

   "You're talking about somebody who has spent his life in this field, and who
would like to make the real breakthroughs that are going to allow it to be used
in patients with diseases," Felgner said. "There's quite a bit at stake."

   Other collaborators with Wolff and Felgner on the research were Robert W.
Malone of Vical and Phillip Williams, Wang Chong, Gyula Acsadi and Agnes Jani in
Wisconsin.

   Vical is planning to try to patent the technique, even though it involves no
novel or complex steps unfamiliar to molecular biologists. In essence, it
involves preparing DNA or RNA with standard techniques and then injecting it in
the conventional way into muscle.

   "The reason why we have patent position is that it was such a total surprise.
Some of those things are the best patents you can get," Felgner said. "Nobody
who was 'skilled in the art' would have ever thought that what we have
accomplished here was even possible. Nobody would have even thought to do the
experiment."


                             1804 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      March 23, 1990, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words

HEADLINE: BIG ADVANCE IN GENETIC TREATMENTS REPORTED;
MEDICINE: RESEARCHERS SAY NEW TECHNIQUE COULD ALLOW DOCTORS TO FIGHT DISEASES
SUCH AS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY SIMPLY BY INJECTING MATERIAL DIRECTLY INTO MUSCLE
TISSUE.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   Researchers have developed a revolutionary way to treat genetic diseases that
could greatly accelerate human gene therapy, which has been delayed for a decade
by ethical considerations and technical problems.

   Special genetic material would simply be injected into muscle tissue every
few days or weeks in much the same fashion that insulin is now injected daily to
treat diabetes.

   The technique, developed by San Diego and Wisconsin scientists, could apply
to a wide range of genetic diseases for which there is now no adequate therapy,
ranging from muscular dystrophy to rare diseases of the immune system.

   It might also serve as a way to deliver genetic engineering products, such as
human growth hormone, much more cheaply than is currently possible.

   In addition, according to researchers, it could be a valuable tool in the
search for an AIDS vaccine or to help fight infections by the AIDS virus.

   Conventional gene therapy involves using genetic-engineering techniques to
replace a defective gene that causes illness with a healthy one. Geneticists
have not yet received approval from regulatory agencies to attempt such therapy
in humans.

   Until now, scientists have experimented with replacing defective genes by
using special viruses to insert healthy genetic material into an individual's
own DNA. But researchers and critics have feared that the viruses would insert
the genes at the wrong site in DNA, thereby disrupting healthy genes.

   In the surprisingly simple new technique, the researchers would simply inject
specially prepared genetic material into the person's muscle tissue, stimulating
production of an enzyme or protein whose absence is the cause of the disease.
The protein would be carried by the bloodstream to body tissues where it is
needed.

   Because a virus is not used, the injected material would pose no risk to the
recipient's genes.

   The added genetic material would break down in a period of days to weeks, so
the genetic therapy would be reversible if adverse effects should appear.

   The researchers, from Vical Inc. in San Diego and the University of Wisconsin
Medical Center in Madison, report in today's Science magazine that they have
used the technique successfully to produce proteins in mice. They hope to extend
the studies to humans within five years, most likely for the treatment of
muscular dystrophy.

   "We are ushering in a very major change . . . that is going to push gene
therapy ahead much faster in the next decade," said biochemist Philip L. Felgner
of Vical.

   Although the researchers were looking for a way to introduce genetic
information into cells, their discovery was serendipitous.

   Felgner and his colleagues were working with messenger ribonucleic acid
(mRNA), which serves as a sort of working copy of the genetic information
contained in DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) that is used by the cell's
protein-making machinery.

   The mRNA has certain potential therapeutic applications in its own right, and
many laboratories are looking for ways to get it inside cells. Vical has been
working with liposomes, microscopic globules of fat that would encase the mRNA
and carry it into cells. To test how well the liposomes worked, researchers
decided to inject naked mRNA into tissues, assuming that none of it would make
it into cells.

   They were wrong.

   The naked mRNA was taken up by the cells faster than the mRNA in liposomes.
"I didn't believe it at first," said medical geneticist Jon A. Wolff of
Wisconsin. "It was a total surprise," Felgner added. "Nobody would have even
thought to (try it)."

   After they convinced themselves that the mRNA was being taken up, research
progressed rapidly. "The procedure is extremely simple," Felgner said. "It's
simple to administer the mRNA, and it's simple to make it. It's straightforward
molecular biology."

   They do have to modify the mRNA, though. Special segments of RNA must be
added to the ends of the RNA gene for the cells to make proteins from it.
Additional segments must be added if the cells are to secrete the proteins into
the bloodstream.

   The mRNA is broken down and absorbed by the cells within two or three days,
so continuous replacement is necessary. But Felgner and Wolff have been able to
circumvent that problem by modifying the genetic information so that it persists
for as long as six months.

   One of the most promising uses of the technique might be for treating
muscular dystrophy, which causes progressive weakening and wasting of muscles.
About one in every 3,500 males develops the disease.

   Researchers discovered two years ago that the muscle cells of muscular
dystrophy victims lack a specific protein, called dystrophin, that is necessary
for muscle function. Felgner speculates that the new technique could readily be
used to have muscle cells produce the protein right where it is needed. He is
now preparing experiments in which the dystrophin gene will be injected into
dystrophic mice, and hopes to have them completed by the end of the year.

   The technique theoretically could also be used to treat any genetic disease
requiring that a protein or enzyme be released into the blood. In one type of
rare immunodeficiency disease that genetic engineers are contemplating treating,
for example, the victims are missing a crucial enzyme called adenosine
deaminase.

   Felgner speculates that such a condition could be treated easily with the new
technique, so that muscle cells would secrete the missing enzyme.

   Other missing hormones and biological agents that now must be injected on a
regular basis, such as human growth hormone, could be produced in the same
fashion. Because injections of a plasmid would be required only every six months
or so, rather than daily or several times a week, the cost would be greatly
reduced.

   The technique probably could not be used for treating diabetes, however,
because the production of insulin must be much more closely regulated than is
possible in muscle cells.

   Finally, the technique could be used to produce vaccines against the AIDS
virus and others. If muscle cells could be induced to produce certain AIDS
proteins, speculated immunologist Howard Gray of Cytel Corp. in San Diego, a
much more effective immune response would be produced against the virus.


                             1805 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1990 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      March 19, 1990, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 25 p.

LENGTH: 1272 words

HEADLINE: Workshops take teachers into 'real world' of genetics;
Massachusetts program provides way for instructors;
to explore social issues in a rapidly expanding field;
GENETICS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

DATELINE: GARDNER

BODY:

   The subject is human genetics, but at the moment the emphasis is on the
"human."

   As biology teachers from various Massachusetts high schools watch raptly, a
video unfolds a drama that tears at the heart.

    The episode poignantly illustrates the power of new tests that predict
genetic disease, but also the agonizing dilemmas that people may face in
attempting to use the information.

   In the video, a pregnant woman partially paralyzed by a birth defect learns
that her fetus is affected by a similar condition. From her wheelchair she
declares she wishes to go ahead with the pregnancy. Her distraught and fearful
husband, however, advocates abortion.

   "You and the doctor are saying by discussing an abortion of the fetus that I
shouldn't have been born!" cries the woman. Not at all, insists the husband, but
he had hoped they could have a normal child.

   "Tell me, what's normal?" asks the wife, indicating with a gesture her own
situation. "Who decides - and what happens to the rest of us?"

   Issues like this are becoming more and more relevant as scientists gain
increasing power to uncover defective genes. The changes have come so fast, and
have been so recent, that biology teachers must struggle to keep up the pace of
genetic advance. And many received their training before the explosion of DNA
discoveries in the 1970s and '80s.

   To help close this gap, the Massachusetts Genetics Program, an agency within
the state Department of Public Health, organized the two-day course that drew
about 80 teachers to Gardner last week.

   The course is among only a few nationwide and ranks as one of the most
ambitious. Others will surely follow, just as special science and engineering
courses proliferated after the first Soviet Sputnik was launched in 1957,
prompting a huge effort to update teachers.

   "It's a brave new world out there, and every day we're finding out about new
genetic conditions and ones that can be diagnosed prenatally," said Dr. Solveig
Pflueger, a medical geneticist at Baystate Medical Center in Springfield, who
described for the teachers how genes can go wrong to cause inherited diseases.
"You and your students are going to be living through the period of the human
genome project, designer genes, sex selection of children," he told them.

   The genome project is a massive quest just under way to decipher all human
genes in an attempt to uncover the causes of diseases that have an inherited
factor, and to better understand how an embryo is genetically programmed to
develop into a staggeringly complex adult human.

    As the couple in the video fade from the screen, the watching teachers break
into debate: How can the husband and wife settle the crisis? Did the doctor
improperly try to influence them? Does the mere existence of prenatal testing
for disabilities foster discrimination against those born with them?

   The videotaped sequence was at the heart of a bioethics workshop, but there
were many others. Teachers learned to recognize and sort out the 23 pairs of
human chromosomes in magnified photographs; they participated in an exercise
called "Chances/Choices," in which a hypothetical family attempts to cope with
the appearance of one inherited disease after another.

   At other sessions, the teachers were intensively briefed on the more
prevalent and severe genetic diseases, such as sickle cell anemia, cystic
fibrosis, hemophilia and Marfan syndrome. The participants said later they not
only had learned much information about the diseases, but also felt they would
be better prepared to perhaps sense if a student in their classes might have one
of the conditions.

   Jan Warsing, a genetics counselor and primary organizer of the course for the
Massachusetts Genetics Program, said the three two-day briefings scheduled this
year should include about 230 high school teachers. The course held in Gardner
was the second; another will be given in Northampton on April 10 and 11.

   "Genetics is changing so rapidly, and this is our way of trying to help them
stay current," Warsing said.  In addition, she said, the information will
dispersed by a ripple effect from one teacher to many students.  "This will have
more impact than on just the number of teachers here, and in the long run, we're
going to have a much more informed public" on human genetics.

   Marsha Lanes, director of the state genetics program, briefed the teachers on
potential applications of genetic research that are troubling to scientists,
ethicists and consumers alike.

   For example, if screening to detect defective genes becomes routine among the
entire population, should it be mandatory or voluntary?

   Would it be fair for companies to test workers, and then bar them from
employment if they are found to carry genes that make them susceptible to
disease from exposures to chemicals in the workplace? What will happen if
doctors begin routinely using tests that can reveal genetic tendencies to
conditions like heart disease or cancer, but which may be misleading because
genes are not the whole cause?

   "Nature vs. nurture is a fallacy," said Lanes. "No disease is determined
entirely by either genetic or environmental factors."

    Besides the sessions on genetic disease, the teachers attended briefings on
topics such as linkage mapping, a method of tracing disease genes through family
pedigrees, and on DNA fingerprinting. The latter is a new and somewhat
controversial technique for linking a criminal suspect to a crime by comparing
distinctive patterns of the DNA in his blood with that in samples of blood,
semen or other tissue from a crime scene.

    This is the second year of the short course, which has counterparts in other
states but should be offered far more widely, said Joseph McInerney,
president-elect of the National Association of Biology Teachers.

   "A lot is happening, but not enough," said McInerney."We really need to
educate the population about the personal and societal implications" of gene
technology but many courses are seriously outdated. McInerney is director of the
Biological Sciences Curriculum Study in Colorado Springs, Colo.

   Even when the facts are correct, the interpretation may not reflect current
thinking, he said, noting that "a lot of texts give the idea that genetics
equals destiny" - i.e., that genetic traits or tendencies can't be changed by
experience.

   Special efforts like the Massachusetts course are badly needed, because
"these kids are going to face enormous decisions" as adults, he said.  "It's a
case of bringing the teachers up to speed, so they can help kids make rational
decisions."

   McInerney was referring to personal decisions, such whether to make use of
the large array of genetic tests that will undoubtedly become routinely
available, and what to do if genetic problems are discovered.

   Some of today's students will one day be immersed in issues as varied as gene
therapy, potential discrimination against carriers of certain genes, and whether
national health insurance should be established to deal with inequalities in
coverage caused by genetic susceptibility.

   At the end of the two days, the majority of teachers said they had found the
experience rigorous but rewarding.

    "This is one of the most relevant courses like this I've ever had," said Bob
Becker, a teacher at Wachusett Regional High School.

   Robert Gibbons, who teaches biology at Hudson High School, agreed. "I have a
child with cystic fibrosis, so I have a vested interest," he said. But that
aside, added Gibbons, "this is one of the very best" special educational
offerings, and if necessary, "I'd have fought tooth and nail to come here."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. GLOBE PHOTO/JOHN MOTTERN / Genetics technologist Betty Thorpe
(standing) and teacher Mary Hare Greaves at Gardner workshop.  2. GLOBE
PHOTO/JOHN MOTTERN / Marsha Lanes and Jan Warsing at Gardner conference.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1990


                             1806 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: IDEAS AND TRENDS;
Gene Therapy Moves A Step Closer to Reality

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

BODY:

   WITH an anatomy consisting of no more than a glob of genetic material wrapped
in a protective coat of protein, viruses exist on the boundary between the
living and the dead. Under a plan announced last week, these borderline
creatures would be used as messengers to smuggle missing genes into the cells of
children otherwise doomed by a devastating congenital disorder.

   Since the late 1970's when scientists learned how to splice human insulin
genes into bacteria, turning them into living chemical factories, molecular
biology has promised to revolutionize medicine. Using the techniques developed
to alter bacteria, scientists hope to edit and repair the defective genetic
instructions that cause thousands of inherited diseases like cystic fibrosis and
Duchenne's muscular dystrophy.

   An important step was taken on Wednesday when a Government panel gave
preliminary approval to what scientists hope will be the first successful
attempt at gene therapy. The target is ADA deficiency, a disease so rare that it
affects only about 20 people in the world. Victims are born without the gene for
making adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that breaks down biological byproducts
that can accumulate in the body and poison T-cells and B-cells, important
components of the immune system.

   Their defenses destroyed, victims usually die of infections in their first
few years. One patient, David, the ''bubble boy'' from Texas, spent his 12-year
life sealed in a sterile enclosure, awaiting a cure that never came. With the
new therapy, scientists plan to start with a mouse virus that has been modified
so that it won't cause disease. The gene that makes adenosine deaminase is to be
spliced into the virus's genetic material and the virus used to infect T-cells
that have been removed from a patient's blood.

   As in a natural viral infection, the virus (technically a retrovirus) would
latch onto a cell and squirt its genetic material into it. This, along with the
new gene, would be incorporated into the T-cell's own DNA. Finally, these
altered cells would be injected back into the bloodstream, where they would
begin manufacturing the enzyme. Scientists hope that regular transfusions would
keep the children alive.

Regulatory Hurdles

   Though the treatment would benefit only a handful of patients, the same
techniques might be used against other genetic diseases.

   But first the proposal, which was approved by the Institutional Biosafety
Committee of the National Institutes of Health, must vault a half-dozen more
regulatory hurdles. In addition to the layers of red tape, the scientists can
almost count on confronting protesters who oppose genetic experiments as an
intrusion on the sanctity of life. In the mid-1980's scientists fought three
years of legal battles before they were allowed to spray a strawberry patch with
bacteria altered to fight frost. Considering the stakes, scientists hope that
this time experiments can begin within the year.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Doctors hope to use gene therapy, for the first time, to treat a
rare disease: the genetic disorder that afflicted David, the Texas boy who lived
his short life in a plastic bubble (Baylor College of Medicine)


                             1807 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     March 8, 1990, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 17; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: GENE TRANSFER FOR HUMAN ILLNESS GETS OK

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A federal scientific panel Wednesday took a potentially major new step in
gene therapy as it for the first time approved a plan to treat an illness by
inserting new genes in patients.

   The experimental gene therapy will be used to treat a rare and almost always
fatal childhood immune deficiency disorder.

   If the research is successful, the "potential for gene therapy could lead to
a range of treatments for many presently incurable diseases," said Dr. W. French
Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and one of the
researchers on the project.

   "Its basic importance is that it is the first step to something that could be
a major treatment procedure over the next 10-20 years," Anderson added. He
characterized Wednesday's approval as, "really the first step. If this is
successful, it will lead to a second step and a third step." The treatment
proposal was approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee of the National
Institutes of Health. It must now be further approved by six other panels, and
then must be approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

   "It's a long way from being done," said Dr. R. Michael Blaese, a National
Cancer Institute scientist who is also one of the researchers on the project.

   However, Blaese predicted that "ultimately in the next century there will be
an infinite number of possibilities for using genes to treat disease. In the
next decade or so, you will probably see them used in the treatment of cancer,
hemophilia and other diseases."

   The new therapy will treat the disease adenosine deaminase deficiency.
Adenosine deaminase is an enzyme that performs an essential function in the
immune system. Without the enzyme, the body's ability to fight infection is
crippled.

   Currently, the only successful treatment for the disease is a bone marrow
transplant from a sibling who is an identical match. However, the researchers
hope to treat the disease by replacing the gene that makes the crucial enzyme.

   The researchers have learned how to replace the gene in lymphocytes that are
grown in tissue cultures in the lab. They thus propose to take a small amount of
the patient's enzyme-deficient blood, then isolate the lymphocytes, or white
cells, from the blood. The lymphocytes are then to be grown in a tissue culture,
where they increase 1,000 fold.

   Next, the researchers will add normal genes to the white cells. Then the
healthy white cells with the new genes will be put back into the patient.

   It is presumed that the corrected white cells will then flourish, begin
producing the essential enzyme, and thus restore a functioning immune system.

   The therapy would not be a permanent cure, Blaese said, since the enzyme
would be produced only as long as the genetically manipulated cells live.

   "We don't know how long these cells last," he said. "Some lymphocytes,
however, can live for years."

   Adenosine deaminase deficiency is "very, very rare," Blaese said. "There are
only 20 to 30 patients in the whole world."

   Last May, genetically engineered cells were injected into a human patient for
the first time. The federally approved experiment was designed not to use the
genes as a therapy, however, but as marker genes to track the movement in the
body of cancer fighting white blood cells. Blaese was also involved in that
experiment.


                             1808 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: Gene Implant Therapy Is Backed For Children With Rare Disease

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER, Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., March 7

BODY:

   Gene therapy for human disease took a leap from the theoretical realms of the
laboratory toward the real world of practicing medicine today. A National
Institutes of Health panel approved a proposal to treat children with a severe
genetic disease by inserting new genes into their blood cells.

   The Institutional Biosafety Committee at the National Institutes of Health
held the nation's first public hearing on a human gene therapy project and then
approved it as safe without opposition. The project still needs the approval of
six other Federal regulatory panels, and the researchers are unlikely to begin
clinical trials of the therapy before the end of this year.

First Obstacle Surmounted

   But in weathering the initial scrutiny of the 12-member safety panel of
scientists and local citizens, human gene therapy surmounted its first hurdle on
the long regulatory road to the patient's bedside.

   ''As far as I know this is the first public review of a human gene therapy
program ever,'' said Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, an author of the therapy proposal.

   Under the proposal, Dr. Anderson and Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National
Cancer Institute and their colleagues will try to treat young children suffering
from adenosine deaminase deficiency. ADA deficiency, a genetic disorder that
destroys their immune systems, afflicted the famous ''bubble boy'' from Texas,
who had to live in a sterile plastic enclosure as a protection against
infection.

Hopes on Possible Impact

   Should their initial experiment prove successful, the scientists say, it will
open a new chapter in treating hereditary diseases.

   Researchers believe human gene therapy may also prove valuable in the battle
against cystic fibrosis, familial cholesterol disorders, metabolic deficiencies
of the liver and other genetic disorders. In principle, the new technique will
allow doctors to introduce any sort of necessary gene into patients lacking
healthy copies of it.

   The method could also be used to implant in a patient's cells foreign genes
that would make compounds to attack tumor cells selectively, or even the AIDS
virus.

   ''I hope that this will become a very powerful tool in the physician's
armamentarium,'' Dr. Blaese said. ''I predict that in the next decade we will
see human gene therapy used specially for diseases that we don't think of
primarily as genetic such as cancer.''

   In children who lack the ADA enzyme, toxic chemicals build up in the body and
destroy certain white blood cells of the immune system, known as T-cells and
B-cells. Patients ordinarily die of large-scale infections in the first few
years of life. The disease is extremely rare, Dr. Blaese said, affecting no more
than 20 people in the world at any time.

Plan on Correcting Deficiency

   Bone marrow transplants have helped a few patients but only when a perfectly
matched donor can be found; otherwise no effective treatments exist. In their
trials Dr. Blaese and Dr. Anderson plan to correct ADA deficiency by taking
blood from the patient, isolating the T-cells, growing them in vast quantities
in the laboratory, and infecting them with a genetically engineered virus.

   The virus is a mouse retrovirus that can infect human cells but has been
carefully redesigned so it cannot replicate or cause disease in humans. The
researchers have sliced into this crippled mouse virus a copy of the human gene
for the ADA enzyme.

   Once the viral package has infected the patient's cultured T-cells, it can
integrate into the chromosomes, where the gene for ADA will switch on and begin
producing the life-saving enzyme. The researchers will then inject the T-cells
back into the patient through a simple blood transfusion.

   If all goes well, the T-cells will produce enough ADA enzyme to prevent the
destruction of the child's immune system. Dr. Nelson Wivel, director of the
N.I.H. office of recombinant DNA activities, which regulates most bioengineering
research, said ''the big question is whether the cells will express enough of
the ADA product'' to correct the disease.

   Another question is how long the treatment will last. Most types of T-cells
live for only weeks or months, and so, at first, patients will probably need
regular reinfusions of the engineered blood cells to replenish the supply of ADA
enzyme.

   The researchers hope eventually to isolate longer-lived types of T-cells like
the memory cells that confer years of resistance to disease. If they could
infect such memory cells with the recombinant virus, patients would then have a
store of cells capable of propagating the ADA enzyme indefinitely.

Concern About Safety

   The panel that met today was concerned largely with questions of the safety
of human gene therapy. The panel members considered whether there was a chance
that the recombinant mouse virus could somehow become activated into a dangerous
form once inside the patient. Extensive laboratory and animal studies seem to
rule out that possibility. In addition, Dr. Anderson and Dr. Blaese have been
working with Dr. Steven Rosenberg of the N.C.I. on another type of gene transfer
experiment suggesting that the viral shuttle they use is safe and effective for
delivering foreign genes into human cells.

   More intense scrutiny of the therapy will come March 30, when the proposal
will be presented to the Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee, a division of the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health. At that
point a national panel of 25 scientists, legal scholars, ethicists and other
experts will thrash out all the medical and ethical issues of the proposed
experiment. Not until the proposal wins the approval of that and other review
boards as well as the F.D.A. and the director of the N.I.H. can human trials
proceed.

GRAPHIC: drawings


                             1809 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:



Many West Germans are troubled by the tone of world debate on German
reunification. A tone, they say, that indicates serious doubt about West
Germany's commitment to peace and democracy.    A1



   Fast merger of Germanys is opposed by Social Democrats    A13


   Alleged Libyan chemical arms plant splits U.S. and Bonn    A17


   Ethnic Albanians find a voice in a Yugoslav province    A13



   Aid requests from new democracies are hounding Washington policymakers who
must find the money to give. Lawmakers are pondering a cut in aid to other
countries or a diminished U.S. role in world affairs.    A14



Unrest spread to Bophuthatswana four days after a coup and protests in Ciskei,
another South African-created homeland. In the new demonstrations, seven people
were reported killed and 450 were treated for gunshot wounds.    A16



   A Cabinet vote on Israeli peace talks was postponed. The coalition
government, which could dissolve over the matter, failed to complete its debate
on Secretary Baker's plan for Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.    A5



   Teheran denies direct discussions with U.S. on hostages    A6


   Iran agrees to second U.N. human rights inquiry    A8


   Afghanistan says the leader of a failed coup is in Pakistan    A3


   In Nicaragua, victors are menaced    A3


   Castro to stop giving military aid to Nicaragua    A3


   Felix Bloch appealing his ouster by the State Department    A11



   NATIONAL    A18-22, B8-9

Nutritional labeling will be required for virtually all packaged foods beginning
next year, the Bush Administration announced. The plan also would provide
definitions for terms like ''low fat.''    A1



   Gene therapy for human diseases received its first important approval when a
National Institutes of Health panel said the procedure is safe. The treatment
offers patients injections of genetic material they lack.    A1



   Health counselors at colleges say many students do not use condoms because
warnings have focused on AIDS, a disease that heterosexuals on campus do not
fear.    A18



   Low risk seen for women postponing pregnancy    B9


   Federal court dismisses Planned Parenthood suit    A22



   A new summary of Catholic beliefs being circulated in draft form is creating
a dispute among Catholic scholars. Some say church teachings need to be
reassembled; others say the plan puts a conservative stamp on those beliefs.
A1



   A Philadelphia subway car crashed, killing 3 people and injuring at least 150
others in the morning rush hour. The train collided with steel pillars in a
downtown tunnel.    A1



   Bush says poor financing imperils transportation system    A20



   A top aide to Samuel Pierce would receive immunity in exchange for testimony
about Mr. Pierce's role in political favoritism at H.U.D., in a re-ported
arrangement with Congressional investigators.    A18



   An Italian investor bought MGM/ UA for $1 billion. The sale of the film
company to Giancarlo Parretti's Pathe Communications, which owns European movie
theaters, reflects the growing foreign interest in Hollywood.    D1



   News analysis: President Bush was attacked by Representative Richard Gephardt
in a move that may have hurt Mr. Gephardt's plan for direct Soviet aid but did
raise nagging questions about the President's response to changes abroad.    A22



   Judge will not bar North as witness in Poindexter trial    A21


   House drops inquiry on Gingrich, but will admonish him    A20


   Minority enrollment shows gains at law schools    A20


   Awaiting AWACS decision, Saudis gave to fight drugs    B8



   REGIONAL    B1-7

Mayor Dinkins named Barbara Sabol to head the city's Human Resources
Administration, which is responsible for addressing homelessness, welfare and
child care. Ms. Sabol had been a top official at the State Department of Social
Services.    B1



   A telephone rate increase was denied by the Public Service Commission. The
commission's staff had come under heavy criticism for negotiating New York
Telephone's proposed $445 million increase without holding public hearings.
B7



   G.O.P. to ignore Cuomo plan and use old budget as guide    B4



   AIDS in New York State prisons is not prevented or adequately treated in a
violation of inmates' protection from cruel and unusual punishment, a lawsuit
charged.    B3



   Two men were awarded $76 million by a Brooklyn jury that concluded that five
police officers beat the men and shot at them on a Coney Island street without
reason.    B1



   A barge that exploded in Arthur Kill spilled more than 100,000 gallons of
heating oil. While cleanup crews skimmed oil from the water, investigators
searched for the cause of the mysterious blast.    B1



   Environmentalists fear the cumulative toll of spills    B2



   Tax cuts for companies in Tarrytown are forcing the Westchester community,
and a neighboring town, either to make cuts in education spending or shoulder a
sharp increase in tax rates.    B6



   Boy, 12, set afire by man after resisting crack offer    B1


   Bensonhurst witness, once in hiding, returns to New York    B2


   DNA tests link Golub to killing, expert says    B4


   Officer says he was target in Lower East Side shoot-out    B3



   BUSINESS DIGEST    D1



   THE HOME SECTION

A magazine's ''Oscars'' for design    C1


   Hurtless house for children built    C1


   Lagerfeld's camouflaged furs    C1


   Close to Home    C2


   Reviving the warmth of chestnut    C5


   Quilts of yore    C6


   On the town with retarded people    C7


   Parent & Child    C8


   Off the beaten path in Milan    C10



   ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

Running the City Opera  C15


   Theater: ''Acid Paradise''    C24


   Art: New arts center in Ohio    C15


   Music: Vienna Philharmonic    C15


   La Monte Young    C19


   Dance: usan Marshall    C19


   Word and Image: Liberals starting a journal    C20


   Volume II of Johnson biography    C21


   Dinkins appoints WNYC head    C22



   SPORTS

Baseball: Try, try again    B11


   Basketball: Sixers beat Knicks    B11


   No great urgency in Big East    B11


   Column: Anderson on Knicks    B11



   HEALTH    B10



   Personal Health
Overtreatment is found in newborn jaundice

OBITUARIES    D25



   Charlotte M. Sitterly, an astrophysicist
William Appleman Williams, historian
Joe Sewell, ex-major league baseball player

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A24



   $150 billion a year
Topics: Nice neighborhood

Letters    A24



   A. M. Rosenthal: The President's bomb    A25


   Tom Wicker: Cheney vs. Webster    A25


   Tom Engelhardt: At Pantheon, closed books    A25


   Timothy E. Wirth: Clean fuels, clean air    A25



                             1810 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1990 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             March 8, 1990 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: FIRST USE OF GENE THERAPY OK'D ON CHILDREN WITH RARE DISORDER

BYLINE: NATALIE ANGIER, New York Times News Service <

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Thursday, March 8, 1990 FIRST USE OF GENE THERAPY OK'D ON CHILDREN WITH RARE
DISORDER

   Gene therapy for human disease took a leap from the theoretical  realms of
the laboratory toward the real world of practicing medicine  Wednesday as a
National Institutes of Health panel approved a proposal to  treat children with
a severe genetic disease by inserting new genes into their blood cells.

   The Institutional Biosafety Committee at the National Institutes of Health
held the nation's first public hearing on a human gene therapy project and  then
approved it as safe without opposition.

   The project still needs the approval of six other federal regulatory  panels,
and the researchers are unlikely to begin clinical trials of the  therapy before
the end of this year.

   But in weathering the initial scrutiny of the 12-member biosafety panel of
scientists and local citizens, human gene therapy surmounted its first hurdle
on the long regulatory road to the patient's bedside.

   ``As far as I know this is the first public review of a human gene therapy
program ever,'' said Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, an author of the therapy proposal.

   Under the proposal, Anderson and Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National
Cancer Institute and their colleagues will try to treat young children
suffering from adenosine deaminase deficiency.

   ADA deficiency, a genetic disorder that destroys their immune systems,
afflicted the famous ``bubble boy'' from Texas, who had to live in a sterile
plastic enclosure as a protection against infection.

   Should their initial experiment prove successful, the scientists say, it
will open a new chapter in treating hereditary diseases.

   Researchers believe human gene therapy may also prove valuable in the  battle
against cystic fibrosis, familial cholesterol disorders, metabolic  deficiencies
of the liver and other genetic disorders.

   In principle, the new technique will allow doctors to introduce any sort of
necessary gene into patients lacking healthy copies of it.

   The method could also be used to implant in a patient's cells foreign genes
that would make compounds to attack tumor cells selectively, or even the AIDS
virus.

   ``I hope that this will become a very powerful tool in the physician's
armamentarium,'' Blaese said.

   ``I predict that in the next decade we will see human gene therapy used
specially for diseases that we don't think of primarily as genetic, such as
cancer.''

   In children who lack the ADA enzyme, toxic chemicals build up in the body
and destroy certain white blood cells of the immune system known as T-cells  and
B-cells.

   Patients normally die of large-scale infections in the first few years of
life.

   The disease is extremely rare, Blaese said, affecting no more than 20  people
in the world at any time.

   Bone marrow transplants have helped a few patients but only when a  perfectly
matched donor can be found; otherwise no effective treatments  exist.

   In their trials Blaese and Anderson plan to correct ADA deficiency by  taking
blood from the patient, isolating the T-cells, growing them in vast  quantities
in the laboratory, and infecting them with a genetically engineered virus.

   The virus is a mouse retrovirus that can infect human cells but has been
carefully redesigned so it cannot replicate or cause disease in humans.

   The researchers have sliced into this crippled mouse virus a copy of the
human gene for the ADA enzyme.

   Once the viral package has infected the patient's cultured T-cells, it can
integrate into the chromosomes, where the gene for ADA will switch on and  begin
producing the life-saving enzyme.

   The researchers will then inject the T-cells back into the patient through  a
simple blood transfusion.

   If all goes well, the T-cells will produce enough ADA enzyme to temporarily
prevent the destruction of the child's immune system.

   Dr. Nelson Wivel, director of the NIH office of recombinant DNA activities,
which regulates most bioengineering research, said ``the big question is
whether the cells will express enough of the ADA product'' to correct the
disease.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1811 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1990 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             March 8, 1990 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: FIRST USE OF GENE THERAPY OK'D ON CHILDREN WITH RARE DISORDER

BYLINE: NATALIE ANGIER, New York Times News Service <

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Thursday, March 8, 1990 FIRST USE OF GENE THERAPY OK'D ON CHILDREN WITH RARE
DISORDER

   Gene therapy for human disease took a leap from the theoretical  realms of
the laboratory toward the real world of practicing medicine  Wednesday as a
National Institutes of Health panel approved a proposal to  treat children with
a severe genetic disease by inserting new genes into their blood cells.

   The Institutional Biosafety Committee at the National Institutes of Health
held the nation's first public hearing on a human gene therapy project and  then
approved it as safe without opposition.

   The project still needs the approval of six other federal regulatory  panels,
and the researchers are unlikely to begin clinical trials of the  therapy before
the end of this year.

   But in weathering the initial scrutiny of the 12-member biosafety panel of
scientists and local citizens, human gene therapy surmounted its first hurdle
on the long regulatory road to the patient's bedside.

   ``As far as I know this is the first public review of a human gene therapy
program ever,'' said Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, an author of the therapy proposal.

   Under the proposal, Anderson and Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National
Cancer Institute and their colleagues will try to treat young children
suffering from adenosine deaminase deficiency.

   ADA deficiency, a genetic disorder that destroys their immune systems,
afflicted the famous ``bubble boy'' from Texas, who had to live in a sterile
plastic enclosure as a protection against infection.

   Should their initial experiment prove successful, the scientists say, it
will open a new chapter in treating hereditary diseases.

   Researchers believe human gene therapy may also prove valuable in the  battle
against cystic fibrosis, familial cholesterol disorders, metabolic  deficiencies
of the liver and other genetic disorders.

   In principle, the new technique will allow doctors to introduce any sort of
necessary gene into patients lacking healthy copies of it.

   The method could also be used to implant in a patient's cells foreign genes
that would make compounds to attack tumor cells selectively, or even the AIDS
virus.

   ``I hope that this will become a very powerful tool in the physician's
armamentarium,'' Blaese said.

   ``I predict that in the next decade we will see human gene therapy used
specially for diseases that we don't think of primarily as genetic, such as
cancer.''

   In children who lack the ADA enzyme, toxic chemicals build up in the body
and destroy certain white blood cells of the immune system known as T-cells  and
B-cells.

   Patients normally die of large-scale infections in the first few years of
life.

   The disease is extremely rare, Blaese said, affecting no more than 20  people
in the world at any time.

   Bone marrow transplants have helped a few patients but only when a  perfectly
matched donor can be found; otherwise no effective treatments  exist.

   In their trials Blaese and Anderson plan to correct ADA deficiency by  taking
blood from the patient, isolating the T-cells, growing them in vast  quantities
in the laboratory, and infecting them with a genetically engineered virus.

   The virus is a mouse retrovirus that can infect human cells but has been
carefully redesigned so it cannot replicate or cause disease in humans.

   The researchers have sliced into this crippled mouse virus a copy of the
human gene for the ADA enzyme.

   Once the viral package has infected the patient's cultured T-cells, it can
integrate into the chromosomes, where the gene for ADA will switch on and  begin
producing the life-saving enzyme.

   The researchers will then inject the T-cells back into the patient through  a
simple blood transfusion.

   If all goes well, the T-cells will produce enough ADA enzyme to temporarily
prevent the destruction of the child's immune system.

   Dr. Nelson Wivel, director of the NIH office of recombinant DNA activities,
which regulates most bioengineering research, said ``the big question is
whether the cells will express enough of the ADA product'' to correct the
disease.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1812 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                     March 8, 1990, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; MEDICINE; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Human gene therapy clears first hurdle

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.; VIENNA, Austria

BODY:


   BETHESDA, Md.  A National Institutes of Health panel on Wednesday approved a
proposal to treat children with a severe genetic disease by inserting new genes
into their blood cells. The Institutional Biosafety Committee at the National
Institutes of Health held the nation's first public hearing on a human gene
therapy project and then approved it as safe without opposition.  The project
still needs the approval of six other federal panels.  Under the proposal,
scientists will try to treat young children suffering from adenosine deaminase
deficiency. ADA deficiency, a genetic disorder that destroys their immune
systems, afflicted the famous "bubble boy" from Texas, who had to live in a
sterile plastic enclosure. The new technique may allow doctors to introduce any
sort of necessary gene into patients lacking healthy copies of it. The method
could also be used to implant in a patient's cells foreign genes that would make
compounds to attack tumor cells selectively, or even the AIDS virus.
 Abortion pill study
 may open more markets
 Buoyed by promising results from the largest study yet on the French abortion
pill, RU 486, the drug's manufacturer is considering marketing the drug in other
countries. The drug has been available only in France. With the new data, its
manufacturer, Roussell-Uclaf said Wednesday the company is considering marketing
RU 486 in Britain, the Netherlands and Scandinavian countries. Although the drug
maker said the United States was not ready for RU 486, experts were optimistic
the drug would be available here fairly soon. The new study, being published
today in The New England Journal of Medicine, reports on the experiences of
2,115 French women who took RU 486 within 49 days of their last menstrual
period. The drug induced abortions in 96 percent of the women with no serious
side effects. The researchers, Dr. Louise Silvestre and her colleagues at
Roussell-Uclaf, concluded that RU 486 was as safe and effective as a suction
abortion.
 Vaccine curbs AIDS
 infection in chimpanzee
 VIENNA, Austria An AIDS vaccine produced by an Austrian firm has prevented the
development of infection in a chimpanzee since it was inoculated two years ago.
The pharmaceutical company Immuno AG inoculated a chimpanzee with the vaccine
and injected the animal with the AIDS virus, a spokesman said Wednesday. The
virus showed no sign of spreading in the animal after two years, while a
"control" chimpanzee which had not been inoculated showed signs of infection
within three months. The vaccine, known as GP 160, would need modification
before it was suitable for  humans, the spokesman said.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1992


                             1813 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     February 23, 1990, Friday, P.M. Final

SECTION: Part P; Page 2; Column 1; Late Final Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH;
GENE THERAPY APPROVAL SOUGHT

BYLINE: From Times Wire Services

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Scientists sought permission today for the first attempt at human gene
therapy -- research that will involve children stricken by a rare, inherited
immune disorder that has forced some to live in plastic bubbles.

   In a proposal filed with federal review committees, National Institutes of
Health researchers said they want to correct the children's illness, caused by
the failure of a defective gene to make a vital enzyme, by inserting correct
copies of the gene into their white blood cells.

   If approved by the review panels and the Food and Drug Administration, the
gene therapy effort headed by Drs. W. French Anderson and Michael Blaese could
begin this summer.

   The project would mark the first time researchers have transferred a gene
into a human in hopes of treating a disease.


                             1814 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    February 23, 1990, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A8

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: New Hope in Treating Hereditary Illness;
Researchers Seek to Replace Defective Gene in Blood Cells

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The first attempt to treat a hereditary disease by installing new genes in a
patient's cells is, after years of promise and preparation, about to begin at
the National Institutes of Health.

   Scientists there plan to file a proposal today to transfer copies of the
correct version of a human gene into the white blood cells of children who,
because they inherited a defective version, suffer severe combined
immunodeficiency, a rare disease that destroys the immune system.

   In the past, these children, like the famous Texas "bubble boy," sometimes
lived their shortened lives in sterile plastic enclosures that protected them
from all bacteria and viruses. Today, the children either receive bone marrow
transplants if a donor can be found or are treated with weekly injections that
replace the missing enzyme that the defective gene was supposed to make. Without
the enzyme, immune systems fail to work. Neither treatment is perfect; the NIH
researchers hope ultimately to cure the children by permanently replacing the
defective gene.

   Although fewer than two dozen people are known to have the disease in the
United States, the NIH plan is significant because gene therapy, as the method
is called, is considered a promising way to treat many more common genetic
diseases.

   "This is the first time that a proposal for gene therapy . . . has been
formally submitted," said LeRoy Walters, an ethicist from Georgetown University
and chairman of a key federal committee that must approve the proposed
experiment.

   In the experiment, the scientists would use a genetically modified mouse
virus to carry the human gene for making adenosine deaminase, ADA, the missing
enzyme. The lack of ADA causes the buildup of a toxic chemical that destroys the
child's immune system. Replacing the missing enzyme removes the toxin and
restores the immune system.

   To get the gene into the body, physicians will remove blood from an afflicted
child, separate out a certain kind of white blood cell, called a T cell, and
cause it to proliferate in the laboratory.

   The mouse virus carrying the ADA gene is mixed with the T cells in the
laboratory. The virus, which is altered so it cannot cause illness, infects the
white blood cells and permanently inserts the human gene it carries. The blood
cells start making ADA.

   Using a special growth hormone, billions of the genetically modified T cells
can be grown in the laboratory and then injected back into the children as a
simple blood transfusion.

   The scientists, according to an NIH source who asked not to be identified,
expect the genetically repaired T cells to function normally and to completely
restore the child's immune defenses.

   Although the T cells will be permanently altered by the gene therapy, this
treatment probably will not provide a permanent cure. T cells only live from
weeks to months, so to maintain the effect the children will have to receive
transfusions with genetically engineered cells every few weeks or months.

   The current experiment is expected to be proposed by the teams of R. Michael
Blaese of the National Cancer Institute and W. French Anderson of the National
Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Neither Blaese nor Anderson wanted to discuss
the proposed experiments. They said they would wait until the final version of
the proposal is submitted to federal review committees.

   Anderson and Blaese already are collaborating with the cancer institute's
Steven A. Rosenberg to transfer a bacterial gene into special T cells that
Rosenberg uses to attack cancer. These experiments are intended to track the T
cells in the body but not to enhance their cancer-killing power, so it is not
considered gene therapy.

   Three NIH committees must review the Blaese-Anderson experiment over the next
month, with the first public review coming on March 30 when there is a meeting
of the human gene therapy subcommittee of the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, or RAC. The full committee won't consider the gene therapy experiment
until its June meeting, so even though the scientists are essentially ready to
go, the first children will not be treated before summer. The experiment also
must be approved by the Food and Drug Administration.


                             1815 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   February 18, 1990, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Column 6; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 1403 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS HARNESSING BODY'S NATURAL AGENTS AS POWERFUL HEALERS

BYLINE: By LARRY THOMPSON, THE WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   Instead of the sharp edge of the scalpel or a massive blast of toxic
chemicals to wipe out illness, doctors are turning to the body to heal itself.

   They are taking the body's natural products -- hormones, antibodies, enzymes
and even whole cells -- to attack disease and restore normal functioning.
Cancer, Parkinson's disease, heart disorders and hormone deficiencies are all
the targets of this new approach to treating illness.

   Harnessing these new "natural" agents produced by the body might be called
biological therapy, or biotherapy, much as toxic chemicals used to treat cancer
are called chemotherapy.

   It all started with the genetic-engineering revolution in the 1970s when
scientists learned how to manipulate genes in the laboratory. Previously rare
human proteins -- interferon, interleukin-2, human insulin and human-growth
factor -- could suddenly be mass produced with these new gene-engineering
techniques. Although the early experiments in human patients failed to live up
to expectations, solid gains have been made and physicians remain optimistic
about the role of biotherapies.

   "In the next decade, the major advance will be genetic therapies," said Bruce
A. Chabner, director of the National Cancer Institute's division of cancer
treatment. Genetic manipulation, for example, is being increasingly studied as a
way to fight diseases such as cancer and AIDS.

   The idea of biotherapies has been around for decades, though the first ones
were crude. Cow insulin, a protein essential for signaling cells to pull sugar
from the blood, was discovered in the 1920s and injected into the bodies of
diabetics.

   Vaccination -- the injection of a living but inactive virus or bacteria into
the body -- showed that it was possible to manipulate the body's natural
defenses. The immune system was programmed to prevent subsequent infection by
that particular bacteria or virus.

   Just before World War II, doctors discovered that blood could be transfused
between individuals. And beginning in the 1960s came the organ transplants --
heart, lungs, liver, pancreas, kidney, even bone marrow.

   The common factor between these now standard treatments is that they use
natural substances -- cells in the transfusion, organs in the transplants,
viruses in the vaccines, protein in the insulin. But they are limited. Blood
doesn't always match; organs are rejected; improperly prepared vaccines can
cause the disease they were intended to prevent.

   Most of the problems came from incomplete understanding of the biology. The
new generation of biotherapies is changing that, putting in doctors' hands some
of the most powerful treatments ever developed. Biotherapies fall, generally,
into three groups: proteins, genes and cells.

   In the last five years, physicians have been putting to use the natural
medicines produced for the first time by the biotechnology labs. Genetic
engineers have learned to put specific human genes into bacteria, turning the
bacteria into miniature factories that grow large quantities of the human
proteins doctors can use against a certain disease. The new protein biotherapies
include:

   * Clot busters. Several natural proteins have been found that rapidly
dissolve blood clots. Physicians now routinely inject these clot busters to stop
heart attacks in mid-attack -- something that never had been possible.
Additionally, these drugs also have been used experimentally to stop strokes and
open painful blockages in leg arteries.

   * Blood boosters. A set of proteins has been found that stimulate the bone
marrow to produce both red blood cells and certain types of white blood cells.
Growing red blood cells is revolutionizing the care for end-stage renal failure,
which causes the body to stop making blood. Before this discovery, these
patients needed constant transfusions.

   Stimulating white blood cells boosts immunity to various types of infections.
It can prevent some of the secondary diseases associated with AIDS. Its most
important use, however, may be the countering of the immune-destroying effects
of cancer chemotherapy, thus allowing physicians to treat tumors with larger
doses of the poisonous drugs and kill the cancer.

   * Height control. Human-growth factor can literally add inches to children of
short stature. They don't always reach normal height, but they reach heights
previously impossible. Some also have talked about using this powerful hormone
for weight loss, and there have been reports of use by some athletes seeking an
extra edge.

   * Antibodies. The body's immune system produces thousands of different-shaped
proteins called antibodies that recognize invading bacteria and viruses by their
shape -- and then attack them. Scientists have learned how to make antibodies of
any given type -- called monoclonal antibodies -- that can be used to diagnose
disease both in the lab and in the body and can be used to attack cancer cells
directly.

   Organ transplants and blood transfusions have led the way in the use of
living cells or tissues to treat an illness. But the new biotherapies take it
all a quantum leap further.

   * Brain transplants. Clearly the brain itself cannot be transplanted, but
parts of the brain wear out for uncertain reasons. Parkinson's disease arises
with the loss of certain brains cells that produce a chemical needed for normal
movement. Neurosurgeons have now experimented with transplanting into the brain
patches of human cells that produce the missing chemical. Preliminary
experiments with nerve cells taken from aborted fetuses reportedly show promise.

   * Tissue transplants. In diabetes, pancreatic cells stop secreting the
protein insulin. Although insulin can be injected every day, control of blood
sugar is better when a pancreas is transplanted into the body. A number of human
experiments are under way to inject just the insulin-making cells in the hope
that they will work better and be easier to protect from rejection.

   * Killing cancer. Researchers at the National Cancer Institute have found
that certain white blood cells are primed to attack cancers. They remove those
cells and stimulate them in the lab with a growth factor called interleukin-2.
Once several billion of the white blood cells have grown in the lab, they are
put back into the patient's body and attack the tumor. More than half of the
patients with the skin cancer malignant melanoma and with kidney cancer now
respond to this treatment.

   The third general form of biotherapy, genetic, relies on the recent ability
to insert genes into cells of the body. Genes control the production of
proteins, so gene transfers can be used to replace a missing protein
permanently. This is the future of medicine, many believe. About 4,000 inherited
diseases could be attacked by this technology.

   * First steps. In the first gene transfer experiments in humans, begun last
year at the National Institutes of Health, cancer researchers put a bacterial
gene into the white blood cells they already had been turning into cancer
killers. The gene allows them to track the altered blood cells in the body and
to see which type best kills the cancer. Future experiments in which other genes
are added should boost the cell's cancer-killing power.

   * Artificial organs. The biggest problem with gene therapy is getting the
altered cells back into the body so that they survive. One approach under
development in animals creates an artificial organ by growing the gene-modified
cells on a synthetic pad that is surgically placed in the animal's abdomen.
Hormones are added that make blood vessels grow into the pad. Theoretically, the
newly created organ could be designed to secrete any protein to treat a wide
array of illnesses.

   Although the new biotherapies have begun to radically alter the treatment of
disease, they also have created controversies. For example, some of the tissue
transplanted for diabetes and Parkinson's comes from aborted fetuses. Groups
opposed to abortion have so strongly opposed the use of this material that the
government no longer funds any related research.

   The debate will grow more intense as the massive project to identify and
analyze every single human gene, now being developed at NIH, gets under way. It
will speed the ability to detect diseases for which nothing can be done. That
means doctors will be able to tell which patients are likely to get which
diseases. Will patients want to know?


                             1816 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

              February 16, 1990, Friday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO AT LARGE / ANTHONY PERRY:  TALK IS ANYTHING BUT CHEAP AT LA
JOLLA'S SALK INSTITUTE

BYLINE: By Anthony Perry

BODY:

   When it comes to science, researchers at the Salk Institute in La Jolla are
at the top of the heap: trying to crack the secrets of AIDS, gene therapy, what
makes the brain tick, and more.

   But in media relations, Salk lags.

   Unlike UC San Diego and other science centers, Salk

   does not have a public-affairs staff that encourages media attention.
Interviews are rare.

   The late Frederic de Hoffman, Salk president from 1972 to 1988, was a
strong-willed nuclear physicist who had worked on the Manhattan Project and at
General Atomics. He preferred that reporters be kept at bay.

   Under De Hoffman's successor, Salk, a private institution that receives
federal funds, has gone a step further by establishing an informal policy of
asking for money, in some cases, before agreeing to interviews.

   A documentary film maker from Los Angeles was told last week it would cost
$10,000 for an hour interview with Salk President Dr. Renato Dulbecco, who
received the Nobel Prize in 1975 for virus research.

   Lacking a spare 10 grand, the film maker left.

   Kenneth Klivington, an assistant to Dulbecco, said Salk researchers will
continue to do some free interviews but will seek payment when they feel the
interviewer is demanding too much time, is ill-prepared, or is just "fishing"
for a story.

   "The goal of the Salk Institute is to create an environment devoted entirely
to research," Klivington said. "Interviews can be very disruptive. We will
continue to cooperate when there is truly a newsworthy reason, but there will be
cases when payment seems appropriate."

   Pierre Kandorfer, the film maker, said he was "stunned" by the request.

   He's doing a documentary for French television on whether the United States
can maintain its competitive edge in scientific research. He's arranged free
interviews with scientists at Caltech and UC Berkeley.

   Charles Petit, science writer for the San Francisco Chronicle and president
of the 1,500-member National Assn. of Science Writers, said he's never heard of
a science institution charging for interviews. He called the idea "dumb."

Well, It's Different

   Items everywhere you look.

   * The Central City Assn. stickball tournament trophy was delivered Thursday
to the Hall of Champions. It takes a place of honor March 29.

   You can't miss it. It's the one with a hubcap from a '57 Chevy and two
stickball bats made from broom handles.

   * Hide the bureaucrats and the statists. The Libertarian Party state
convention opens today at the Hanalei Hotel in Mission Valley.

   Opening act is the unveiling of the advertisement that Libertarians have
placed in the national Colombian newspaper to coincide with President Bush's
attendance at the drug summit in Cartagena.

   The ad says Libertarians believe the drug wars will end only when drugs are
legalized.

   * Kee McFarlane, the Los Angeles social worker whose interviews were central
to the McMartin child molestation case, is married to San Diego County Deputy
Dist. Atty. Harry Elias.

   Elias heads the D.A.'s child abuse unit. The couple met at a child abuse
seminar in late 1986 and married a year later.

Robbery Not Par For the Course

   Gentlemen, pick your weapons.

   * Two golfers from Vista were robbed while playing at the Fallbrook Country
Club.

   The twosome had just teed off and were searching for a ball in the rough. A
scruffy fellow emerged from the bushes and demanded money.

   One of the golfers pulled a putter. The scruffy fellow then pulled a gun. He
got away with $100 plus credit cards.

   * Trent Archer explains why ads for his stun-gun company are on the door to
the outhouse on the bluff over Black's Beach.

   "I'm a surfer, and Black's is my favorite spot," he says. "It seemed
natural."

   A surfer selling stun guns. Only in San Diego.

GRAPHIC: Photo,


                             1817 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1990 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z10

LENGTH: 1412 words

HEADLINE: 'Patient, Heal Thyself' Are Words for the '90s;
Doctors Turning Away From the Cutting and the Toxic to Utilize Natural Body
Products

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Instead of the sharp edge of the scalpel or a massive blast of toxic
chemicals to wipe out illness, doctors are turning to the body to heal itself.

   They are taking the body's natural products -- hormones, antibodies, enzymes
and even whole cells -- to attack disease and restore normal functioning.
Cancer, Parkinson's disease, heart disorders and hormone deficiencies are all
the targets of this new approach to treating illness.

   Harnessing these new "natural" agents produced by the body might be called
biological therapy, or biotherapy, much as toxic chemicals used to treat cancer
are called chemotherapy.

   It all started with the genetic engineering revolution in the 1970s when
scientists learned how to manipulate genes in the laboratory. Previously rare
human proteins -- interferon, interleukin-2, human insulin and human growth
factor -- could suddenly be mass produced with these new gene engineering
techniques. Although the early experiments in human patients failed to live up
to initial expectations, solid gains have been made and physicians remain
optimistic about the role of biotherapies.

   "In the next decade, the major advance will be genetic therapies," said Bruce
A. Chabner, director of the National Cancer Institute's division of cancer
treatment. Genetic manipulation, for example, is being increasingly studied as a
way to fight diseases such as cancer and AIDS.

   The idea of biotherapies has been around for decades, though the first were
crude. Cow insulin, a protein essential for signalling cells to pull sugar from
the blood, was discovered in the 1920s and injected into the bodies of
diabetics.

   Vaccination -- the injection of a living but inactive virus or bacteria into
the body -- showed that it was possible to manipulate the body's natural
defenses. The immune system was programmed to prevent subsequent infection by
that particular bacteria or virus.

   Just before World War II, doctors discovered that blood could be transfused
between individuals. And beginning in the 1960s came the organ transplants --
heart, lungs, liver, pancreas, kidney, even bone marrow.

   The common factor between these now-standard treatments is that they use
natural substances -- cells in the transfusion; organs in the tranplants;
viruses in the vaccines; protein in the insulin. But they were limited. Blood
doesn't always match; organs are rejected; improperly prepared vaccines can
cause the disease they were intended to prevent.

   Most of the problems came from incomplete understanding of the biology. The
new generation of biotherapies is changing that, putting in doctors' hands, some
of the most powerful treatments ever developed. Biotherapies fall, generally,
into three groups: proteins, genes and cells.

   Protein Therapy

   In the last five years, physicians have been putting to use the natural
medicines produced for the first time by the biotechnology labs. Genetic
engineers have learned to put specific human genes into bacteria, turning the
bacteria into miniature factories which grow large quantities of the human
proteins doctors can use against a certain disease. The new protein biotherapies
include:

   Clot busters. Several natural proteins have been found that rapidly dissolve
blood clots. Physicians now routinely inject these clot busters to stop heart
attacks in mid-attack -- something which never had been possible. Additionally,
these drugs also have been used experimentally to stop strokes and open painful
blockages in leg arteries.

   Blood boosters. A set of proteins has been found that stimulates the bone
marrow to produce both red blood cells and certain types of white blood cells.
Growing red blood cells is revolutionizing the care for end-stage renal failure,
which causes the body to stop making blood. Before this discovery, these
patients needed constant transfusions.

   Stimulating white blood cells boosts immunity to various types of infections.
It can prevent some of the secondary diseases associated with AIDS. Its most
important use, however, may be from countering the immune destroying effects of
cancer chemotherapy, thus allowing physicians to treat tumors with a bigger dose
of the poisonous drugs and kill the cancer.

   Height control. Human growth facter can literally add inches to children of
short stature. They don't always reach normal height, but they reach heights
previously impossible. Some also have talked about using this powerful hormone
for weight-loss, and there have been reports of use by some athletes seeking an
extra edge.

   Antibodies. The body's immune system produces thousands of different-shaped
proteins called antibodies that recognize invading bacteria and viruses by their
shape -- and then attack them. Scientists have learned how to make antibodies of
any given type -- called monoclonal antibodies -- that can be used to diagnose
disease both in the lab and in the body and can be used to attack cancer cells
directly.

   Cell Therapy

   Organ transplants and blood transfusions have led the way in the use of
living cells or tissues to treat an illness. But the new biotherapies take it
all a quantum leap farther.

   Brain transplants. Clearly the brain itself cannot be transplanted, but parts
of the brain wear out for uncertain reasons. Parkinson's disease arises with the
loss of certain brains cells that make a chemical needed for normal movement.
Neurosurgeons have now experimented with transplanting into the brain patches of
human cells that produce the missing chemical. Preliminary experiments with
nerve cells taken from aborted fetuses reportedly show promise.

   Tissue transplants. In diabetes, pancreas cells stop secreting the protein
insulin. While insulin can be injected every day, control of blood sugar control
is better when a pancrease is transplanted into the body. A number of human
experiments already are under way to inject just the insulin-making cells in the
hopes that they will work better and be easier to protect from rejection.

   Killing cancer. Researchers at the National Cancer Institute have found that
certain white blood cells are primed to attack cancers. They remove those cells
and stimulate them in the lab with a growth factor called interleukin-2. Once
several billion of the white blood cells have grown in the lab, they are put
back into the patient's body and attack the tumor. More than half of the
patients with the skin cancer malignant melanoma and with kidney cancer now
respond to this treatment.

   Gene Therapy

   The third general form of biotherapy, genetic, relies on the recent ability
to insert genes into cells of the body. Genes control the production of
proteins, so gene transfers can be used to replace a missing protein
permanently. This is the future of medicine, many believe. Some 4,000 inherited
diseases could be attacked by this technology.

   First steps. In the first gene transfer experiments in humans, begun last
year at the National Institutes of Health, cancer researchers put a bacterial
gene into the white blood cells they already had been turning into cancer
killers. The gene will allow them to track the altered blood cells in the body
and to see which type best kill the cancer. Future experiments in which other
genes are added should boost the cell's cancer-killing power.

   Artificial organs. The biggest problem with gene therapy is getting the
altered cells back into the body so that they survive. One approach now under
development in animals creates an artificial organ by growing the gene-modified
cells on a synthetic pad that is surgically placed in the animal's abdomen.
Hormones are added that make blood vessels grow into the pad. Theoretically, the
newly created organ could be designed to secrete any protein to treat a wide
array of illnesses.

   Although the new biotherapies have begun to radically alter the treatment of
disease, they also created controversies. For example, some of the tissue
transplanted for diabetes and Parkinson's comes from the aborted fetus. Groups
opposed to abortion have so strongly opposed the use of this material that the
government no longer funds any related research.

   The debate will grow more intense as the massive project to identify and
analyze every single human gene, now being developed at NIH, gets underway. It
will speed the ability to detect diseases for which nothing can be done. That
means doctors will be able to tell which patients are likely to get which
diseases. Will patients want to know?

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, NICHOLAS WILTON FOR TWP


                             1818 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 28, 1990 Sunday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 916 words

HEADLINE: Clear priority for the '90s: financing U.S. health care

BYLINE: Dr. Gerard N. Burrow, Burrow is dean of the UCSD School of Medicine and
vice chancellor for health sciences.

BODY:

   Perhaps the decade that has just ended can best be described for medicine as
a decade of paradox.

   To paraphrase Dickens, it was the best of times and the worst of times.
Unquestionably, the AIDS scourge has dominated medicine.

   Simultaneously, however, the decade began with the announcement by a global
commission that smallpox had been totally eradicated in the world.

   Successful organ transplantation has become a routine occurrence.

   Premature babies weighing as little as one pound routinely survive. But
despite these major advances in health care, as many as 37 million Americans
have no health insurance.

   More than 25 percent of women who deliver at UCSD Medical Center have
received no prenatal care. The major health concerns of the '90s are being
shaped by environmental and social issues including pollution and toxins in the
environment, hazards in the workplace, drugs, violence and the spread of AIDS.
Profound changes in demographics during the next decade will also heavily impact
the health care system.

   The number of Americans over age 75 is projected to increase by 34 percent,
and older individuals tend to use medical services at a much higher rate. A
clear priority for the next decade is financing the American health care system,
which requires radical change.

   Despite efforts at containment, medical costs have increased an average of 10
percent per year for the last decade. A recent Harris Poll indicated that 80
percent of Americans believe that our health care system requires fundamental
change, although only 24 percent felt that health care was one of the areas in
which the government should spend more money. Over the next 10 years we can
expect to see the end of unrestricted fee-for-service health insurance, replaced
by universal coverage of basic health services through a creative, pluralistic
financing approach. What about the practice of medicine over the next decade?

   As a consequence of advances in molecular and cellular biology, a true
revolution is occurring in clinical medicine. The fact that San Diego has one of
the highest concentrations of biotechnology companies in the nation is further
impetus for medical progress -- from "laboratory bench" to "bedside" to the
public sector through biotechnology. In the past year alone, San Diego
researchers have announced major breakthroughs in the production of antibodies
against disease, in the growth of human skin grafts to better treat burn victims
and in the successful use of genetically altered cells in animal models of
Parkinson's disease and cancer. Genetics research, which will fundamentally
change the practice of medicine, is an area in which San Diego has become a
center of national importance.

   Genetic engineering has already given us the ability to produce human
insulin, human growth hormone, hepatitis vaccine and a growing list of other
products that allow us to better manage disease. Advances in this arena are
allowing us to understand the basis of abnormal cell growth and, potentially,
how to correct or even prevent it in cancer patients.

   This basic arsenal of knowledge should allow us to develop an effective
weapon to fight AIDS as well as a variety of incapacitating disease in the
developing world like malaria. Building on current research, we will see
significant advances in our understanding of the brain, with the possibility of
preventing or reversing memory loss and regenerating or replacing damaged nerve
cells.

   The feasibility of this approach recently has been proven in animal studies
at UCSD; developing a treatment for human patients is the next logical step. A
better understanding of the immune system will lead to better understanding of
diseases with an immune component, like rheumatoid arthritis.

   Immunological research is progressing at such a rate that it is almost
certain that we will solve the rejection problems in organ transplantation, but
the shortage of donors will be limiting. This shortage will provide the impetus
toward improved technology and ultimately the emergence of the "bionic man" with
biologically synthesized organs, implantable drug delivery systems and lifelike
artificial limbs and joints. By the year 2000, we will have mapped a significant
portion of the human genome, giving us a blueprint for the most basic functions
of human life. Gene therapy -- basically the insertion of healthy genes into
damaged cells to correct malfunction that gives rise to disease -- will be a
reality. This will be vitally important for patients whose disease is caused by
a single, identifiable genetic defect. On a broader scale, we may see the
development of genetic screening tests to allow identification of individuals at
high risk of developing certain diseases, like heart disease or Alzheimer's
disease. As we enter a decade of transition, with molecular genetics potentially
changing the way we approach the diagnosis and treatment of disease, we can be
hopeful that we will witness the amelioration of certain chronic diseases.

   Does this mean that we are moving toward immortality?

   Not at all. There is good evidence that like other machines, the body
eventually wears out even in the absence of disease.

   Our goal as physicians, and as teachers of the next generation of healers, is
not to help the patient strive for immortality, but to use the tools of humanity
as well as technology to keep the "machine" in good running order until the
"warranty" runs out. Burrow is dean of the UCSD School of Medicine and vice
chancellor for health sciences.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: North America Syndicate

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1819 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1990 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    January 16, 1990, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 25; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 908 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PROVIDES INTERNAL BAND-AID;
MEDICINE: RESEARCHERS SAY THE TECHNIQUE IS A STEP TOWARD REDUCING RISK OF HEART
ATTACKS AND STROKES.

BYLINE: By LINDA ROACH MONROE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO

BODY:

   Michigan doctors have succeeded in using genetically altered cells to act as
an internal Band-Aid, a technique that eventually might be used to prevent
atherosclerotic lesions from worsening, it was reported here Monday.

   Although the work so far has been done only in animals, and with genes that
do not produce biologically active products, the research represents a leap
toward gene therapy to prevent heart attacks and strokes, the president of the
American Heart Assn. told science writers.

   The Michigan work is generating much excitement among cardiovascular
researchers because it "points out to them the potential for broadly moving
their field and other fields forward," Dr. Myron L. Weisfeldt said.

   Dr. Elizabeth G. Nabel, assistant professor of medicine at the University of
Michigan, reported at the meeting that her research group had used a common
cardiovascular technique -- balloon angioplasty -- to insert genetically
engineered cells into the arteries of Yucatan mini-pigs.

   The group infected endothelial cells -- which line the interior of the blood
vessels -- that had been taken from the pigs earlier with a retrovirus that had
itself been altered with a bacterial gene. Because a retrovirus inserts its own
genetic code into infected cells, the enzyme-producing bacterial gene became
part of the pig cells' genetic machinery.

   The altered cells were inserted into the pig artery through a balloon
catheter. There they established a healing layer of endothelial cells over the
atherosclerotic lesion, which is an accumulation of fat-filled cells on the
artery wall. The layer successfully produced the bacterial enzyme, showing that
a foreign gene could work in this way, Nabel said.

   Aware of problems that other proposed gene therapies have had in obtaining
results, Nabel was cautiously optimistic. "We have established the feasibility
of using endothelial cells as factories for artery repair," Nabel said.

   The endothelial cells eventually might be modified to secrete anti-clotting
proteins to prevent blockage of the artery at atherosclerotic plaque sites.
Noting that plaques themselves produce substances that promote their own growth,
Nabel said the endothelial Band-Aid might also contain genes to block these
growth promoters.

   Since endothelial cells are in organs throughout the body, she added, these
designer cells might even be engineered to produce anti-cancer drugs at tumor
sites.

   Still, she called such applications "pie in the sky," and said she did not
expect the research to bear clinical fruit for perhaps 20 years.

   Part of the reason for that is the extensive safety monitoring that would
have to be done before such techniques could be used in humans, she said.
Retroviruses would have to be shown unable to cause harmful infection before
they could be used in humans. The inserted genes would also need to have only a
localized effect, so they would not harm other body systems.

   Weisfeldt, however, said he thought that if the technique proves promising,
it might be usable early on in people for whom there is no other hope of
survival. For instance, heart transplant patients often develop life-threatening
atherosclerosis a few years after transplant as a result of the operation.

   Endothelial cells have become a prime target for genetic engineers because
their location inside the blood vessel ensures that hormones or other biological
agents they produce will be distributed throughout the body. They are also
easier to work with than bone marrow cells, which had previously been the target
of choice.

   Geneticists around the country are already experimenting in animals with
altered endothelial cells that deliver CD4, a protein that blocks the AIDS
virus; a clotting factor to prevent excessive bleeding in hemophilia; adenosine
deaminate, which is missing in children with certain genetic disorders of the
immune system; and von Willebrand's factor, which cures another genetic bleeding
disorder.

   Researchers speculate the technique could also be used to produce tissue
plasminogen activator, which would prevent the formation of blood clots that
cause strokes and heart attacks, and even insulin for diabetics.

   Most researchers agree that several years will elapse before attempts are
made at human therapy by genetic engineering. To date, genetically engineered
cells have been introduced into only a handful of humans as part of an
anti-cancer therapy devised at the National Cancer Institute.

   Last May, researchers there used genetic engineering techniques to insert
markers into white blood cells that are used in therapy of malignant melanoma, a
particularly severe form of skin cancer, to help track the cells through the
body. A total of 10 patients are to be treated, and so far no ill effects from
the genetically engineered cells have been observed.

   REPAIRING INJURED ARTERIES

   In miniature pigs, scientists at the University of Michigan used this
two-ballon technique to insert replacements for the injured cell layer that
normally lines the arteries, but which is damaged in atherosclerosis. Because
the inserted cells successfully produced an enzyme that they had been
genetically altered to make, the researchers see the angioplasty technique --
already used to unblock arteries in humans -- as a potential way to both repair
injured artery walls and make them produce lesion-inhibiting proteins that would
reverse or prevent further atherosclerosis.

GRAPHIC: Drawing, REPAIRING INJURED ARTERIES, Los Angeles Times


                             1820 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 14, 1990 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. I-1

LENGTH: 1255 words

HEADLINE: Biotechnology stocks viewed with wariness

BYLINE: Robert Henwood, Special to The San Diego Union

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO -- Sarah Gordon knows how Sir Edmund Hillary felt.

   Hillary, the first man to conquer Mount Everest, found the going tougher as
he approached the summit. Gordon, chief biotechnology analyst for San
Francisco-based Hambrecht & Quist, knows the prices of the stocks she follows
are in a rarified atmosphere. "Last year it was easy being a biotech analyst;
this year could be a lot tougher," said British-born Gordon. Gordon aired her
views at Hambrecht & Quist's 8th annual Life Sciences Conference last week in
San Francisco, where some 140 companies made presentations to a record 1,300
attendees. "The gains we saw in the biotech stocks last year were essentially
because there were clear fundamentals developing within the group and there were
many undervalued stocks," Gordon said.

   "Looking forward into 1990, the companies are much more realistically valued.

   Those to focus on now are the ones making real product progress, in the
public markets at least." Gordon's premier pick for 1990 is Emeryville-based
Chiron, whose share price more than doubled last year.

   "They're going to build a very valuable franchise in the blood-banking
business and hopefully in the vaccine area as well," she said. Food and Drug
Administration approval is expected by midyear for Chiron's diagnostic test for
hepatitis C, already selling in Europe.

   Also, the company's recent acquisition of Du Pont's AIDS and hepatitis B
blood-screening business made Chiron the No. 2 player behind Abbott Laboratories
in diagnostics worldwide. Where the Dow Jones Medical-Biotechnology Index
swooned 39 percent in 1988, led by a 62 percent plunge in Genentech's stock, it
rebounded nearly 48 percent last year to show the 13th best percentage gain
among DJ's 82 industry indices. Interest in Amgen's erythropoietin drug, Epogen,
for anemia associated with kidney disease, was the driving force for the sector.
Analysts, chastened in 1988 for wildly overestimating the sales of Activase
(t-PA), Genentech's thrombolytic agent, proved to be too conservative where
Epogen was concerned. Amgen's president and chief operating officer, Harry
Hixson, told the conference that Epogen had reached $95 million in sales in its
first seven months, rapid market penetration by anyone's standards.

   Epogen is now stocked by 90 percent of kidney dialysis providers and relevant
hospital pharmacies. In introducing Hixson, Gordon said she believed Thousand
Oaks-based Amgen would have an even bigger success in Neupogen for chemotherapy
patients. Neupogen enhances white blood cell production through the use of a
granulocyte colony. David MacCallum, H&Q's managing director for Life Sciences
and Health Care, noted biotechnology had produced three drugs so far with annual
sales exceeding $100 million.

   All are from Genentech.

   Epogen obviously will be next to cross the threshold. "By 1992, there could
be four more for the industry," he said.

   "And by 1995 there will probably be a dozen biotech products with sales north
of $100 million, some of them ranging up to the $500 million mark." Last year,
Gordon had said, "In biotechnology we're either flying high or hanging on by our
fingertips."

   Now, she sees that changing. "With specific products either to be approved or
close to approval this year, the extreme cyclicality of this group will be
reduced," Gordon said. "Advances in product development are becoming apparent in
a much broader range of companies.

   Two years ago we talked a lot about Genentech, last year Amgen, but this year
there's a much broader range of companies -- Xoma, Centocor, Chiron and others.

   That breadth will add stability." Gordon noted that the successful biotech
products had been recombinant (DNA), quick uptake replacement products such as
human growth hormone, insulin, hepatitis B vaccine and EPO. "Other markets, like
t-PA and alpha interferon, have grown slowly but now show well over $100 million
in sales annually," she said.

   "Interleukin-2, already approved in Europe, should follow the same path after
receiving FDA approval this year and become an interesting anti-cancer product.
"But what we'll see over the next few years is, finally, the emergence of
significant (monoclonal) antibody products," Gordon said.

   "They have taken longer to come to commercial fruition.

   I think of Xoma, with its graft-vs.-host disease product, Xomazyme CD5 Plus,
for bone marrow transplant complications, which is close to FDA approval in the
United States." Antibodies are the foot soldiers of the immune system.

   Monoclonal antibodies are B lymphocite cells linked to a rapidly dividing
cancer cell to produce a hybridoma.

   Each hybridoma secretes large amounts of identical monoclonal antibodies.
Gordon also mentioned the sepsis market (medications for blood infections),
particularly Xoma's mouse-based antibody, Xomen E5, and Centocor's human-based
Centoxin, both designed to neutralize the endotoxins released in gram-negative
septicemia. Centocor filed for FDA approval of Centoxin in September.

   Jim Wavle, the company's president and chief operating officer, revealed "the
incidence of gram-negative sepsis has grown dramatically in the last 20 years.
"Approximately 200,000 patients in the U.S. develop gram-negative sepsis
(frequently in the hospital) with bacteremia each year," he said. "Thirty-five
(percent) to 45 percent of them die within one month of infection." Agricultural
biotechnology is an area "now worth taking a look at," according to Gordon.

   She mentioned Calgene, of Davis, which with partner Campbell Soup soon will
file for FDA approval of the first genetically engineered food, a tomato that
stays fresh longer. Scientists, using Calgene's "anti-sense" technology, can now
switch off production of an enzyme responsible for tomato softening and rotting.
Gordon noted use of anti-sense technology in genetic therapy had made big
strides in recent years. In introducing ISIS Pharmaceuticals of Carlsbad, one of
13 San Diego companies to make presentations, Gordon called the privately held
company "one of the two (the other is Gilead Sciences) leading companies in
anti-sense technology today." ISIS, started with $5.2 million in venture capital
in March, is headed by Stanley Crooke, former head of research at SmithKline
Beckman. "Traditional drugs are generally small molecules that interact with
modest specificity with their target proteins and modulate the performance of
those proteins to generate some therapeutic gains," Crooke said. "In contrast,
anti-sense oligonucleotides will interact with extraordinary specificity with
the messenger RNA (ribonucleic acid), or with the gene that produces the
protein, and as a result prevent the production of proteins that cause disease."
Crooke used the "lock and (skeleton) key" analogy to describe traditional drugs,
noting that sometimes the keys "open locks that you're not particularly
interested in having opened. "Anti-sense drugs interact at multiple points in
the message, through hybridization, so the analogy that makes more sense is to
think of those plastic keys you use to open your hotel room these days.

   Instead of interacting with a single tumbler, you're interacting at multiple
sites on the plastic and as a consequence you can be very specific about what
doors you open. "In addition, once you have the plastic and once you have the
holes punched, you can stamp out key after key relatively rapidly.

   You can stamp out a lot of drugs." H&Q chairman Gordon Macklin recalled that
the first Life Sciences conference lured just 150 attendees to hear 24
companies.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007
