
                             1201 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         November 8, 1999, Monday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 1

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: Artificially grown heart valves work like real thing in sheep
 Experiment may pave the way for growing spare parts for human hearts

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

DATELINE: Atlanta

BODY:

   For the first time, researchers have used cells to grow complete heart valves
in the lab that were then successfully transplanted into animals, where they
functioned normally.

   The experiment is a first major step toward doctors someday creating spare
parts for human hearts using a patient's own cells.

   The groundbreaking experiment was announced Sunday at the 72nd Annual
Scientific Sessions of the American Heart Association.

   Performed by researchers at the department of cardiac surgery at Children's
Hospital in Boston, the procedure involved taking cells from blood vessel walls
of sheep and growing them on a biodegradable "scaffold" made of a polymer in the
shape of a valve. As the cells grew in the lab, the valves were exposed to
increasing flows and pressures to mimic blood flow in the heart and make them
stronger.

   At the same time, the cells received a constant supply of a nutrient
substance.

   After about two weeks, the cells completely covered the polymer scaffolding,
which then decayed, leaving a living copy of the valve.

   These so-called tissue-engineered valves then were surgically transplanted
into the hearts of six sheep.

   "After the operation, they went back to the farm and had a normal life," said
Simon Hoerstrup, who presented the findings Sunday. "(The valves) functioned
over five months."

   After that, the animals all were killed so that autopsies could be done to
study the valves.

   Hoerstrup said performing the procedure on humans is several years away.

   If it works in humans, the procedure may one day be used to grow valves for
children born with congenital heart valve defects or adults or children whose
heart valves are damaged by bacterial infections or rheumatic fever. Aging may
also weaken hardened heart valves.

   More than 17,000 people die every year from valvular heart disease, according
to the Heart Association.

   Currently, defective heart valves are replaced with either mechanical valves
or so-called biologic valves transplanted from pigs. Both methods have problems.

   People who receive mechanical valves must take anti-coagulant medicine every
day for life. That can lead to bleeding problems. Also, the mechanical valves
don't grow, which, in children, means that newer, larger valves have to be
implanted, sometimes twice more during their lifetime.

   People who receive animal valves have had problems with rejection, which also
can lead to additional surgery.

   In theory, using tissue-engineered valves combines the best of both worlds,
said Lynn Smaha, a cardiologist and president of the American Heart Association.

   "The concept makes eminent sense," Smaha said. "I have reserved
anticipation."

   The Boston experiment involved only the pulmonary valves of the sheep. The
pulmonary valve, which sends blood into vessels of the lungs, does not undergo
as much pressure as the mitral valve, which guides blood between chambers of the
heart, and the aortic valve, which regulates the flow of blood to the arteries.

   Those are the two valves that most commonly need replacement in humans.

   Hoerstrup said one of the next steps will be to grow aortic and mitral
valves.

   In a related presentation, researchers reported continued success in using
gene therapy to grow new blood vessels in the heart to bypass blockages.

   One small study involved 14 patients who continued to have reduced blood flow
to the heart even after undergoing conventional bypass surgery. They were given
a genetically engineered virus that delivered a substance known as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) into the heart.

   Samuel Hart, an 82-year-old resident of Rome, N.Y., received the treatment in
June. He had undergone bypass surgery 13 years ago, but because of his age and
other complications he was not a candidate for more surgery.

   "All I had to do was lie down on the bed, stay still and keep quiet," he
said.

   The procedure took only about a half-hour.

   Hart said he has felt better and has been able to walk farther, although he
still physically limited.

   In another gene therapy study, researchers reported that after one year, 15
patients, or about half the group who received VEGF, reported having virtually
no angina episodes.

GRAPHIC: Photo
ASSOCIATED PRESS

   Simon Hoerstrup of Children's Hospital in Boston explains
how he used tissue engineering techniques to grow new heart valves
for sheep.


   RONALD M. OVERDAHL
STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER

   Appreciating law enforcement
Kathy LaMalfa, a member of the East
Side Baptist Church, 2409 E. Park Place, pins a blue and white ribbon on
the uniform of Milwaukee Police Officer Derek Jeter before a service
Sunday morning honoring local and state law enforcement officers for
their often unappreciated hard work.



   The congregation started out the non-traditional service with the
national anthem. "Blue and White Sunday" was attended by law enforcement
officers and criminal justice system workers.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1999


                             1202 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 8, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1319 words

HEADLINE: Death Reports Spark No Cries for Demise of Gene Therapy Studies;

Critics seek increased openness from those conducting research

BYLINE: TOM ABATE

BODY:
The field of gene therapy got a black eye last week when reporters disclosed
that two prominent researchers had delayed telling a scientific advisory panel
that eight of their patients had died while enrolled in a gene therapy
experiment.

    That shock came shortly after the University of Pennsylvania revealed that
an 18-year-old man had died as a result of taking a gene therapy drug. The Food
and Drug Administration, the main enforcement agency on human drug tests,
stopped that experiment and a similar gene therapy trial.

    Despite these deaths, not even critics want to halt all gene therapy work.
"Calling for a moratorium would be pulling the trigger too soon," said Paul
Billings, a scientist with the Council for Responsible Genetics, an ethics
watchdog group based in Cambridge, Mass.

    But Billings wants the government to exercise more oversight of gene therapy
experiments, in part because the scientists involved in such tests often start
biotech firms or hold stock in them.

    "The financial stakes are so high, academics are starting to get too
secretive," Billings said, adding that they may be reluctant to disclose bad
news that could hurt them financially.

    He pointed to the recent episodes involving Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's
Hospital in Boston, and Ronald Crystal of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical
Center in New York.

    Both are trying to cure heart disease by injecting patients with genes
designed to strengthen their hearts. Isner is a major shareholder in Vascular
Genetics, the North Carolina company sponsoring his trial. Crystal holds stock
in GenVac, the Maryland startup funding his experiment.

    Over the past year, eight of their patients died while participating in the
studies. The researchers say -- and there is as yet no reason to doubt them --
that all eight patients died of the underlying disease, not from any gene
therapy overdose.

    Both scientists promptly reported these deaths to the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration.

    But apparently neither scientist filed an immediate death report with a
second oversight body, the Recombinant Advisory Committee. RAC is part of the
National Institutes of Health. It reviews gene therapy experiments before the
FDA approves them, and then keeps track of "adverse events" -- such as deaths --
once they start.

    Even if the two scientists flouted the RAC's rules, it is not clear whether
they broke any laws. The RAC will meet in December to discuss the breach.

    Isner denied that his stock ownership had anything to do with his tardiness
in reporting the deaths to the RAC.

    "I was not aware RAC was expecting these reports immediately," Isner said,
pointing out that he had reported the first death at a scientific meeting well
before this whole flap arose.

    "There was never any intent to conceal anything," he said.

   Gene therapy differs from other forms of drug development, said Dr. Estuardo
Aguilar, a gene therapist at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston and an RAC
member.

    Drugs are manufactured. We take them to supply some chemical our bodies
lack. But in gene therapy, scientists inject the patient with a gene that is
supposed to teach the body to produce the needed chemical from within.

    There have been nearly 300 human gene therapy trials over the past decade,
and so far none has achieved a cure. Because it's such a novelty and affects the
entire human blueprint, Aguilar said it makes sense to have the RAC and the FDA
both review experiments in advance.

    But Aguilar said biotech firms have long grumbled about having to
immediately report adverse events to RAC, because the committee makes such
information public, while the FDA keeps death reports to itself.

    When the RAC meets in December to discuss the controversy, Aguilar said, he
will ask whether the advisory panel should continue asking for -- and
publicizing -- every death report.

    "Many patients who have undergone gene therapy studies have died, but they
have died in spite of the gene therapy, not because of it," he said. "Companies
are very concerned because if some death is reported in a piecemeal fashion, it
may have an adverse effect on their stock."

    Aguilar doesn't know how the 12-member committee will react to his
suggestion, which would mean that only the FDA would get immediate death
reports.

    But critics like Billings will certainly oppose any such change.

    "When you have situations where scientists are taking equity positions in
companies founded around experimental therapies, you need more public scrutiny,
not less," he said.


   ALZA STILL READY TO MERGE: If there was a botched merger sweepstakes, I would
nominate the proposed marriage of Abbott Laboratories of Chicago with Alza Corp.
of Palo Alto.

    On June 21, Abbott, the pharmaceutical giant, said it would acquire Alza, a
local drug discovery firm, in a stock swap then worth $7.3 billion. Alza
shareholders approved the deal September 21.

    One week later, Abbott revealed for the first time that the FDA considered
Abbott's diagnostics division in "noncompliance" with federal manufacturing
guidelines.

    "The parties are in discussions over a proposed consent decree," Abbott
said. "If those discussions are not successful, the government has advised the
company" it would sue to shut down Abbott's main diagnostic-device factory in
Lake County, Ill.

    Shares of both firms plunged. Within days, several law firms had filed an
array of class-action lawsuits, charging Abbott and Alza with defrauding Alza
shareholders by concealing the FDA problem until after the vote.

    But wait, it gets better.

    Two weeks ago, class-action attorneys asked the federal judge handling the
case to force both companies to turn over any documents that would show when and
what they knew about the FDA's beef with Abbott.

    Alza stunned observers by filing court papers siding with the classaction
lawyers.

    "It is uncommon for a defendant to join you in a motion like this," said
Steve Toll, one of the attorneys representing shareholders. "The judge said that
fact swayed him to grant our motion."

    Alza has not explained its unusual move, which has encouraged speculation
that Abbott may not have disclosed the problem to Alza during the premerger
talks.

    Last week Abbott agreed to pay a $100 million fine to settle the FDA
dispute. That is the largest civil penalty ever levied against a medical product
manufacturer. Abbott also agreed to stop selling certain diagnostic devices
until the FDA says its manufacturing is up to snuff.

    Abbott's stock price, and the value of the Alza deal, fell yet again. Abbott
ended the week at $38.50, making the deal worth $6.4 billion -- almost $1
billion less than the value at the outset.

    Looked at differently, the exchange rate of 1.2 Abbott shares for each Alza
share means the deal now represents only a 4.3 percent premium for Alza, based
on its Friday closing price of $44.31.

    For the record, both companies remain committed to the deal. But last week,
the two firms agreed not to close their merger before December 30 without
holding a second shareholder vote. Such an agreement would head off the
scheduled November 23 hearing to stop the merger.

    Investors don't know whether Abbott and Alza are preparing to settle with
the lawyers to make the classaction suits disappear, or are looking for a
face-saving way to break or renegotiate the deal.

    The merger agreement leaves them plenty of wiggle room. According to Alza's
proxy statement, the two firms can agree to walk away from the deal "even if
Alza's stockholders have approved it."

    In addition, either firm can "without the consent of the other, terminate
the merger agreement" if the deal isn't completed by December 31.

   Look for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, abate@sfgate.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or
phone, (415) 777-6213.




LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1999


                             1203 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    November 8, 1999, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: Misplaced Secrecy on Genes

BODY:


   THE DEATH of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger during a gene therapy experiment in
September was shocking to those with high hopes for gene-based medical
treatment. But at least they heard about it. In at least six other cases,
according to a troubling story by Post reporters Deborah Nelson and Rick Weiss,
researchers supervising clinical trials of new gene therapies failed to inform
the National Institutes of Health when patients died during the trials. In three
more cases -- one death and two serious illnesses -- researchers made the
required reports but only after asking the NIH for confidentiality.

   Does this mean gene treatments are uniquely dangerous? Probably not, but
that's what these trials are there to find out. Gene treatments typically
involve injecting modified genes into a patient in the hopes that they will
propagate and replace defective ones. The companies doing the research argue
that they need only report deaths when they are caused by the trial -- a
connection that wasn't clear in any of the cases -- and that that determination
is one they can make themselves.

   Regulators at the NIH dispute that interpretation and plan to make more
explicit the rules that govern such research. The Food and Drug Administration,
which also has jurisdiction, backed up the NIH's view Friday with a stern letter
reminding researchers to report all deaths or "serious adverse events." The
notion that companies need only report deaths or other side effects that they
know are caused by the treatment is circular. How else are researchers to track
the cause of negative symptoms except by comparing them with adverse effects
from other studies?

   Gene therapy trials fall under both FDA and NIH regulations because of
federal funding for genome research and because the nature of the work is
thought to call for heightened public scrutiny. But while the FDA, which
traditionally supervises drug trials by private companies, keeps those
companies' reports on the trials confidential, the NIH process is more public.
Until the biotechnology boom, most medical research was done by federally funded
scientists accustomed to sharing information as a matter of course -- and
without personal or company fortunes riding on the outcome.

   The migration of biotech research into a still fluid and speculative private
sector has strained that model. The potential for conflict of interest is
evident when companies stake their future on the outcome of clinical trials.
(The researcher who asked the NIH for confidentiality strongly denied any
connection between that request and an upcoming public stock offering, now
postponed.) The privatization of cutting-edge gene research has some benefits,
notably a huge influx of capital and a boom in start-up companies (particularly
in the Maryland suburbs). But that benefit needs to be counterbalanced with
redoubled vigilance. Nobody knows very much in practice about this form of
treatment, and meddling in the genetic code induces a deserved squeamishness. It
is hard to imagine a field where openness to public scrutiny is more urgently
required.

LOAD-DATE: November 08, 1999


                             1204 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                  November 7, 1999 Sunday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: VALLEY AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 993 words

HEADLINE: HE DIVED RIGHT IN MAN WHO DIED SAW GENE TRIAL AS CHANCE TO HELP SELF,
OTHERS

BYLINE: By Kerry Fehr-Snyder, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   After 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger's funeral, his friends paid an
unusualtribute to the Tucson teen: They dived into his parents' pool in their
newsuits and dress shoes.

   It recalled the times they'd played there with the friend who died
inSeptember during a gene therapy study, but symbolized something more.

   "We told each other, 'You better not die because we're not going to
buyanother suit,' " said Justin Lillie, 19.

   Jesse's father, Paul, says Jesse understood he might die by volunteeringfor
the University of Pennsylvania study, but he downplayed the risks tofriends.

   "He didn't really talk about the risks because he didn't feel they
wereinvolved," Lillie said.

   Jesse, who had a rare genetic disorder, knew there was a 1 in 10,000
chancehe'd have an allergic reaction to a dye used in the procedure. He also
riskeddamage to the right lobe of his liver, said Dr. Steven Raper, the
trial'sprincipal investigator.

   "I reviewed all the paperwork, and I told him, 'You could die from this,'"
Paul Gelsinger said.

   But 17 other patients had been through the procedure without ill effects,and
"(Jesse) said, 'Those aren't bad odds,' " Gelsinger said. "I encouragedhim to
participate."

   Doctors injected genes into Jesse's liver using a common cold virus as
avector. People with the disorder, called ornithine transcarbamylasedeficiency,
lack an enzyme that removes ammonia from the body, leading to afatal buildup.
The injected genes are engineered to produce the missingenzyme.

   The disorder occurs in about 1 in 25,000 births. Half those with thedisorder
don't live past age 5. Jesse's problem didn't appear until he wasnearly 3, when
he became irritable and lethargic. He refused to eat anythingbut potato chips.

   A doctor put Jesse on a disastrous high-protein diet. Within days, he
fellinto a coma as he watched Saturday morning cartoons. Doctors first
diagnosedReye syndrome, a rare childhood disease that develops after the flu
orchickenpox.

   It took 11 days in the hospital to bring his ammonia levels back to normal.It
was the first of four times he would lapse into a coma.

   His third crisis came in December after he stopped taking the 54 pills aday
required to control the disorder.

   "He wasn't always compliant, and he didn't always take them," Gelsingersaid.

   Jesse, then 17, was admitted to Tucson's University Medical Center, wherehis
ammonia level was five times higher than normal. He was allowed to go homeon
Christmas Day, but he was listless, incoherent and down to 97 pounds.

   Back in the hospital, Jesse stopped breathing in his father's arms. He
wasrevived, but fell into a coma. His father spent 11 of the next 13 nights
byhis bed.

   When Jesse awoke, he began moving his fingers as if to tell his
parentssomething. Unsure, they stood at the foot of his bed until they got
themessage.

   "We were in the way of the TV," said his stepmother, Mickie. "It waslike back
to reality."

   The next day, he was out of the hospital. In four months, he had gained
40pounds and had a new lease on life.

   He began taking school seriously, earning a spot on the honor roll his
lastsemester.

   "He didn't talk about it much," Lillie said. "Words couldn't explain
itanyway. He just took life in a different way."

   An avid World Wrestling Federation fan, Jesse didn't come around
Lillie'sapartment to watch matches on TV as much.

   "The last six months, we barely saw him," Lillie said. "He was always
atschool all day and at night for three hours at a time."

   When Jesse graduated from Tucson's Rincon High School, Lillie was sure tobe
there.

   "He never did that great in school, although he was extremely bright,"Lillie
said. "I was really proud of him when he graduated."

   Jesse began preparing to participate in the clinical trial after he turned18
in June.

   "He was thrilled that they were working on his disorder and developing
acure," his father said.

   Although the experiment likely wouldn't cure Jesse, he felt it might
helpothers. For years, Jesse was the only patient of his kind in Arizona. A
secondcase appeared recently.

   Jesse didn't talk about the trial much with his friends, although they
knewabout it.

   "He told me, 'The worst thing that could happen to me is that I coulddie,' "
recalled co-worker Tereasa Martin, a cashier at Fry's Food & Drug."He kind of
made light of it."

   Jesse told Martin that he had been in and out of the hospital so much thathe
wanted to give something back to the medical community.

   "He always said it was for the babies," she said.

   Jesse flew to Philadelphia by himself Sept. 9. His father was going tofollow
a few days later.

   "I told him at the airport, 'Son, I'm really proud of you. You're myhero.' "

   Jesse's uncle, Ken Gelsinger, picked him up a few days later to spend
timewith family in Delaware.

   Jesse didn't talk about the experiment, but "I could tell when I droppedJesse
off that he was a little bit nervous," Ken Gelsinger said.

   He told Jesse that he'd visit him after the procedure, which was scheduledfor
that Monday.

   When Jesse became ill, Ken was hopeful Jesse would recover.

   "I told myself, 'Look, he's an 18-year-old boy, he's strong,' " Ken said.

   Thursday night, with his father and stepmother by his side, Jesse died.

   Raper, of the University of Pennsylvania, declined to discuss Jesse's
lastdays, which Jesse's father attributed to how shaken Raper was by
Jesse'sdeath.

   "Everyone's intent in this was pure," Paul Gelsinger said.

   The cause of Jesse's death hasn't been determined, and the trial was
haltedimmediately thereafter. Doctors are scheduled to present their findings
earlynext month to an advisory committee at the National Institutes of Health.

   Jesse's friends and family plan to scatter his ashes on a hike today upMount
Wrightson, one of the highest peaks in Tucson's Santa Rita Mountains.

   Despite his slight build, Jesse had tackled the hike three times, leadinghis
brother and father up the mountain.

   "He was the trailblazer," Paul Gelsinger said.

GRAPHIC: Paul and Mickie Gelsinger of Tucson lost their son, Jesse, in
September. Jesse, who suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, died
during a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy study.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2005


                             1205 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                  November 7, 1999 Sunday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: VALLEY AND STATE; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: CLINICAL TRIALS VARY IN RISK, REQUIREMENTS UA HANDLES MOST IN ARIZONA

BYLINE: By Kerry Fehr-Snyder, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Not all clinical trials are as risky as the Phase I trial during whichJesse
Gelsinger died two months ago.

   The risk level decreases with each phase, said Dr. Steven Raper, theprincipal
investigator of the University of Pennsylvania gene therapy trialGelsinger was
in.

   Most of the medical trials in Arizona are run by the University of
Arizona.Although the university's medical center is based in Tucson, many trials
arein the Valley because of its larger population.

   "It's absurd for us not to understand that Phoenix should be served theway
other major cities are served by technology and clinical trials," saidDave
Alberts, associate dean for research in the UA College of Medicine.

   Some trials, such as the Women's Health Initiative, require patients tochange
their diets or receive injections. It involved 1,000 women older than65, who
were monitored for osteoporosis and signs of heart disease.

   Other trials don't require anything other than what doctors already
haveordered, which was the case for Kameha St. Peter. The 4-year-old was
diagnosedlast year with a rare form of cancer called neuroblastoma.

   When doctors removed a kidney tumor, they asked permission for a biopsy
tocreate a biological marker to determine how aggressive it was.

   "It wasn't a big decision for us to let them do it," said Tamara St.Peter,
Kameha's mother. "This is one of those diseases that they don't knowmuch about."

   St. Peter and her husband, Jason, also gave blood samples for genetic
teststhey knew might benefit their other two children.

   "For Jason and I, it wasn't this wrenching decision we had to make,because it
didn't affect her (Kameha) directly," St. Peter said.

   "Each additional study brings an incremental improvement to cancertreatment,"
said Alberts, the director of cancer prevention and control atthe Arizona Cancer
Center.

   About 20 percent of the center's cancer patients are eligible toparticipate
in cancer research trials, spokeswoman Laurie Young said. About 3percent of
those do, a decline of 1 percent from a decade ago.

   Many insurance companies don't cover trials, which are
consideredexperimental. Two bills have been introduced in Congress that would
givepatients more access to clinical trials.

   "There are many more clinical trials now in diseases that we didn't have10
years ago," Young said.

   The number of clinical trials under review has been on a slow but
steadyincrease, said Dick Powell, UA's vice president for research. In 1994,
UA'shuman subjects committee reviewed 240 projects. The committee has
reviewedmore than 270 projects so far this year.

   Most trials are run at multiple sites, as required by the agency that paysfor
the research. Participants often learn about trials through ads.

   Medical trials, especially those involving new drugs, are expected tobecome
more prevalent as more developments move out of the lab and intodoctors offices
and hospitals.

   "There's really an explosion, and it's related to the increased enthusiasmfor
drug development in all areas and technology development in the UnitedStates,"
Alberts said.

GRAPHIC: Kameha St. Peter, 4, was diagnosed last year with a rare form of cancer
called neuroblastoma. Her clinical trial required only what doctors had already
ordered, and a biopsy of her tumor was used to create a biological marker.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2005


                             1206 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                        November 7, 1999, Sunday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,2A SUN JOURNAL

LENGTH: 1018 words

HEADLINE: Hopes, fears for 21st century; Predictions: Thirty intellectuals
speculate on space travel, medicine and more in a new anthology.

BYLINE: Bill Glauber

SOURCE: SUN FOREIGN STAFF

BODY:

   LONDON -- Prince Harry will head into space, and humans will land on Mars.

    There will be sex purely for love and lust, while fertilization will be
achieved through reproduction "banks."

    And the attention span could be in trouble.

    They sound like supermarket-tabloid headlines, but these speculations are
among the predictions offered by 30 intellectuals peering into the next century.

    The Oxford University Press anthology "Predictions" is a provocative,
playful and at times sobering look at the 21st century, as envisioned by
scientists, writers and philosophers. It's a small volume with big ideas,
published here and set for release early next year in the United States.

    "Nobody is predicting the end of the world," says Sian Griffiths, the
anthology editor.

    Through snappy profile pieces and sharp essays, the intellectuals dive into
the next 100 years in what amounts to the ultimate millennium parlor game.
Dealing in everything from birth to death, artificial intelligence to robotics,
and politics to medicine, they foresee a bright new world in the coming century.

    Changing decades and centuries provide people with opportunities to make
outlandish claims about the future. Most predictions turn out in retrospect to
be way off the mark.

    But some of the current material is magical. Take the predictions from
science-fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, author of "2001: A Space Odyssey."

    It's Clarke who forecasts the travel adventure of Prince Charles' younger
son, Harry, the first space-bound royal who "may even stop off at the Hilton
Orbiter hotel."

    By 2021, humans will land on Mars, he adds, and in 2057, the centennial of
the Sputnik satellite launch will include celebrations on Earth, the moon, Mars,
Jupiter's moons Europa and Ganymede and Saturn's largest moon, Titan.

    Clarke also predicts that after 2020 there will be two intelligent species
on Earth: humans and one evolving from artificial intelligence.

    Clarke's optimistic embrace of the future is countered by neuroscientist
Susan Greenfield's lament that, despite all the gains, biomedical advances could
be misused. She wonders if George Orwell's world of 1984 might arrive by 2084,
with humans monitored "from their genes and molecules through to their mental
worlds."

    As the young interact with virtual-reality products, Greenfield says, there
is a risk the attention span and imagination needed to read may no longer exist,
and "we may end up a society of restless, unimaginative individuals."

    According to chemist Carl Djerassi, who helped bring the world the birth
control pill, human fertility is due for a change, perhaps in the next 30 years
"when sex and fertilization will be separate" and the 21st century becomes known
as the century of "A.R.T. -- assisted reproductive technologies."

    Djerassi pictures young men and women opening "reproductive bank accounts
full of frozen sperm and eggs. And when they want a baby, they'll go to the bank
to check out what they need."

    W. French Anderson, sometimes called the father of gene therapy, boldly
predicts that gene-based therapy will revolutionize medical practice by 2030,
yet cautions that it may not be used responsibly.

    "I fear that the downside of this powerful technology might be that eugenics
will be practiced on a scale far larger than any 'selective breeding' policy
could accomplish," Anderson writes.

    Telephones and faxes could be headed for the junk heap if Kevin Warwick is
proved right.

    The British cybernetics professor sees humans using implant technology to
link with computers. Through the power of the mind and the computer, people will
open doors, turn on lights.

    "In the future we could have memories of events that we have not witnessed,
and mathematical abilities that far surpass anything of today," Warwick writes.

    There could be brain-to-brain communication via the Internet, he suggests,
and "we will simply be able to think to each other."

    Philosopher and bioethicist Peter Singer envisions changes designed to
"reduce avoidable pain and suffering," including animals gaining rights enforced
by courts.

    Others list their hopes. British scientist Richard Dawkins yearns for people
to "finally understand what consciousness is and how it works."

    American feminist and writer Andrea Dworkin describes what she wants for
women, including "a woman- dominated legal system in every country."

    Paul Nurse isn't promising a cure for cancer, but the head of Britain's
Imperial Cancer Research Fund envisions "a complete understanding of the
workings of a cell, which in turn will provide real insights into the nature of
life."

    Economist John Kenneth Galbraith calls for the "income gap to be narrowed,"
and writes that "a rich country can guarantee an income to the deprived. If some
do no work, so be it.  The rich are also known on occasion to prefer leisure."

    Galbraith concludes his elegant, no-nonsense essay, "No economist can take
professional refuge from the omnipresent and overwhelming danger of nuclear
destruction. Nor can anyone else."

    Chinua Achebe writes of his optimism for Africa in the 21st century. The
author and Nigerian exile says, "There are signs that we are beginning to see
the end of the period of complete turmoil in Africa."

    Public-policy professor Francis Fukuyama, who coined the phrase the "end of
history," explores the great changes produced by globalization, aging and the
increase of women in political life. He foresees a "very different kind of
politics," moving away from "military intervention, defense and power
competition."

    "Let's face it," he writes. "Most of the trouble in the world is caused by
young men, or else Saddam Hussein types who want to lead young men into various
kinds of adventures."

    Linguist and author Noam Chomsky is perhaps the most downbeat, wondering
"whether humans are a kind of lethal mutation."

    However, he does offer what is likely the safest forecast, writing that
"perhaps the most plausible prediction is that any prediction about serious
matters is likely to be off the mark, except by accident."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) 1. Flying high: Prince Harry, seen skiing in Switzerland in
January, will head into space, predicts Arthur C. Clarke.
 2. John Kenneth Galbraith, economist
 3. Noam Chomsky, linguist

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1999


                             1207 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            November 7, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS - INSIGHT, Pg. 4C

LENGTH: 517 words

HEADLINE: NEXT MEDICAL BREAKTHROUGHS WILL ARISE FROM GENETICS

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson

BODY:


   It's going to be some time before medicine reaches its Star Trek potential,
when physicians wave diagnostic wands over patients and treat them with a single
pill or shot.

   On the way there, however, we'll learn a lot about ourselves, said Bradford
L. Stokes, associate dean for research and graduate studies at the Ohio State
University College of Medicine.

   Most of this knowledge is deep in our genetic makeup.

   "Cloning of the human genome will occur as early as next spring," Stokes
said. "The implications of that means determining virtually everything about
medicine in the next decade."

   Individual genes responsible for many diseases, including forms of cancer,
are being discovered daily, and gene therapy is being studied in patients.

   So far, about 6,800 genes have been discovered, and a few have been cloned.

   Researchers for more than a decade have been mapping the genome, which
contains roughly 100,000 genes.

   The secrets locked inside our cells in genes will give researchers insight
into our susceptibility to disease and injury.

   Stokes, who studies traumatic injuries, said even his field will benefit.

   "Trauma is about turning on certain sequences in disease," he said. "A
person's genetic makeup determines whether he becomes a paraplegic or stays in a
vegetative state following injury."

   Cancer doctors are inserting good copies of genes into patients with
defective ones. Stokes said this is the tip of the iceberg.

   "Genetic therapy is bit down the road, but coming quickly," he said. "The
challenge is to take all of the information and translate it into animal models
to control the genome, and then find a way to translate that into . . . human
populations."

   Another controversial area of research -- xenotransplantation, the use of
animal organs in humans -- will challenge not only the scientific community but
society as well, Stokes said.

   To many, using animal organs for human transplantation is unacceptable.
Doctors and researchers, however, know that too many people die waiting for
human organs.

   They think simply brushing off the idea is unacceptable.

   "This will be the first major arena that medicine and society is going to
have to face," Stokes said. "We have to decide, if we overcome a number of
medical problems, whether it is acceptable to use certain animal organs in human
bodies."

   Pig kidneys, for example, are about the right size for humans, and recent
tests in primates in England have produced good results.

   "Transplant doctors are losing patients every day," Stokes said. "Many
patients cannot be transplanted with human organs -- they reject them. Are
people going to continue to die because we can't use animal organs?"

   Medical procedures once considered futuristic are being used today. One
example is the robotic surgical tool OSU doctors use to assist open-heart
procedures.

   "There are a number of Buck Rogers-types of things we are already using,"
Stokes said. "Our approach here is to break down the barriers between academia
and physicians. We need to get both sides together to make things happen."

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1999


                             1208 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                           November 07, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: News; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 840 words

HEADLINE: TEEN'S DEATH SPURRING GENE-RESEARCH PROB

BYLINE: By SUSAN FERRARO SUNDAY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Two months ago, an Arizona 18-year-old named Jesse Gelsinger took part in an
experimental gene treatment trial for a rare, often fatal disease that he had
lived with since infancy. Unlike many very sick, "last-resort" participants in
such studies, Gelsinger was relatively healthy. Four days later, he was dead.

   News of Gelsinger's death, though reported promptly by scientists, brought
into focus troublesome questions about what - and when - the public should learn
of potentially controversial scientific experiments that go bad.

   As a consequence of the Gelsinger case, among others, the National Institutes
of Health, which monitors such experiments, is putting the heat on gene
researchers to report all deaths related to such genetic treatments - and has
ensnared a top doctor at Weill Cornell hospital (formerly New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center) in the process.

   At issue is the public's right to know about the experimental uses of genetic
therapies on human subjects versus the patient's right to confidentiality and
the right of drug companies to preserve trade secrets.

   "People have a fear and possibly even false hope about [genetic research ],
and the public wants to know what's going on," said Dr. Ruth Macklin, a
bioethicist at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.

   Macklin serves as a member of the institute's Recombinant DNA Advisory Board,
which is trying to strengthen its control of experimental drug trials. Even
before Gelsinger's death, there were suspicions that some researchers and drug
companies were trying to avoid negative publicity - which might affect
investment funds or stock prices - by hiding news of adverse results.

   In September, the New Jersey drug-maker Schering-Plough, a sponsor of similar
genetic research, inflamed the situation by writing a letter to the institute
expressing "concern regarding its public disclosure of certain confidential and
proprietary information," according to company spokesman Robert Consalvo.

   Institute officials know full well that trade secrets are justifiably
proprietary. New treatments often require funding of $ 500 million before
products even come to market. But Macklin and others deemed "outrageous" what
they perceived as Schering-Plough's attempt to classify deaths as proprietary
information.

   There also were reports of other deaths during gene treatment trials - which
must be reported immediately to the institute as well as the federal Food and
Drug Administration - that had not been reported promptly.

   Several of them, institute officials found, were associated with experimental
trials conducted by Weill Cornell hospital's Dr. Ronald Crystal. The treatments
were designed to enable hearts to grow their own new bypass arteries. Crystal
reported the deaths - which he said were unrelated to the gene therapy - only to
the FDA, saying he was not required to report to the institute as well. The
institute then dug out a letter Crystal wrote in May 1998 requesting that news
of one death be kept out of public record. Crystal told the Sunday News he acted
only to protect the patient's confidentiality and avoid publicly attributing a
death unrelated to the treatment to a cause that might embarrass the family.

   Crystal's plea for privacy was the first ever received by the institute in
connection with genetic treatments. Along with the Schering-Plough letter, it
set off alarms among members of the agency's gene advisory group. What's more,
said Macklin, patient's names are never used during the institute's public
deliberations.

   Parke-Davis pharmaceuticals, which sponsored Crystal's work, sent full
reports of the deaths to the institute earlier this month. That did not stop
reports, sharply denied by Crystal, that he had requested silence to protect his
gene therapy business, Gen Vec, when it went public.

   "We are not hiding anything," said Crystal, who says he has only small equity
in the company. "I don't know why this is happening. It is very frustrating."

   Dr. Amy Patterson, head of the institute committee that reviews experimental
gene therapy trials, refused to comment.

   For now, institute guidelines require any institution or company receiving
its grants (including Crystal, who gets some funding for his large lab) to
report serious adverse trial results to the institute at once.

   Industry insiders complain that drug companies that do not receive institute
funding are excluded from the stringent reporting rules.

   "Protecting confidentiality is very important," said Dr. Savio Woo of Mount
Sinai Medical Center and president of the American Society for Gene Therapy.
"But the public needs to know about these things."

   In the much-publicized death of Jesse Gelsinger, he said, "I'm not so sure
confidentiality should override the public's interest."

   Both Schering-Plough and Parke-Davis have filed complete reports on the
deaths for review at the next institute meeting in December, when the group also
will consider tightening its reporting requirements.


GRAPHIC: Caption not available electronically

LOAD-DATE: November 09, 1999


                             1209 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      NOVEMBER 6, 1999 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: WAITING TO BATTLE A DISEASE AGAIN MOTHER HAD HOPES PINNED ON HALTED
GENE TRIAL AT PENN

BYLINE: Jennifer Farrell, INQUIRER SUBURBAN STAFF

BODY:

   Tish Simon hates to think that the disease that killed her 14-year-old son
has won again.

   For years, a cure has flickered on the horizon, if just out of reach. And,
like other parents who have passed the inherited liver disorder on to their
children, Simon and her husband, Andy, had their hopes pinned on a gene therapy
trial that was under way at the University of Pennsylvania.

   But the trial was halted last month after the 18th patient, Arizona teenager
Jesse Gelsinger, died within days of getting the virus carrying his missing
gene. It was the first known death linked to gene therapy.

   "All of us believed that this was the answer," Simon said in a recent
interview at her home in Union, N.J. "They tell you that there's a risk, but I
don't think that anybody thought that was a possibility."

   Simon's son, Sonny, was to have been in the trial, but he died on New Year's
Day 1996, while waiting for the Food and Drug Administration to approve his
undergoing the treatment.

   Instead, Simon, who has a mild form of the disease, herself volunteered. She
was the 15th person to get the gene therapy drug.

   While some people have criticized Penn's trial because it placed largely
healthy people at unknown risk, Simon saw it as a chance to fight back against
the disease. Known as OTC (ornithine transcarbymylase deficiency), the disease
is caused by a gene defect that allows dangerous levels of ammonia to build up,
leading to coma and often, death.

   The fact that the disorder, which affects one in 30,000 children, is carried
from mother to child, affecting boys mostly, also played a role in Simon's
decision.

   "I knew that I had to do it," she said. "I knew how I felt not doing it."

   All 18 participants in the trial had varying degrees of the deficiency. Many
were mothers who had lost sons to the disease.

   A common thread was their belief that anything is better than living with the
current treatment for the disease - a combination of diet restrictions and
medicine, or liver transplant.

   For Janie Sheedy of Walnut Creek, Calif., the trial seemed like a chance for
redemption. She signed on after she and her husband, Mike, lost four newborn
sons to the disorder between 1981 and 1989.

   All suffered seizures within 24 hours of birth, then lapsed into coma before
dying.

   None of the boys lived more than three days.

   "I guess I didn't want it to have the final word," said Sheedy, who got the
gene therapy at Penn in 1997. "The gene replacement therapy gave me a little bit
of control back."

   "This disorder is a roller-coaster ride," said Mindy Rosen of Cherry Hill,
who is copresident of the National Urea Cycle Disorder Foundation. The
foundation offers support to families on its Web site, www.nucdf.org, and on its
hotline, 800-38NUCDF.

   Rosen's son, Brett, a student at Cherry Hill East High School, suffers from a
form of the disorder known as arginase deficiency. "Any small virus or infection
can be devastating," she said. "At this moment, gene therapy is the only hope."

   The Simons struggled to control their son's disorder using diet and medicine,
with results that were uncertain at best. They watched Sonny suffer the
twice-daily doses of vile-tasting medicine combined with rigid food
restrictions.

   In any one day, he could not eat more than 4 grams of protein - roughly
equivalent to that found in half a slice of Wonder Bread. (His mother, whose
enzyme activity is about 40 percent of normal, does well by not eating meat.)

   Before Sonny died, the 14-year-old stood little more than 3 feet tall and
weighed just 37 pounds. His hands were permanently fisted and he could not walk
or speak.

   When he was born in 1981, he appeared to be the picture of health, weighing
in at 6 pounds, 11 ounces. Three days later, nurses noticed he had become
lethargic. Vomiting followed, and then the infant slipped into a coma.

   Simon said Sonny's brain damage was the result of feeding her son
high-protein formula before doctors detected the illness.

   While growing up, Sonny's ammonia levels spiked frequently, sending him to
the emergency room about three times a month. Hospital stays lasted anywhere
from three days to three weeks.

   Later, the episodes slowed to one every six weeks or so, but they remained
frightening and disruptive for the family.

   "The medication that these children are on controls the disease," Simon said.
"But for any reason they can go out of control."

   Penn researchers are now trying to figure out what exactly killed Gelsinger.
They will present their findings to the federal agency that oversees human gene
therapy trials on Dec. 9.

   Gelsinger's death has done little to sway Sheedy and Simon from their faith
in the promise of a cure through gene therapy. While their husbands are leery of
the safety of gene therapy, both women say they would try it again in a
heartbeat.

   "I just don't know if there's anybody who can understand that unless you're a
mother," Simon said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Tish Simon lost her son, Sonny, (shown at age 2) to an inherited liver disorder.
After his death, she volunteered for gene therapy at Penn. The trial ended last
month after a patient died. (ROSE HOWERTER, Inquirer Suburban Staff)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1210 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   November 6, 1999, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Reminded To Report Deaths; FDA Responds to Gene Therapy
Flap

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:



   The Food and Drug Administration yesterday issued a firm reminder to doctors
and pharmaceutical company researchers involved in gene therapy studies that
they are required to tell federal health officials immediately about any deaths
or other serious side effects among patients who have received gene therapy.

   The letter came two days after The Washington Post reported that two research
teams had failed to provide such notification for six patients who had died
after receiving gene therapy in the past 19 months. The researchers said they
had reported the deaths promptly to the FDA, which generally keeps such
information secret, but not to the National Institutes of Health, which also
oversees gene therapy but reviews injury reports publicly.

   In yesterday's letter, Kathryn Zoon, director of the FDA's Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, also put researchers on notice that the
agency will turn death and injury reports over to the NIH if the researchers do
not.

   Gene therapy seeks to cure inherited diseases and cancer by giving patients
new genes. Because the science is still new and unproven, and because genetic
manipulation is controversial, the field has been held to a higher standard of
public scrutiny than conventional medical experimentation.

   For example, all researchers who gain federal approval to conduct gene
therapy studies get a letter from the NIH saying they must "immediately report
unexpected or serious adverse events" to the NIH Office of Recombinant DNA
Activities (ORDA), in addition to the FDA and other agencies to which other
researchers must report.

   Tufts University researcher Jeffrey Isner failed to report two deaths to ORDA
in a study of gene therapy for heart disease. Ronald Crystal at New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center didn't report four deaths to ORDA in a competing
heart disease study, and an additional death in a study of blocked blood vessels
in the leg. Crystal reported one other heart study death to ORDA but with an
unusual request that it be kept confidential.

   Earlier this week, the two researchers said the deaths were not related to
the gene therapy but to the patients' underlying illnesses, and they did not
believe they were required to report them promptly to ORDA. They said they told
the NIH about the deaths in summary reports recently requested by ORDA, and in
response to a special appeal from the agency for any unfiled reports of deaths
or illnesses. The appeal followed the death in September of a teenager
undergoing gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania, thought to be the
first directly caused by a genetic treatment.

   Amy Patterson, director of ORDA, said summary filings provide too little
information too late. "The guidelines are quite clear on this that serious
adverse events are to be reported immediately," she said.

   Moreover, she said, the rules require all deaths and serious illnesses to be
reported, regardless of whether they seem to have been caused by the therapy,
because all information can be helpful in such a new field of research and
subsequent research might prove those conclusions wrong. The FDA notice to that
effect was prominently posted yesterday on the agency's Web site and forwarded
to the NIH, which may distribute the notice directly to researchers.

   On Thursday, Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) sent a letter to NIH chief Harold
Varmus expressing his "great concern" about the cases in which deaths were not
reported to the NIH.

   "I was troubled that these deaths were not reported to the NIH, and it raises
several questions regarding the clarity and enforcement of NIH guidelines for
gene therapy research," wrote Frist, who is a member of the Health, Education,
Labor and Pensions Committee.

   Frist asked Varmus to provide details of the controversy to him within two
weeks, including an explanation of how the NIH intends to ensure that any lack
of compliance with federal regulations does not happen again.


LOAD-DATE: November 06, 1999


                             1211 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               November 5, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      November 5, 1999 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 10B

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: CHEERS & JEERS

BODY:

   CHEERS ... to the Lorain Board of Education for adopting the requirement that
teachers dress appropriately for work. The local teachers union shouldn't fight
this response to a concern expressed by parents.

   JEERS ... to gene therapy researchers Ronald Crystal of the New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan and Jeffrey Isner of Tufts
University in Boston. They have lost a total of six patients in their separate
heart research projects, but kept that information from the National Institutes
of Health because they doubted that the therapy was directly responsible for the
deaths. That's not their decision to make, and their actions represent a serious
breach of both good scientific practice and research ethics.

   CHEERS ... to skater Timothy Goebel, who trains at Lakewood's Winterhurst Ice
Rink, for becoming the first skater in history to land three quadruple jumps in
a single program. He said he surprised even himself, and better-known skaters
are talking as if they feel the ice beneath them thinning.

   JEERS ... to Omobinike Odegbami, a former graduate student at Bowling Green
State University who reported receiving racist and threatening e-mail messages.
She has since admitted that she wouldn't have gotten them if she hadn't sent
them to herself. The world has enough problems without people fabricating more.

   CHEERS ... to Cincinnati's creation of a Web site to showcase urban
neighborhoods for potential homebuyers. A city that makes it easier to shop for
housing just might benefit. Cleveland officials should keep an eye on this.

   JEERS ... to Baltimore Ravens coach Brian Billick for whining about referee
calls before this weekend's game even begins. Billick accused the National
Football League of favoring the Browns and said he knew the Ravens wouldn't "get
a call in Cleveland, no way, no shape, no form, no how." Is the league going to
take this nonsense from a rookie head coach?

   CHEERS ... to the small minority of registered voters here who braved cold,
wind, rain and even snow to do their civic duty on Tuesday. In some close races,
just a few dedicated individuals made the difference.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1999


                             1212 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 4, 1999, Thursday ,City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: Physicians deny deaths unreported;
Researchers dispute NIH officials' claim

BYLINE: By Richard A. Kno, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Contradicting federal health officials, a Boston heart researcher said his
company informed the National Institutes of Health about two deaths that have
occurred in a high-visibility gene therapy study.

    However, an NIH spokesman last night said Dr. Jeffrey Isner failed to report
the deaths immediately. "The guidelines are clear and specific on that matter,"
said spokesman Donald Ralbovsky.

    NIH officials said this week that Isner, of St. Elizabeth's Hospital, and
Dr. Ronald Crystal, of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York,
failed to report a half-dozen deaths that have occurred in gene therapy trials
being conducted independently by the two researchers. Both physicians hold
equity interests in companies whose business plans partly depend upon the
success of the research.

    The studies are testing two novel approaches that aim to grow new coronary
blood vessels to bypass patients' clogged arteries.

    Isner and Crystal said yesterday they had not concealed the deaths. Not only
were the Boston deaths reported to the NIH directly in August, but both Isner
and Crystal said they had published reports on some of the deaths and discussed
others at public scientific meetings.

    One of the Boston deaths occurred a year ago, and the other in July, Isner
said.

    Both Isner and Crystal also said they had reported all the deaths promptly
to the US Food and Drug Administration, as required by law. But officials in the
NIH office, which has looser authority over gene therapy, noted this week that
FDA reports are kept secret, and that researchers should report study deaths to
NIH officials as well so the news can be disseminated widely.

    Isner and Crystal said, in separate interviews, that there have been a total
of eight deaths among 100 patients enrolled in studies conducted by the two
competing research teams. The Washington Post yesterday reported six deaths
between the two separate studies.

    The controversy has erupted just as results of the first large-scale human
studies of various gene therapy approaches are emerging. The death of an
18-year-old man in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy study in September
has sensitized regulators and researchers to the possibility of unexpected
hazards in the new field.

    However, the heart researchers said the deaths in their studies involved
older patients with end-stage heart disease who were considered beyond the help
of conventional heart surgery because their coronary arteries were so severely
blocked. The one exception was a patient being treated with gene therapy for
clogged leg arteries, but he died of pancreatitis, which was unlikely to be
related to the gene therapy, Crystal said.

    One of the Boston deaths involved a 71-year-old woman who died about six
months after genes for a blood vessel growth factor called VEGF-1 were injected
into her heart. The other was a 59-year-old man who received genes for VEGF-2, a
slightly different growth factor, about four months ago, and died within 24
hours of a heart rhythm disturbance.

    In both cases, and in the six cases in Crystal's studies, the researchers
decided that the deaths were not due to gene therapy. They said in interviews
that FDA reviewers agreed with them, allowing the studies to go forward.

    The situation raises old ethical questions in a new context. For instance,
should researchers running human studies own stock in companies that stand to
benefit from the outcome? When clinical researchers do have equity in such
companies, should they be relied upon to make public serious adverse effects,
such as deaths, that occur during the studies?

    Harvard Medical School's policy does not allow researchers with substantial
financial interest in companies to participate in clinical trials of their
products. But other medical schools do not have such proscriptions.

    "I feel comfortable with the way things are," Isner said, when asked about
his dual roles as a Vascular Genetics stockholder and leader of the gene therapy
trial.

    Crystal, who owns stock in GenVac, a company sponsoring the gene therapy
experiments with Parke-Davis Warner Lambert Pharmaceuticals, said he does not
plan to be involved in phase 2 gene therapy trials, but defended his right to
participate in phase studies, which are aimed at demonstrating safety.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: November 04, 1999


                             1213 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    November 4, 1999 Thursday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 014

LENGTH: 504 words

HEADLINE: Deaths of patients cloud experiments in gene therapy

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   The deaths of several patients undergoing gene therapy experiments, including
two at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, have raised questions about the future of
the new drugs that promise to revolutionize the treatment of disease.

   "We have to take a long, hard look at human experiments and see if we are
ready to do them," said Arthur Caplan, a leading biomedical ethicist.

   The deaths came to light after federal officials asked gene researchers to
report any undisclosed fatalities following the September death of a teenager
undergoing gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

   In that case, the 18-year-old died suddenly of liver failure four days after
he received an injection of therapeutic genes designed to correct a genetic
liver disease.

   It was the first death linked directly to gene therapy, which seeks to
replace or supplement faulty genes with healthy ones.

   Afterward, the Food and Drug Administration halted the trial, clouding the
future of it and many other gene therapy experiments now under way or planned.

   But the newly reported deaths appear not to have been attributable to the
gene experiments, researchers said.

   The deaths occurred in heart studies headed by Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St.
Elizabeth's and Tufts Medical School and Ronald Crystal of New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center. The research involves injections of genes into
the heart to grow new blood vessels.

   Isner said two of 60 patients getting the gene injections died of their
underlying heart conditions, not from the gene therapy.

   He said the deaths were reported to the FDA within 24 hours as required and
said the FDA agreed that the deaths were not the result of the gene therapy
experiments.

   "We have their consent to go on with the protocols," he said.

   Still, some believe gene experiments may be moving too fast.

   "I think it will be a wonderful addition to medicine's arsenal in about 50
years," Caplan said. "But it's going to take a long time to get genes to go
where you want them to, stay there and do what you want them to do."

   A leading expert on gene therapy, speaking at a recent conference in
Cambridge, said that while the Pennsylvania death was sobering and must be
considered a setback, research will continue and gene therapy will move on.

   "People were affected by it," said Inder Verma of the Salk Institute for
Biological Studies. "They suddenly realize that it can be dangerous. That's a
step forward."

   Verma told the conference sponsored by the Whitehead Institute that the
problem was in the method of delivery of the gene therapy, not in the therapy
itself.

   To deliver the therapeutic gene to the liver, the researchers attached it to
a genetically modified respiratory virus.    Verma said it was the virus - the
delivery agent - that killed the patient. "He got an enormous amount of virus,
the highest dose ever given," he said. "And he died of a viral infection."

   The tragedy "will not result in a slowdown in gene therapy, but in the use of
adenoviruses," he said.


LOAD-DATE: November 04, 1999


                             1214 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                     November 4, 1999 Thursday West Edition

SECTION: MET; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 420 words

HEADLINE: Asthma-free mice bred at UC

BYLINE: TIM BONFIELD, The Cincinnati Enquirer

BODY:

   Step may lead to gene therapy for humans

   By TIM BONFIELD

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   University of Cincinnati researchers have developed a genetically altered
mouse that can breathe massive amounts of smog without suffering asthma attacks.

   Test results from the new transgenic mice were published in today's edition
of the Journal of Biological Chemistry by Drs. Stephen Liggett and Dennis
McGraw, who have spent the past two years on the asthma mouse project.

   The special mice, researchers say, are a key early step on a long path toward
developing a genetic therapy for asthma, which affects about 15 million
Americans.

   In a human or mouse asthma attack, exposure to various irritants such as smog
can cause the smooth muscles of the airway to constrict, thus making it hard to
breathe. Many asthma medications are based on chemicals that cause those muscles
to relax.

   With the engineered mice, the researchers have permanently altered DNA so
that the red-eyed, white-furred rodents express large amounts of the human
beta-2 adrenergic receptor, which helps relax the smooth muscles of the airway
instead of a medication.

   Then they exposed the mice to high doses of ozone and other substances known
to trigger asthma attacks in normal mice. The engineered mice breathed the
harmful vapors as if nothing unusual happened.

   The difference in breathing was visible to the naked eye, but the researchers
also created special devices to measure the mouse breathing patterns.

   "Do you know how difficult it is to measure breathing in mice? They breathe
about 200 times a minute, and they only take in about (half a cubic centimeter)
per breath," Dr. Liggett said.

   Much more work is needed before this genetic therapy could be used for
humans.

   "This was a permanent gene modification for the mice that is transferred to
their pups," Dr. Liggett said. "We probably don't want to do that for people."

   The mouse DNA change involved harvesting fertilized eggs from some female
mice, injecting designer snippets of DNA, then implanting the eggs in other
female mice. UC has produced about 50 of the special mice so far and plans to
breed more.

   Even though the researchers have observed no harmful side effects from
rewriting this part of the mouse genetic code, ethical concerns may prevent
similar embryo treatment in humans, Dr. Liggett said.

   Instead, the researchers hope to produce a genetic medication that could be
absorbed by fully developed human lungs and last three to six months between
treatments.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2003


                             1215 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        November 4, 1999, Thursday State

SECTION: News Pg. 19

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: Scientists chided for failing to tell NIH about deaths
 Researchers insist 6 deaths in gene experiments were not caused by treatment

BYLINE: DEBORAH NELSON AND RICK WEISS

SOURCE: Washington Post

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   Scientists and drug companies have failed to notify the National Institutes
of Health about six deaths that occurred in gene therapy experiments in the past
19 months, keeping details of the deaths from becoming public, according to
interviews with researchers and federal officials.

   The deaths are the first in gene therapy to come to light that were purposely
withheld from the NIH, one of two federal agencies charged with overseeing the
safety of the controversial field of medical research, which seeks to cure
diseases by giving patients new genes.

   The lack of disclosure provides new evidence of a shift toward secrecy in
gene therapy, traditionally one of the more open fields of medical research, and
reflects escalating efforts by gene therapy companies to weaken federal
reporting regulations.

   Confirmation of the six deaths follows revelations last week of a death and
two serious illnesses in gene therapy patients that were reported to the NIH
with the unprecedented insistence that they be kept confidential, in defiance of
a long-standing agency policy of public disclosure.

   The six deaths occurred in heart studies headed by two leading gene
researchers -- Ronald Crystal of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in
Manhattan and Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University in Boston. The two are racing to
be the first to grow new blood vessels around blocked ones as an alternative to
bypass surgery.

   Crystal and Isner said that unlike the widely reported death of a teenage
patient at the University of Pennsylvania in September, they believe that the
fatalities in their studies were not directly caused by the gene therapy but by
complications stemming from the patients' underlying illnesses.

   Because they decided the deaths weren't caused by gene therapy, they argued,
federal regulations don't require them to notify the NIH -- a new interpretation
of those regulations that stands in sharp contrast to the one held by NIH
officials and a decade of practice.

   The researchers said they reported the deaths to the Food and Drug
Administration, which keeps such information secret.

   But NIH officials in the federal office that oversees gene therapy are
adamant that even deaths not initially believed to have been caused by the
therapy must be reported to the NIH and made public, because often it is not
clear until later whether the therapy actually caused the deaths.


LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1999


                             1216 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 4, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: A Death Puts Gene Therapy Under Increasing Scrutiny

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3

BODY:

   Six weeks after an 18-year-old Arizona man died unexpectedly in a gene
therapy experiment, the field's safety record is coming under increasing
scrutiny, and new information is coming to light about patients who may have
been harmed in other clinical trials.

   Of particular concern to federal health officials are studies that employ an
inactivated cold virus, adenovirus, as what scientists call the vector that
carries new genes to the proper cells. The Arizona patient, Jesse Gelsinger, 18,
died four days after doctors at the University of Pennsylvania injected a
corrective gene, encased in a deactivated adenovirus, into the hepatic artery,
which leads to the liver.

    Leading scientists and government officials said Mr. Gelsinger was the only
person known to have died as a direct result of receiving gene therapy. Other
patients receiving gene therapy have died, but doctors treating them in the
trials say their diseases, not the therapy, killed them. What remains unknown is
how many patients experienced side effects directly related to gene therapy and
what they were.

   Today, a spokesman for the Schering-Plough Corporation said three liver
cancer patients who had been treated the same way as Mr. Gelsinger had
experienced serious side effects that might have been related to their therapy.

   The spokesman, Robert Consalvo, would not disclose details, except to say
that the Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health had
been notified. "These were reported prior to the Penn study death," Mr. Consalvo
said. "The similarity is that we were using an intra-hepatic artery route of
administration."

   In the wake of Mr. Gelsinger's death, the F.D.A. temporarily halted two
Schering-Plough gene therapy experiments using adenovirus, one for the treatment
of liver cancer and another for colorectal cancer that had spread to the liver.
At the same time, the health institutes office that oversees gene therapy has
asked all scientists using adenovirus vectors to submit data relating to patient
safety.

   The data will be made public Dec.  8 and 9 at a meeting of the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee, the health institutes' panel that reviews gene therapy
protocols. In preparation for that meeting, committee staff members, as well as
F.D.A. officials, have been analyzing the safety reports in an attempt to
determine if there are connections between experiments that might shed light on
Mr. Gelsinger's death, or if there are circumstances in which the adenovirus
vector should no longer be used.

   "The promise of adenovirus was that it's the common cold virus, so how bad
could it be?" Dr. Amy Patterson, who directs the health institutes' office that
provides administrative support to the committee, said in an interview last
week.

   Dr. Patterson said her office had been receiving "disparate reports" of drops
in platelet counts, fever and flu-like symptoms among patients who received gene
therapy with adenovirus. "There are enough reports now that we can start to
piece together an accurate description" of what the patients experienced, she
said.

   Scientists already know that inactivated adenovirus causes an inflammatory
reaction and flu-like symptoms in patients who receive it in experiments. There
are currently about 50 gene therapy trials using the adenovirus vector, and
while its loss would not be a devastating blow for the field, it would
undoubtedly slow down certain aspects of the research.

   While there there are other, safer versions of adenovirus vector in
development, said Dr. Savio Woo, president of the American Society for Gene
Therapy, they are not yet ready for testing in patients. Dr. Woo said that it
was probably safe for scientists to inject the adenovirus currently in use
directly into tumors or muscle. But he said scientists would have to be
extremely careful about putting it into the bloodstream, at least until the
cause of Mr. Gelsinger's death is fully understood.

   "We don't know whether this particular incident is a freak incident or the
beginning of a trend," Dr. Woo said. "That has to be critically evaluated by the
F.D.A." and the the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee.

   The government's gene therapy inquiry comes amid growing concern that some
researchers and companies have not been entirely forthcoming with information
about the technology's harmful side effects, as well as patient deaths from
causes other than gene therapy. Typically, companies experimenting with new
drugs and therapies are monitored by the Food and Drug Administration, which
keeps information about deaths and adverse reactions secret until a drug is
approved.

   But gene therapy has always been held to a higher standard. The health
institutes' advisory committee was established in the early days of the research
to foster public discussion. But in recent years its role has been scaled back,
and scientists have apparently begun reporting primarily to the F.D.A.,
sidestepping the health institutes' panel, which conducts all its business in
public.

   Schering-Plough, for instance, has insisted that information about the side
effects of gene therapy be classified as a proprietary trade secret. In
addition, a researcher at New YorkHospital Cornell Medical Center, Dr. Ronald G.
Crystal, reported to the health institutes last year the death of a heart
disease patient in gene therapy trials, but asked that it be "kept confidential
and not part of the public record."

   Today, The Washington Post reported that six additional deaths had been
reported to the F.D.A., but not to the advisory committee. The researchers
involved, who include Dr. Crystal, said the deaths had been caused by the
patients' underlying disease, as opposed to gene therapy, and so they did not
believe they had to report them.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1999


                             1217 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 4, 1999, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: PUTTING LIFE ON ICE TO HOLD OFF DEATH

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Dr. Peter Safar is telling Death to take a chill.

   A person on the verge of death for lack of a pulse might be safely
transported to a hospital, the Pittsburgh doctor suggests, if the patient can be
rapidly cooled and placed in a state of suspended animation.

   He talked about the idea at a symposium yesterday celebrating the 20th
anniversary of UPMC Presbyterian's Safar Center for Resuscitation Research, an
institution that is unmatched in the Western Hemisphere for the scope of its
critical care research - from DNA to disasters, as Safar put it.

   Suspended animation doesn't seem farfetched when it comes from the man who
pioneered mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and the life-saving steps that comprise
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR; made paramedics and emergency medical
services a commonplace reality; and launched the field of critical care medicine
and the country's first intensive care unit.

   Despite such advances, half of all people who have a cardiac arrest outside
of hospitals cannot be revived, Safar said.

   "When CPR attempts are made at the scene, first by bystanders and then by
medics, they can't get the heart restarted and they give up," Safar said. "Many
of those [patients] have hearts too good to die and brains too good to die."

   Safar and an Army doctor proposed suspended animation in 1984 as a solution
to chest and belly injuries soldiers sustained on the battlefield.  If a wounded
soldier's organs were quickly "pickled" when his pulse and breathing stopped, he
could be transported to an operating room for treatment.

   "That might require one to two hours of clinical death and making it
reversible," Safar said. He and his research team accomplished that feat in
animal experiments in the early 1990s, but the procedure required a heart-lung
bypass machine, which would not be available in the field.

   They have since developed an alternative strategy that doesn't require the
bypass machine initially. It has been tested in animals and they are now
searching for drugs that would make the cooling process more efficient.

   He hopes that this method for saving bleeding patients could be adapted to
save the lives of cardiac arrest patients who do not respond to conventional
CPR.

   In that scenario, a patient who collapses from a stalled heart might first
get basic CPR from bystanders. The paramedic arrives and performs treatments
such as administering drugs or shocks to start the heart. An emergency
physician, who rides on the ambulance, meanwhile threads a catheter from a blood
vessel in the patient's groin into the aorta. If the heart doesn't respond to
the usual therapies, the doctor will push an icy fluid into the aorta through
the catheter, flushing the heart.

   The team may try again to start the heart. If it doesn't beat, more icy fluid
will be given to flush the brain and chill it. By this time, the patient will
not have a heartbeat.

   "You push the brain temperature down as low as you can as fast as you can,"
Safar explained. "And transport the dead."

   In the hospital, the patient would be put on a bypass machine to resume blood
circulation in place of the heart, buying time for evaluation of that organ and
the brain and for appropriate treatment. The patient might thus be "reanimated."

   "It's a crazy, expensive prospect," Safar said.

   "It sounds like Disney or something, but it's very serious science," said Dr.
Patrick Kochanek, director of the Safar center.

   Along with suspended animation and studies of mild hypothermia, programs at
the center focus on traumatic brain injury, including the molecular disruptions
it causes and strategies to minimize cell death and preserve brain tissue.
Kochanek's team is also working on developing gene therapies for the treatment
of acute brain injuries.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1999


                             1218 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   November 3, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 290 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF

BYLINE: From our news services

SOURCE: JOURNAL

BODY:
Experts assigned to Korea probe
The Pentagon is calling in a panel of outside experts to aid its investigation
into alleged killings by U.S. soldiers of South Korean civilians at No Gun Ri. A
former congressman, the retired commander of U.N. forces in Korea and five
others joined the investigation Tuesday to advise Army investigators and the
Pentagon steering committee overseeing the inquiry into the Korean War deaths.
''(Our purpose is) to uncover the truth wherever it is, whatever it is,''
Defense Department spokesman Kenneth Bacon said Tuesday in Washington.

Researchers fail to report deaths
Two researchers trying to grow new blood vessels around blocked ones failed to
report to the National Institutes of Health that six people died during their
gene therapy studies. Ronald Crystal of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical
Center in Manhattan and Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University in Boston told The
Washington Post in today's editions they believe the six patients died from
underlying illnesses. The Food and Drug Administration ordered Schering-Plough
Corp. to temporarily halt new enrollments in two gene therapy studies last week
after a teen-ager in a similar experiment died Sept. 16.

Federal officials probe reported radio payola
Federal officials are investigating radio programmers at nearly 80 stations who
allegedly took bribes to play songs, the Los Angeles Times reported today.  The
new inquiry stems from a two-year payola investigation of Fonovisa Inc., the
nation's largest Spanish-language music label, which admitted to paying up to $
1 million to programmers. Mexican media giant Grupo Televisa, which owns
Fonovisa, reported the illegal activities and cooperated with authorities.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1999


                             1219 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 3, 1999, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 1120 words

HEADLINE: NAMES & FACES / CAROL BEGGY AND BETH CARNEY;
Material from wire services and other sources was used in this column. Names &
Faces can be reached by e-mail at names@globe.com or by calling 617-929-8253.;
CAMMARATA MAKES IT TWO FOR ONE

BYLINE: By Carol Beggy and Beth Carney

BODY:






   TJX chairman Ben Cammarata is doing double duty on the charity circuit this
week; he's guest of honor at two major fund-raisers benefiting the Crohns and
Colitis Foundation. Cammarata agreed to be Man of the Year at the group's annual
black-tie dinner Saturday at the Four Seasons, which attracts about 300 guests.
But the businessman invited so many to support the charity that organizers had
to add a second event tomorrow at the Sheraton Hotel, which will draw about
1,000.  Within 48 hours, the two parties raised $2.6 million, said organizers,
who hope the tally will reach $3 million.

 The sky must be falling

   Harvard law prof Alan Dershowitz has a role in HBO's animated show "Henny
Penny" that could please critics. In the retelling of the Chicken Little story,
the Dersh plays the barnyard character Turkey Lurkey. Other celebs in the
episode of the "Happily Ever After" series, airing next month, include star
lawyer Johnnie Cochran, who plays Foxy Loxy; the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who plays
the rooster Cocky Locky; "Entertainment Tonight" anchor Mary Hart, who plays
Lucy Goosey; and New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and former congresswoman
Geraldine Ferraro, who play a pair of bickering squirrels.

 Art shot down

   Local sculptor Ken Hruby has been cut out of an upcoming art show at the
federal courthouse. The exhibit, sponsored by the group Artists For Humanity,
features mainly pieces from the National Vietnam Veterans Art Museum in Chicago.
When Hruby, a Vietnam veteran, was invited to contribute, he chose "a
phantasmagorical thing" that looks like a horn turning into a rifle because it
"was easily transportable and not too angst-ridden." But he got a call last
night saying that the courthouse officials censored it because it resembled a
weapon. "I said, wait a minute. Isn't that what the Vietnam War was about?" said
Hruby, who noted that the show's invitation featured four weapons. No one from
Artists for Humanity or the courthouse was available to comment last night.

 Dishing it up

   The sea scallops in a bed of saffron-flavored cauliflower were delicious, the
veal cheeks with chestnuts tender as butter, but it was the basil sorbet and
tarragon ice cream that put the annual Femmes de Fleur Evening over the top
Monday and drew raves from the tough crowd of chefs and caterers. The dinner at
South End eatery Truc, sponsored by Champagne Perrier-Jouet to honor women chefs
and their protegees, drew the likes of Lydia Shire, Susan Regis, Deborah Hughes,
Ann Robert, and grande dame Julia Child, who came straight from the airport
after a day of filming her new show in New York with Jacques Pepin. This year's
chef was Amanda Lydon, daughter of "The Connection" host Christopher Lydon, who
just last year attended as a protegee.

 Boss bows out; Ricky cracks down

   Bruce Springsteen postponed two shows this week in Minneapolis because his
wife and bandmate, Patti Scialfa, has a perforated eardrum. No details were
released Monday on how she suffered the injury. The Boss has been touring with
his E Street Band since July. . . . Singer Ricky Martin has won a court order
barring the sale of counterfeit Martin T-shirts. US District Judge Barbara
Hackett issued the order several hours before the pop star performed Monday in
Ann Arbor, Mich.

 Celebs flock to Hub

   Writer-actor-director Alan Alda will bring his PBS show "Scientific American
Frontiers" to Boston next week. The show will shoot a segment on planets at the
Harvard astrophysics lab and another on gene therapy at St. Elizabeth's
Hospital. Alda and company will film Children's Hospital chief surgeon Richard
Jonas as he performs surgery on an 18-month-old and hang out with Brandeis prof
Jordan Pollack and some of his graduate students. Pollack designs things on
computers and then builds them with Legos. . . . Actor Danny Glover will join
Mayor Tom Menino, Boston schools superintendent Thomas Payzant, and Lesley
College president Margaret McKenna in marking the Cambridge college's 90th
anniversary. The birthday event will take place Sunday at the opening of a
three-day conference on literacy that Lesley is hosting at the Hynes convention
center.

   Nothing ambiguous about the charge

   Wallace Langham, who plays sexually ambiguous Josh on TV's "Veronica's
Closet," hurled homosexual slurs at, and then physically attacked, a stringer
for the Star tabloid newspaper, police said Monday. A spokesman for the L.A.
D.A. said the incident began Sept. 7 in a supermarket when the stringer, 35,
gazed at the tattoos on Langham's girlfriend's exposed arms and midriff. At that
point, Langham, 34, let loose with words, punches, and kicks, the spokesman
said. Hayley Sumner, a spokeswoman for the actor, said he was defending his
girlfriend against insults by the stringer, and added that before filing
charges, the stringer approached Langham's people demanding a large sum of
money.

                   The Green get going, with a nod to Red

   Norwell blueswoman Susan Tedeschi is scheduled to sing the national anthem
tonight to tap off the Celtics' season in Boston. The home opener also marks Red
Auerbach's 50th anniversary with the Celtics' organization. The team has planned
a ceremony for halftime, featuring Celtic greats Bill Russell and Tom Heinsohn,
who will assist Auerbach when he raises a banner commemorating his 50 years.

   SIDEBAR:

   VOICES ARE CHANGING AT 'RKO

       Things are shuffling around at all-talk radio station WRKO.

   This week two familiar radio personalities have taken over the AM station's
7-to-10-p.m. slot. Darlene McCarthy, the palatable half of the morning show
"Katz and McCarthy," which program director Al Mayers mercifully put out of its
misery about a month ago, is being joined by Lori Kramer.

   Kramer, the stronger half of the former "Two Chicks Dishing," previously held
court in the nighttime hours on 'RKO. After splitting with on-air partner Leslie
Gold in February, Kramer moved to New York and has been a host on all-talk
eYada.com Internet gossip and celebrity site. Until Kramer can work out the
logistics to get back to Boston, the duo will be assisted by WRKO Sunday
afternoon show hosts Doreen Iudica Vigue, a Boston Globe staff member, and Ellen
O'Brien, a Boston journalist and former reporter for the Globe.

   One casualty of the changes is nighttime show "That Guy Tai" host Tom Irwin,
who came to 'RKO after several years with alternative FM station WFNX.

   Additionally, the station has signed on political consultant Michael Goldman

  and Tom Moroney, a columnist for the MetroWest Daily News, as hosts of the
10-a.m.-to-1-p.m. Saturday spot.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, DIAMONDS ARE - Marilyn Monroe expert and fashion historian Gene
London unpacks the dress that Monroe wore to sing "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best
Friend" in the movie "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes." London was working at Shreve
Crump & Low yesterday to get ready for tomorrow's opening of a display of the
Mikimoto pearl strands Joe DiMaggio gave Monroe when they were married. Mikimoto
recently reacquired the pearls. GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/MARK WILSON

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                             1220 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 3, 1999, Wednesday ,City Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 1099 words

HEADLINE: Cammarata makes it two for one;
NAMES & FACES;
Material from wire services and other sources was used in this column. Names &
Faces can be reached by e-mail at names(AT SIGN SYMBOL)globe.com.

BYLINE: By Carol Beggy and Beth Carney

BODY:

   TJX chairman Ben Cammarata is doing double duty on the charity circuit this
week; he's guest of honor at two major fund-raisers benefiting the Crohns and
Colitis Foundation. Cammarata agreed to be Man of the Year at the group's annual
black-tie dinner Saturday at the Four Seasons, which attracts about 300 guests.
But the businessman invited so many to support the charity that organizers had
to add a second event tomorrow at the Sheraton Hotel, which will draw about
1,000. Within 48 hours, the two parties raised $2.6 million, said organizers,
who hope the tally will reach $3 million.

   The sky must be falling

    Harvard law prof Alan Dershowitz has a role in HBO's animated show "Henny
Penny" that could please critics. In the retelling of the Chicken Little story,
the Dersh plays the barnyard character Turkey Lurkey. Other celebs in the
episode of the "Happily Ever After" series, airing next month, include star
lawyer Johnnie Cochran, who plays Foxy Loxy; the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who plays
the rooster Cocky Locky; "Entertainment Tonight" anchor Mary Hart, who plays
Lucy Goosey; and New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and former congresswoman
Geraldine Ferraro, who play a pair of bickering squirrels.

   Art shot down

    Local sculptor Ken Hruby has been cut out of an upcoming art show at the
federal courthouse. The exhibit, sponsored by the group Artists For Humanity,
features mainly pieces from the National Vietnam Veterans Art Museum in Chicago.
When Hruby, a Vietnam veteran, was invited to contribute, he chose "a
phantasmagorical thing" that looks like a horn turning into a rifle because it
"was easily transportable and not too angst-ridden." But he got a call last
night saying that the courthouse officials censored it because it resembled a
weapon. "I said, wait a minute. Isn't that what the Vietnam War was about?" said
Hruby, who noted that the show's invitation featured four weapons. No one from
Artists for Humanity or the courthouse was available to comment last night.

   Dishing it up

    The sea scallops in a bed of saffron-flavored cauliflower were delicious,
the veal cheeks with chestnuts tender as butter, but it was the basil sorbet and
tarragon ice cream that put the annual Femmes de Fleur Evening over the top
Monday and drew raves from the tough crowd of chefs and caterers. The dinner at
South End eatery Truc, sponsored by Champagne Perrier-Jouet to honor women chefs
and their protegees, drew the likes of Lydia Shire, Susan Regis, Deborah Hughes,
Ann Robert, and grande dame Julia Child, who came straight from the airport
after a day of filming her new show in New York with Jacques Pepin. This year's
chef was Amanda Lydon, daughter of "The Connection" host Christopher Lydon, who
just last year attended as a protegee.

   Boss bows out; Ricky cracks down

    Bruce Springsteen postponed two shows this week in Minneapolis because his
wife and bandmate, Patti Scialfa, has a perforated eardrum. No details were
released Monday on how she suffered the injury. The Boss has been touring with
his E Street Band since July. . . . Singer Ricky Martin has won a court order
barring the sale of counterfeit Martin T-shirts. US District Judge Barbara
Hackett issued the order several hours before the pop star performed Monday in
Ann Arbor, Mich.

   Celebs flock to Hub

    Writer-actor-director Alan Alda will bring his PBS show "Scientific American
Frontiers" to Boston next week. The show will shoot a segment on planets at the
Harvard astrophysics lab and another on gene therapy at St. Elizabeth's
Hospital. Alda and company will film Children's Hospital chief surgeon Richard
Jonas as he performs surgery on an 18-month-old and hang out with Brandeis prof
Jordan Pollack and some of his graduate students. Pollack designs things on
computers and then builds them with Legos. . . . Actor Danny Glover will join
Mayor Tom Menino, Boston schools superintendent Thomas Payzant, and Lesley
College president Margaret McKenna in marking the Cambridge college's 90th
anniversary. The birthday event will take place Sunday at the opening of a
three-day conference on literacy that Lesley is hosting at the Hynes convention
center.

   Nothing ambiguous about the charge

    Wallace Langham, who plays sexually ambiguous Josh on TV's "Veronica's
Closet," hurled homosexual slurs at, and then physically attacked, a stringer
for the Star tabloid newspaper, police said Monday. A spokesman for the L.A.
D.A. said the incident began Sept. 7 in a supermarket when the stringer, 35,
gazed at the tattoos on Langham's girlfriend's exposed arms and midriff. At that
point, Langham, 34, let loose with words, punches, and kicks, the spokesman
said. Hayley Sumner, a spokeswoman for the actor, said he was defending his
girlfriend against insults by the stringer, and added that before filing
charges, the stringer approached Langham's people demanding a large sum of
money.

   The Green get going, with a nod to Red

    Norwell blueswoman Susan Tedeschi is scheduled to sing the national anthem
tonight to tap off the Celtics' season in Boston. The home opener also marks Red
Auerbach's 50th anniversary with the Celtics' organization. The team has planned
a ceremony for halftime, featuring Celtic greats Bill Russell and Tom Heinsohn,
who will assist Auerbach when he raises a banner commemorating his 50 years.

   Voices are changing at 'RKO

    Things are shuffling around at all-talk radio station WRKO.

    This week two familiar radio personalities have taken over the AM station's
7-to-10-p.m. slot. Darlene McCarthy, the palatable half of the morning show
"Katz and McCarthy," which program director Al Mayers mercifully put out of its
misery about a month ago, is being joined by Lori Kramer.

    Kramer, the stronger half of the former "Two Chicks Dishing," previously
held court in the nighttime hours on 'RKO. After splitting with on-air partner
Leslie Gold in February, Kramer moved to New York and has been a host on
all-talk eYada.com Internet gossip and celebrity site.

    Until Kramer can work out the logistics to get back to Boston, the duo will
be assisted by WRKO Sunday afternoon show hosts Doreen Iudica Vigue, a Boston
Globe staff member, and Ellen O'Brien, a Boston journalist and former reporter
for the Globe.

    One casualty of the changes is nighttime show "That Guy Tai" host Tom Irwin,
who came to 'RKO after several years with alternative FM station WFNX.

    Additionally, the station has signed on political consultant Michael Goldman
and Tom Moroney, a columnist for the MetroWest Daily News, as hosts of the
10-a.m.-to-1-p.m. Saturday spot.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: November 03, 1999


                             1221 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 3, 1999, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 176 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFLY / BIOTECHNOLOGY;
 CHIRON CUTS BACK 2 RESEARCH PROGRAMS

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:


   Chiron Corp. said it plans to cut spending for two early-stage research
programs involving vaccines and gene therapy so it can meet a target of
increasing earnings per share by 25% next year. Emeryville, Calif. -based
Chiron, one of the world's largest biotechnology companies, said the two
programs employ about 90 people. Those employees, most of them in California,
may not lose their jobs because Chiron will look to partnerships or spinoffs to
keep the programs running. The move will help keep spending on research and
development flat next year at about $ 290 million, a spokeswoman said. Chiron
Chief Executive Sean Lance is trying to focus Chiron's efforts on programs most
likely to lead to development of products with potential to be blockbusters. The
company, 44% owned by Swiss drug maker Novartis, has long been criticized for
its inability to cash in on its research. Separately, Chiron said its board
authorized the repurchase of up to 4 million of the company's shares. Chiron
shares fell 6 cents to close at $ 28.25 on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1999


                             1222 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               November 3, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    November 3, 1999 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 286 words

HEADLINE: MOEN TO REPLACE BUTZ AS CHIEF OF BIOTECH FIRM COPERNICUS

BYLINE: By ZACH SCHILLER; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Beachwood-based Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. has named Dr. Robert C. Moen as
its president and chief executive, replacing Robert F. Butz.

   Butz, who came to Cleveland from California in 1997 to run the company, said
he left because his wife, Polly Sanderson, had been unable to find a job in the
drug or biotechnology industry in the Cleveland area.

   She has been vice president of development for a privately held biotechnology
company in Research Triangle Park in North Carolina. Butz, who worked at another
company there for 18 years, will relocate to that area.

   Moen, 49, who had been acting chief operating officer since last month and
had been on the Copernicus board since early last year, is a veteran of the
biotechnology and gene therapy field. Most recently, he had been vice president
of clinical and regulatory affairs for Baxter Healthcare Corp.'s Gene Therapy
Unit in Round Lake, Ill.

   Copernicus is developing delivery systems for gene therapy, the insertion of
genes into human cells to treat disease. Its work is based on technologies
developed at the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine.

   "Despite the dramatic progress with biomedical [devices] ... in Northeast
Ohio, there really aren't that many companies working on new therapeutic
[drugs]," Butz, 50, said.

   Besides his position at Copernicus, Butz has been an enthusiastic backer of
efforts to develop a larger biotechnology industry in Northeast Ohio. "The
vision we've all had of a 'Biotech Lake,' that's still on target,' Butz said.
However, progress on its development simply hasn't occurred quickly enough to
allow he and Sanderson to stay.

   He will continue as a consultant to the company for two months.

COLUMN: COMPANIES & PEOPLE

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1999


                             1223 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               November 3, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    November 3, 1999 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 763 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY DEATHS GOING UNREPORTED TO GOVERNMENT

BYLINE: By DEBORAH NELSON; and RICK WEISS; WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists and drug companies have failed to notify the National Institutes
of Health about six deaths that occurred in gene therapy experiments in the past
19 months, keeping details of the deaths from becoming public, according to
interviews with researchers and federal officials.

   The deaths are the first in gene therapy to come to light that were purposely
withheld from the NIH, one of two federal agencies charged with overseeing the
safety of the controversial field of medical research, which seeks to cure
diseases by giving patients new genes.

   Confirmation of the six deaths follows revelations last week of a death and
two serious illnesses in gene therapy patients that were reported to the NIH
with the unprecedented insistence that they be kept confidential, in defiance of
a long-standing agency policy of public disclosure.

   The six deaths occurred in heart studies headed by two leading gene
researchers - Ronald Crystal of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in
Manhattan and Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University in Boston. The two are racing to
be the first to grow new blood vessels around blocked ones as an alternative to
bypass surgery.

    Drawing distinctions

   Crystal and Isner said that, unlike the widely reported death of a teenage
patient at the University of Pennsylvania in September, they believe that the
fatalities in their studies were not directly caused by the gene therapy but by
complications stemming from the patients' underlying illnesses.

   Because they decided the deaths weren't caused by gene therapy, they argued,
federal regulations don't require them to notify the NIH - a new interpretation
of those regulations that stands in sharp contrast to the one held by NIH
officials and a decade of practice.

   The researchers said they reported the deaths to the Food and Drug
Administration, which keeps such information secret.

   But NIH officials in the federal office that oversees gene therapy are
adamant that even deaths not initially believed to have been caused by the
therapy must be reported to the NIH and made public, because often it is not
clear until later whether the therapy actually caused the deaths.

   "It may take five, six, seven patients ill, or 20 patients, before you find
out, 'Hey, this is also happening in other people's trials,' said Amy Patterson,
who heads the NIH Office of Recombinant DNA Activities (ORDA), which oversees
gene therapy studies. "And if you don't know what's going on in other people's
trials, then you can't put two and two together."

   The FDA can suspend a study if it determines that the therapy being tested is
dangerous, but the agency only makes such information public if the therapy
eventually is approved or with the permission of the study's sponsor.

    Disclosure sought

   Most of the new deaths are coming to light only because federal officials put
out a plea for gene researchers across the country to report any undisclosed
deaths or illnesses, after the death of the teenager at the University of
Pennsylvania. His death is thought to be the first directly caused by gene
therapy, and NIH officials are looking for indications of similar problems in
other studies that may not have been attributed to the treatments themselves.

   Carol Goodrich, a spokeswoman for Parke-Davis, which is sponsoring Crystal's
study, said the company had forwarded details of the deaths to ORDA on Oct. 20.
She said the deaths had previously been reported to the FDA, but she refused to
say whether that agency had agreed with the company's determination that the
deaths were not caused by the therapy.

   Federal regulations have long held genetic treatments to a higher level of
public scrutiny than conventional new therapies because of public discomfort
with the idea of manipulating people's genetic makeup.

   Isner and Crystal helped found competing gene therapy companies - Vascular
Genetics of Durham, N.C., and GenVec of Rockville, Md., respectively.

   Asked why he hadn't reported his deaths to the NIH, Isner said yesterday that
it was an oversight and, in any case, it was not clear that he had to.

   Crystal said Parke-Davis has assumed responsibility for reporting deaths to
the appropriate agencies. However, he added that while he supported the
reporting of deaths and illnesses to the NIH, he did not consider it a legal
requirement. He also said he believed that the NIH should keep some reports
confidential, particularly to protect patient privacy.

   Both researchers said they have discussed some of the deaths at scientific
meetings and in professional journals.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1999


                             1224 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 3, 1999 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1657 words

HEADLINE: Ageless wonders;
Creatures studied for key to longevity in humans

BYLINE: Eric Niiler

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES -- To Caleb Finch, the fountain of youth may be lurking in a fish
tank.

   Finch, a gerontologist and Alzheimer's researcher at the University of
Southern California, believes animals such as the rougheye rockfish -- an ocean
perch that can live up to 140 years -- may help us extend our own life spans.
There's something special about this ugly bottom-dweller that keeps it going
while other rockfish species may live only a dozen years.

   Finding that biochemical difference has been Finch's quest for the past
decade. "Different organisms have developed unique anti-aging mechanisms," said
Finch, author of several books on the biological processes of aging.

   "We're going to discover these mechanisms and how they work." Finch is a
leader in the growing field of negligible senescence, or the study of animals
that live long and show almost no signs of aging.

   These animals generally are slow to reach sexual maturity and produce
offspring their entire lifetime.

   In fact, some animals, such as the Blanding's turtle, are more fertile at age
60 or 70 than at 20. Finch's work on the causes of Alzheimer's disease in humans
has led him to believe that the key to longevity lies in the cells.

   Some creatures, like the rockfish, somehow can resist the slowing of cell
growth that naturally occurs during an animal's lifetime. Members of this
negligible senescence club include marine life such as the lobster, spiny
dogfish, sturgeon and orange roughy; terrestrial organisms such as Blanding's
turtle and the giant tortoise; and birds such as the albatross, Andean condor,
parakeet and parrot.

   Through chemicals produced by their cells and controlled by their DNA, these
organisms resist aging as well as the diseases of aging that affect other
related species and humans. Fish and birds aren't people, skeptics note.

   An explanation for slow aging, they suggest, may be environmental.

   For example, many of these slow-aging animals inhabit harsh environments (for
instance, the bottom of the ocean) that favor slow growth, low metabolism and
low energy use. But Finch is convinced the key to resisting aging will be found
on the cellular level.

   Cell death, he explains, is caused by consumption of energy and oxygen.

   Species that consume the most energy and oxygen can be expected to have the
shortest lives.

   But certain animals break the rule.

   Birds, for example, have high metabolisms, burn lots of oxygen, but outlive
mammals several-fold. The question for Finch is: How do they do it? "The goal is
to find out what sets the scale for aging," said Finch, who organized a recent
conference on senescence at USC.

   "People are just beginning these analyses." Rules broken If you take all the
world's mammals, birds and fish and graph their body size compared with their
life span, a simple pattern emerges.

   Big creatures -- elephants, whales, humans and sharks -- tend to live longer
than little creatures -- mice, finches and rabbits, for example. This
relationship between body weight and longevity is well studied.

   Larger animals need more food to keep them going, but their larger body size
keeps them warm and allows them to be active under harsh conditions. The whale,
for example, has a 100-fold advantage over the porpoise in keeping warm.

   Smaller animals have smaller surface areas, lose heat more rapidly and tend
to have higher metabolisms. But some animals live much longer than predicted by
this straight-line relationship between size and longevity. The rougheye
rockfish has become a totem of sorts for anti-aging researchers.

   In several fishing trips in the Gulf of Alaska, scientist John C. Guerin,
director of the Centenarian Rockfish Project at Oregon State University, found
rockfish that were 109, 107 and 93 years old. (Fish age is determined by
counting annual growth rings in the tiny ear bones called otoliths.) A survey of
commercial fish catches in Alaska found 16 percent of rockfish above the age of
50, while the oldest recorded specimen is 140 years old. "We're looking at what
is different biochemically in rockfish," Guerin said.

   "There's got to be a reason they live so long." Guerin and David E. Williams,
a biochemist at Oregon State University, selected two species, the yelloweye
rockfish (Sebastes ruberrimus) and rougheye rockfish (Sebastes aleutianus). They
hypothesized that these rockfish must have some way to survive to such old age
by repairing damage from oxygen in their cells. This cellular wear and tear
occurs normally in all animals' bodies as we consume oxygen and produce energy.

   One byproduct of energy production is highly reactive oxygen molecules, the
so-called free radicals, that tear apart cells and the DNA inside them.

   While our bodies also make antioxidants that mop up these free radicals, over
time, the damage continues faster than our cells can fight it. Williams looked
at rockfish livers for evidence of this damage and found that rockfish cells
were much more resistant to oxidation than rat or monkey cells.

   But his attempts to isolate the exact chemical responsible for the
anti-oxidative power have been unsuccessful. His research is made more difficult
because rockfish can't be raised in captivity.

   Because the deep-dwelling fish don't survive the trip to the surface in
fishermen's nets, they must be frozen on board and then shipped to the
laboratory.

   Certain biochemical changes occur during defrosting of these rockfish, which
can throw off accurate biological measurements. William's next step is to
collect rockfish alive in their habitat of nearly 2,000 feet deep -- a feat
recently accomplished by scientists at the Moss Landing Marine Laboratory near
Monterey.

   He also plans to measure levels of coenzyme Q-10, an antioxidant that slows
down the activity of mitochondria, the cell's power plant.

   Mitochondria produce free radicals. Many questions remain.

   "Perhaps they generate less reactive oxygen," Williams said, "or generate the
same amount of damage but maybe they have an effective way to repair it." Bird
secrets Other researchers are following a similar line of research in long-lived
bird species.

   But they believe the answer lies in the birds' genetic code. On average,
birds live two to three times longer than similar-sized mammals. (Urban-dwelling
pigeons outlive rats seven-fold.) Hummingbirds are the most disproportionate in
terms of life span to body size ratio: weighing only 3.5 grams but living up to
15 years. Birds have higher metabolic rates, expend more energy and have higher
blood sugar levels.

   Because their internal engines burn hotter and faster, the reasonable
assumption would be that they would accumulate more oxidative cell damage over
their lifetimes and die sooner. But not only do many birds live longer, they
also have lower rates of the aging diseases that affect humans: cataracts, heart
attacks, cancer, atherosclerosis, diabetes and stroke. Researchers reason that
something in bird cells prevents oxidation. Researcher Steven Austad at the
University of Idaho believes it has to do with the action of certain genes.
Austad is using the parakeet as a research model.

   It's a mouse-sized bird that can live more than 20 years while a mouse only
lives four years. Austad has been trying to identify genes responsible for
oxidative resistance.

   He takes cells from the parakeet, grows them in culture, then exposes them to
conditions which would provoke an increase in free radicals.

   In this case, cells are grown in 95 percent oxygen, instead of the 20 percent
oxygen normal for our atmosphere. Human or mouse cells would die if exposed to
such high oxygen levels, but parakeet cells show much less damage. To try to
determine which genes may be responsible for this anti-oxidative power, Austad
is beginning a series of experiments in which he is transferring parakeet DNA
into mouse cells. He hopes to find the location of the gene by moving one
chromosome at a time into the new cells and checking for oxidative resistance.

   From there, Austad will narrow down the search to an individual gene or group
of genes. "We want to see how nature has solved this problem to see how to mimic
it with gene therapy or some kind of pharmaceutical (for humans)," Austad said.
Lobsters and enzymes Researchers know that some substances produced in our
bodies act as a double-edged sword.

   Take telomerase, an enzyme that prevents the decay of telomeres, which are
the caps on the end of chromosomes.

   Normally, human cells divide about 75 times over a lifetime.

   Each time a cell divides, the telomere erodes.

   Eventually, the telomere becomes too short to protect the chromosome.

   When that happens, the cell can no longer divide, and eventually dies. A
German research group found that lobsters produce lots of telomerase and show
few signs of senescence during their long lives.

   These scientists believe telomerase has some kind of anti-aging property.
However, research in humans has found that 90 percent of cancer cells have
telomerase, raising suspicions that it is linked to cancer.

   Telomerase may help malignant tumors to grow abnormally fast without the
consequences of cell aging.

   Whether telomerase is a life extender or cancer promoter is not fully
understood, scientists say. It makes sense to Finch that answers to such
questions can come only from studying the species best at living a long time.

   He noted that most researchers who study aging use short-lived rats, mice,
fruit flies and worms.

   These are good models to study genetics and molecular biology because the
animals reproduce quickly and are easy to raise in the laboratory.

   But they aren't as good for studying the effects of aging. "Almost all my
colleagues have emphasized short-lived animal models," Finch said.

   "We can learn more by studying animals with life spans longer than humans."
Even with such studies, he doesn't expect a quick and easy answer, potion or
elixir. "I think we're pretty far away," Finch admitted.

   "There are a lot of mechanisms that determine life span.

   No one is paramount."

GRAPHIC: 5 PICS; 1 GRAPH; CAPTIONS: 1. Beak to beak: Parakeets, which can live
up to 20 years, are being studied to determine if there's a genetic basis for
their long lives. 2,3,4. Growing old gracefully -- Scientists are looking at
species that take their time growing old in hopes of learning more about human
aging. The field of study, known as negligible senescence, focuses on species
that live long lives (in relationship to their body weight) and show almost no
signs of aging. 2. ROCKFISH -- At Oregon State University, researchers are
studying bottom-dwelling rockfish, which can live more than 100 years. They
theorize that the fish have developed a way to forestall cellular wear and tear
from oxidation. 3. LOBSTER -- German researchers have found that lobsters
produce lots of telomerase, an enzyme sometimes associated with anti-aging.
Although it's impossible to precisely determine the age of a lobster, scientists
believe they can live more than 100 years. 4. HUMMINGBIRD -- Among birds,
hummingbirds are the most disproportionate in terms of life span to body size,
weighing only 3.5 grams but living up to 15 years. 5. Animal secrets: Caleb
Finch looks for clues to human aging in species that live to ripe old ages.
(E-4) 6. How species age -- This chart shows the maximum life span -- in years
-- for 10 very different species including yeast, bamboo, humans and bristlecone
pine. (E-4); PHOTOBY: 1. CRISSY PASCUAL / Union-Tribune 2. JOHN BUTLER /
Southwest Fisheries 4. JERRY RIFE / Union-Tribune 5. UNION-TRIBUNE | SOURCE:
Caleb Finch

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1225 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                      November 3, 1999 Wednesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 239 words

HEADLINE: SIX DEATHS IN GENE STUDIES KEPT FROM PUBLIC, NIH

BYLINE: By The Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists and drug companies have failed to notify the National Institutes
of Health about six deaths that occurred in gene therapy experiments in the past
19 months, keeping details of the deaths from becoming public, according to
interviews with researchers and federal officials.

   The deaths are the first in gene therapy to come to light that were purposely
withheld from the NIH, one of two federal agencies charged with overseeing the
safety of the controversial field of medical research, which seeks to cure
diseases by giving patients new genes.

   The lack of disclosure provides new evidence of a shift toward secrecy in
gene therapy, traditionally one of the more open fields of medical research, and
reflects escalating efforts by gene therapy companies to weaken federal
reporting regulations.

   Confirmation of the six deaths follows revelations last week of a death and
two serious illnesses in gene therapy patients that were reported to the NIH
with the unprecedented insistence that they be kept confidential, in defiance of
a long-standing agency policy of public disclosure.

   The six deaths occurred in heart studies headed by two leading gene
researchers -- Ronald Crystal of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in
Manhattan and Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University in Boston. The two are racing to
be the first to grow new blood vessels around blocked ones as an alternative to
bypass surgery.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1999


                             1226 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   November 3, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1194 words

HEADLINE: NIH Not Told Of Deaths in Gene Studies; Researchers, Companies Kept
Agency in the Dark

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   Scientists and drug companies have failed to notify the National Institutes
of Health about six deaths that occurred in gene therapy experiments in the past
19 months, keeping details of the deaths from becoming public, according to
interviews with researchers and federal officials.

   The deaths are the first in gene therapy to come to light that were purposely
withheld from the NIH, one of two federal agencies charged with overseeing the
safety of the controversial field of medical research, which seeks to cure
diseases by giving patients new genes.

   The lack of disclosure provides new evidence of a shift toward secrecy in
gene therapy, traditionally one of the more open fields of medical research, and
reflects escalating efforts by gene therapy companies to weaken federal
reporting regulations.

   Confirmation of the six deaths follows revelations last week of a death and
two serious illnesses in gene therapy patients that were reported to the NIH
with the unprecedented insistence that they be kept confidential, in defiance of
a long-standing agency policy of public disclosure.

   The six deaths occurred in heart studies headed by two leading gene
researchers--Ronald Crystal of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in
Manhattan and Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University in Boston. The two are racing to
be the first to grow new blood vessels around blocked ones as an alternative to
bypass surgery.

   Crystal and Isner said that, unlike the widely reported death of a teenage
patient at the University of Pennsylvania in September, they believe that the
fatalities in their studies were not directly caused by the gene therapy but by
complications stemming from the patients' underlying illnesses.

   Because they decided the deaths weren't caused by gene therapy, they argued,
federal regulations don't require them to notify the NIH--a new interpretation
of those regulations that stands in sharp contrast to the one held by NIH
officials and a decade of practice.

   The researchers said they reported the deaths to the Food and Drug
Administration, which keeps such information secret.

   But NIH officials in the federal office that oversees gene therapy are
adamant that even deaths not initially believed to have been caused by the
therapy must be reported to the NIH and made public, because often it is not
clear until later whether the therapy actually caused the deaths.

   "It may take five, six, seven patients ill, or 20 patients, before you find
out, 'Hey, this is also happening in other people's trials,' " said Amy
Patterson, who heads the NIH Office of Recombinant DNA Activities (ORDA), which
oversees gene therapy studies. "And if you don't know what's going on in other
people's trials, then you can't put two and two together."

   The FDA can suspend a study if it determines that the therapy being tested is
dangerous, but the agency only makes such information public if the therapy
eventually is approved or with the permission of the study's sponsor.

   Most of the new deaths are coming to light only because federal officials put
out a plea for gene researchers across the country to report any undisclosed
deaths or illnesses, after the death of the teenager at the University of
Pennsylvania. His death is thought to be the first directly caused by gene
therapy, and NIH officials are looking for indications of similar problems in
other studies that may not have been attributed to the treatments themselves.

   Carol Goodrich, a spokeswoman for Parke-Davis, which is sponsoring Crystal's
study, said the company had forwarded details of the deaths to ORDA on Oct. 20.
She said the deaths had previously been reported to the FDA, but she refused to
say whether that agency had agreed with the company's determination that the
deaths were not caused by the therapy. The FDA has not decided whether to
fulfill a Washington Post request to release information about deaths and
illnesses in gene therapy trials.

   Federal regulations have long held genetic treatments to a higher level of
public scrutiny than conventional new therapies because of public discomfort
with the idea of manipulating people's genetic makeup.

   For example, federal regulations require researchers to report the deaths and
serious illnesses of patients enrolled in gene therapy experiments not only to
the FDA, but also to the NIH for public review by a special advisory board.

   But as the field has become increasingly dominated by private industry, drug
companies and scientists with a financial stake in their research are
challenging the historically broad interpretation of that rule. They are filing
reports with demands for confidentiality or maintaining that they don't have to
file them with the NIH at all.

   Isner and Crystal helped found competing gene therapy companies--Vascular
Genetics of Durham, N.C., and GenVec of Rockville, respectively.

   Asked why he hadn't reported his deaths to the NIH, Isner said yesterday that
it was an oversight and, in any case, it was not clear that he had to.

   Crystal said Parke-Davis has assumed responsibility for reporting deaths to
the appropriate agencies. However, he added that while he supported the
reporting of deaths and illnesses to the NIH, he did not consider it a legal
requirement. He also said he believed that the NIH should keep some reports
confidential, particularly to protect patient privacy.

   Both researchers said they have discussed some of the deaths at scientific
meetings and in professional journals.

   Crystal was among the first to request confidentiality from the NIH for a
patient death report, in May 1998, just two weeks after GenVec announced plans
for an initial public offering of stock. NIH staff said yesterday that, at the
time, Crystal cited concerns about the impact on his business if the death were
made public. In the past week, Crystal has said the public offering, later
canceled, had no bearing on his confidentiality request and has offered varying
reasons for that request--including a need to study the death further and
concerns about patient confidentiality.

   The issue of confidentiality requests surfaced at the September meeting of
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), the NIH group that reviews gene
therapy experiments and collects reports of serious side-effects and deaths.

   Schering-Plough also had demanded confidentiality for three recently filed
reports of serious patient illness during gene therapy trials. The lead
scientists in two of those studies determined that the complications "probably"
were caused by the gene therapy; Schering-Plough officials had downgraded those
assessments, saying they were "possibly related" to the therapy.

   In the third case, the researchers and the company agreed that the
complications "possibly" were related to the therapy.

   This week, Schering-Plough, of Madison, N.J., issued a statement defending
its recent requests that the NIH keep the illnesses of three patients
confidential. Company officials and others are expected to make their case for
more confidentiality at a December RAC meeting, where the NIH will seek to
clarify its reporting guidelines.

LOAD-DATE: November 03, 1999


                             1227 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 2, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 7; Column 5; Health & Fitness

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Novel Ways To Counter Destruction Of Arteries

BYLINE: By HOLCOMB B. NOBLE

BODY:

   Two studies offer hope of improved treatments for some half a million heart
patients whose blood vessels have deteriorated to the point of requiring bypass
surgery.

   In one study, researchers reported, healthy blood vessels were grafted onto a
section with severe deterioration and then tricked through gene therapy to
function successfully despite the adverse conditions. In the other, the body was
induced through the use of growth factors to strengthen vessels or grow new
vessels.

    In both cases, the researchers said the experiments were too small to judge
their long-term value. But they said the procedures appeared to be safe and
warranted larger follow-up studies.

   When bypass grafts are used to treat cardiovascular disease, problems have
arisen after a small section of the vein is transplanted onto an artery, where
it encounters higher blood pressure than it normally would along with a constant
pounding of pulsating blood. Largely as a result of this, 30 to 50 percent of
bypass grafts fail. The new hostile environment puts genetic watchdogs in the
grafted vein on the alert. They order construction of new cells to thicken and
fortify its walls. The vessel responds and begins to develop the same
arteriosclerosis, or abnormal fattening and hardening, that started the crisis.

   Dr. Michael Mann, Dr. Victor J. Dzau and a team at Brigham and Women's
Hospital in Boston studied the effectiveness of using a substance called E2F
decoy, or oligodeoxynucleotide, to block the genes that start the undesired cell
proliferation. Reporting in the current issue of The Lancet, they divided 41
patients, all of whom were at high risk for graft failure, into three groups.
One group was given standard bypass treatment. The second was given veins
treated with the E2F decoy. A third group was given veins treated with a
randomly chosen sequence of genetic material.

   Dr. Mann said the patients who received standard treatment showed a graft
failure rate of almost 70 percent. But those receiving E2F decoy had a failure
rate of only 29 percent.

   Another Boston team, led by Dr. Michael Simons, director of the Angiogenesis
Research Center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, used a protein called
basic fibroblast growth factor to promote growth of new vessels to replaced
blocked ones. The team reported its results in Circulation, a journal of the
American Heart Association.

   During attempted bypass surgery, the growth factor, contained in time-release
capsules, was inserted into fatty tissue near blocked vessels in 24 patients.
The chemical was released over four to six weeks.

   Dr. Simons said these patients, who also had severe vascular deterioration,
were all unable to accept the bypass grafts. But one group that was given the
highest dosage of the growth factor showed an improvement in blood supply and
heart function three months later. Groups given less growth factor or a placebo
showed no improvement. A larger study of 120 patients is under way.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1999


                             1228 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    November 01, 1999, Monday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: D; Pg. 6 Medicine

LENGTH: 624 words

HEADLINE: OF NOTE

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Mammogram coach in operation

   St. Luke's Episcopal Health System recently unveiled its new Mobile Mammogram
and Bone Density Coach. Each year, the 40-foot coach will screen 2,000
Houston-area women for breast cancer - half in medically underserved areas. The
coach also will visit St. Luke's four Houston- area health centers at least one
day a month.

   A physician's referral is required for a screening and can be arranged by
calling 713-794-6000.


   Foot screenings for diabetics

   The University of Texas-Houston Medical School and Memorial Hermann Hospital
are offering free diabetic foot screenings in recognition of National Diabetes
Awareness Month.

   The screenings will be held Nov. 9-12 at locations around Houston.

   Nerve damage or loss of circulation in diabetic patients can lead to slow or
non-healing wounds on the feet.

   If left untreated, these wounds can lead to gangrene and possible amputation.

   For information on times and screening locations, call 1-888-488-3627.


   Free flu shots being offered

   UT-Houston Medical School also is offering free flu shots through Dec. 1 at
three UT-Houston neighborhood health centers: 902 Frostwood, Suite 290; 1776
Yorktown, Suite 150; and 4101 Greenbriar, Suite 305. Free parking is available
at all locations.

   The free shots are part of UT-Houston Medical School's "Stay Healthy, Start
Now" community health-education program.

   To schedule an appointment, call 1-888-488-3627.


   New A&M health center leader

   The Texas A&M System Health Science Center will officially inaugurate its
first president, Dr. Jay Noren, on Thursday.

   Prior to joining A&M, Noren was on the faculty at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison Medical School.

   The A&M System Health Science Center is the umbrella organization for a
number of health institutions around the state, including the Institute for
Biosciences & Technology in Houston.


   Bladder screenings in November

   Methodist Hospital, in conjunction with the Baylor College of Medicine, is
offering free bladder screenings from noon to 7 p.m. Nov. 15-19.

   Bladder cancer is the fifth most common cancer in Americans. Men and women
older than 50 and smokers are the most at- risk, and early detection is the best
defense.

   The screenings will be held at Methodist Hospital, 6565 Fannin.

   To make an appointment, call 713-790-3333.


   Chief financial officer is named

   Methodist Health Centers has appointed Victor S. Jordan vice president and
chief financial officer for the Methodist Health Centers.

   Jordan is coordinating and managing financial operations for all the system's
health centers, including Sugar Land, Willowbrook and future sites.


   Methodist picks nursing leaders

   Methodist Hospital has hired two new nursing executives, Connie Sixta and Ann
Scanlon, to serve as vice presidents for patients services.

   Sixta is the nursing leader for the new Methodist Heart Center. Her
responsibilities also will include pharmacy, social services and food and
nutrition services.

   Scanlon's responsibilities include the center for cell and gene therapy,
neurophysiology, physical therapy, skill nursing and women's health.


   Mind-body approach to healing

   Memorial Hermann Hospital is sponsoring a free health-care seminar on Nov.
18.

   The seminar, titled "The Healing Journey," will focus on the mind-body
approach to healing. It will include displays from holistic healing vendors,
speakers on mind-body topics and presentations by experts in complementary and
alternative medicine.

   The health fair will run from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. at the Hermann Pavilion,
Memorial Hermann Hospital, 6411 Fannin at MacGregor. Parking is in the Texas
Medical Center Garage 4 on MacGregor.

   For more information, call 713-222 2273.




GRAPHIC: Photo: St. Luke's mobile mammogram coach aims to screen 2,000
Houston-area women for breast cancer annually

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1999


                             1229 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                     November 1, 1999, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 7; View Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words

HEADLINE: FOR SOME BRAIN-INJURED PATIENTS, A DEEP COMA IS THE TREATMENT;
 THERAPY * AS A LAST RESORT, DOCTORS SLOW ACTIVITY TO A BARE MINIMUM TO REDUCE
CRANIAL PRESSURE, BUT THEY CAUTION THAT NO STUDIES HAVE BEEN DONE.

BYLINE: FRANCES GRANDY TAYLOR, HARTFORD COURANT

BODY:


   Laura Gagliardi awoke from a coma on her 17th birthday, three months after
she suffered traumatic brain injury in a car accident. It was an event her
family and doctors had hoped for but did not expect.

   Gagliardi had arrived at the hospital unconscious and unresponsive. But
rather than battling to keep the teenager out of a coma, Dr. Hilary Onyiuke, a
neurosurgeon who directs the brain injury unit at Hartford Hospital in
Connecticut, put her into a deeper one--an increasingly common, though still
experimental, treatment.

   The idea of putting a patient into a coma to help heal injury sounds like
science fiction, but the technique, known as medically induced coma, has been
around since the 1970s. It was, and still is, a treatment of last resort, an
attempt to save the life of a critically injured person.

   "Her prognosis was terribly poor," Gagliardi's mother, Linda Cromer of
Plainville, Conn., said of the near-fatal September 1994 accident.


   *

   The technique is somewhat controversial, however, because, despite its use in
critical-care units, no controlled studies have been conducted to scientifically
determine its effectiveness.

   "I think there are questions. For one thing, does it work?" said Dr. Leslie
Wolfson, chairman of the neurology department at the University of Connecticut
School of Medicine. "I'm not sure the study that would prove its effectiveness
has ever been done."

   The treatment is not standard care for people with brain injury, said Dr.
Anthony Morgan, who heads the trauma unit at Hartford's St. Francis Hospital and
Medical Center, "because, while we do know that with a select population it does
seem to work, no one to date has been able to select in advance who is going to
respond."

   Morgan, who has written a book on brain-injury treatment and recovery, said
the trend is toward gene therapy and techniques such as hypothermia, which, like
medically induced coma, slow the brain's metabolic rate.

   The research "is using gene therapy to regenerate cells, to induce growth to
replace brain cells that have been damaged," he said.

   But other neurologists working with critical-care patients have used the
induced-coma technique over the years and come to believe it can save lives.

   At Yale-New Haven Hospital's neural-intensive-care unit, an occasion to use
the treatment arises several times a month, said Dr. Issam Awad, who heads the
unit. Victims who experience traumatic brain injury in car accidents,
near-drownings or severe falls are the usual candidates.

   In the mid-1980s, the technique started to be used in cases where there was
hope of recovery, not just nearly hopeless cases, Awad said.

   "By the '90s, it has now become almost routine for complex neurological cases
at technologically sophisticated medical centers," he said.

   The theory behind the technique is that decreased brain-wave activity can
help to dramatically reduce internal pressure in the brain when it has been
severely injured. The absence of brain activity lessens the metabolic demands on
the brain, allowing it to rest and heal. The patient lies in the deepest realm
of unconsciousness possible for a living person.

   "It's electro-cerebral silence, with no brain-wave activity. The patient is
flat-line," said Onyiuke.

   When the brain experiences injury, swelling occurs. With no room to expand
inside the skull, pressure builds, decreasing the oxygen that is carried to the
brain by the blood flow. Using an intra-cranial fiber-optic monitor inserted
into the brain and a fast-acting barbiturate such as pentobarbitone, the patient
rapidly descends into a deep coma. All bodily functions, including breathing and
blood pressure, are maintained by life-support machines. Involuntary movements
are suppressed by another drug that acts as a paralyzing agent.


   *

   Gagliardi's mother remembers those anxious days. "We weren't allowed to touch
her," she said. "They did not want her to be stimulated in any way."

   The patient can be maintained in that state for days or, in some cases,
weeks. Then, over three to five days, the patient is gradually brought out of
the deep coma. In about 10% of cases, Onyiuke said, pressure in the brain
continues to rise, unaffected by the treatment.

   "If you have 100 patients, about 30% of them will benefit, though you cannot
predict in advance who that will be," Onyiuke said, although it appears to be
less effective in patients older than 60.

   "It's not a panacea, but I know from my own practice that it works. I've seen
people we almost gave up on who are now walking around, living miracles."

   Onyiuke counts Gagliardi as one of those miracles. Days after the treatment,
Gagliardi began to show small signs of improvement. "Her eyes were open, and she
turned her head when her father called her name," Cromer said. Then came the
call on Dec. 10, her daughter's birthday. "A social worker called to say she had
responded to commands. She told her to squeeze her hand and let go, and she
did."

   While patients may experience paralysis and require extensive rehabilitation,
those effects are the result of the injury that led to the coma, not the coma
itself, experts say.

   Gagliardi has no memory of the accident or her hospital treatment.

   "I just remember getting a new job about two weeks before the accident," she
said.


   *

   Gagliardi has undergone months of rehabilitation, relearning to walk, dress
herself and perform everyday tasks. She graduated from high school in June 1998.

   "I started out in a wheelchair, then I had a quad cane, then a single cane
and now nothing," said Gagliardi, who is now 21. "I can do most things except
drive." For that, she has her fiance. They plan to marry this month.

   Gagliardi continues to progress and still periodically visits Onyiuke.

   "They just look at her and smile," her mother said. "They don't know how
she's doing what she's doing. She was very lucky."

   As she continues to rebuild her life, Gagliardi doesn't think much about that
these days. "I'm just glad they did it," she said. "It saved my life."

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1999


                             1230 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         November 1, 1999, Monday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 10 Ellen Goodman

LENGTH: 784 words

HEADLINE: Genetic engineering, hustling collide

BYLINE: ELLEN GOODMAN

SOURCE: The Boston Globe

BODY:

   Now it's time for a pop quiz in genetics.

   What happens when you combine the sperm of Internet entrepreneurship and the
egg of a beauty-obsessed culture, then enhance this embryo with a few extra
genes of gall?

   Congratulations! You have just given birth to www.ronsangels.com, the Web
site allegedly set up to auction off the eggs of beautiful babes to the highest
bidder.

   This is the brainchild, or brain ovum, if you prefer, of Ron Harris, a
fashion photographer, Arabian horse breeder and purveyor of soft-core exercise
videos.

   Harris himself is more a creature of nurture than nature. His career path in
beauty, sex and breeding led inexorably to the idea of a prenatal, indeed
preconceptual, market in beauty.

   Having grown up in a culture that makes beauty a commodity, he developed the
Web site philosophy that "choosing eggs from beautiful women will profoundly
increase the success of your children and your children's children, for
centuries to come."

   Or, as he said to one reporter, "What mother wants an ugly child?"

   It's not clear whether Harris is an Internet hustler trying to get folks to
ante up their $24.95 a month for a peek at the babes who could be moms of their
babes, or whether these women will really auction off their genetic maternity.

   But Harris' Internet egg market has gotten attention for the simplest of
reasons: It was predictable. It was inevitable.

   Let us go back to those wonderful yesteryears in the annals of reproductive
technology when a California entrepreneur first opened up a sperm bank of Nobel
Prize winners. It turned out that dozens of women wanted a brief, if artificial,
encounter that might result in a genius.

   Just last spring, someone placed an ad in Ivy League college newspapers
offering $50,000 to a 5-foot-10 Ivy Leaguer with a combined SAT score of 1,400.
Many were willing to trade an egg for a nest egg.

   Today, you can point and click to any number of infertility dot.coms that
offer physical descriptions of their would-be "donors" -- a word now hopelessly
perverted beyond its altruistic roots -- and check out the merchandise. Looks
are part of the package put before all the "customers."

   What is a surprise is not the free enterprise system at work on the Net. It's
the entire direction of the market economy in selling better and better
products, i.e., children.

   Once upon a time, says Lori Andrews, a law professor and author of "The Clone
Age," "infertile couples wanted children who looked as much like them as
possible, right down to the acne."

   Now it's assumed that would-be parents want or should want, as Harris says,
"to give their children an advantage."

   The beauty egg auction, whether it turns out to be real or a scam, is only a
modest example of what may happen when gene therapy takes off. We are moving
toward genetic technology that may allow us to add selective traits to an
embryo. As Andrews says, "parents may be able to pay to give their children
traits they don't have."

   Not long ago, a Louis Harris poll reported that 43% of parents would use
genetic enhancement to make their children more attractive. If we can make a kid
taller or prettier, if we can eliminate baldness or obesity, will we?

   In a world of competitive parenting, will those who want "the best" for their
children come to see genetic engineering as akin to tennis lessons or private
school?

   "We actually do start down the road of treating people like products," says
ethicist George Annas, who found himself unwillingly linked to this Web site.
"In the name of individual liberty, are we are going to actually custom-make our
kids the way we want them to be?"

   There is, in fact, nothing to prevent it. Reproductive technology is the Wild
West of the medical world. We can't legally sell sex. We can't sell organs. We
can't sell babies.

   But there is nothing to prevent selling sperm or eggs. And there are no rules
on the future sale of genes.

   As Annas says, "We don't want to take Ron Harris seriously, but we do want to
take genetic engineering seriously. We have a giant industry, the marriage of
biotechnology and assisted fertility. It's all hype, and nobody is thinking
about it seriously."

   In the meantime, before you bid on a mother egg, think about this seriously.
If beauty is the ultimate life advantage, how come angel Misty-Lee McFern
described her life options as either egg sales or posing for Penthouse?

   A second genetics pop quiz: Are you buying the nature of the DNA? Or the
nurture of a collagen-enhanced, nose-bobbed, aerobicized, silicon-implanted and
liposuctioned angel?

   I have one wish for this Web site. In the words of the auctioneer: going,
going, gone.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1999


                             1231 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       October 31, 1999 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 2304 words

HEADLINE: CU research halt costly Ailing patients, institution's reputation
suffer

BYLINE: By Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical/Science Writer,

BODY:

   Shannon Kline has been living with melanoma since 1978, and  has been told at
least twice she has less than a year to live.

   Now, with more than 150 tumors growing in her slight body,  the 57-year-old
Parker wife, mother and grandmother hoped to take  part in a new chemotherapy
study at the University of Colorado  Health Sciences Center.

   But the 40-day-old federal shutdown of new patient enrollment  in research
studies at CU and five affiliated institutions has  delayed Kline's treatment.
Her only option - besides not doing  anything - is to travel once a week for
eight weeks to Pittsburgh  for a gene therapy treatment that she isn't convinced
will work.

   'One thing you don't have is time,' Kline said.

   Thousands of patients seeking the latest treatments were  thrown into similar
situations beginning Sept. 21 when the U.S.  Food and Drug Administration
ordered CU to suspend clinical  research trials involving FDA-regulated
products.

   The FDA, after two audits at the Health Sciences Center, said  CU's processes
of reviewing and monitoring human studies were  'severely inadequate.' While the
FDA order didn't suggest patients  had been harmed, its letter said there had
been insufficient  documentation of how potential patient risks have been
evaluated.

   On Sept. 22, CU voluntarily suspended all non-FDA human  studies when the
federal Office for Protection from Research Risk  also raised concerns about
CU's review procedures.

   As a result, about 2,700 current studies have been suspended.  Waivers have
been granted to another 500 studies involving  patients who could be harmed if
the treatments are discontinued.  The FDA also recently allowed people who are
seriously ill or have  life-threatening diseases to enroll in studies.

   Those waivers and the prospect late last week that the FDA  could be close to
lifting the restrictions may give patients like  Kline a reprieve.

   'But I'm still in limbo,' said Kline.

   Faculty members were told Thursday by School of Medicine Dean  Richard
Krugman that the situation will be resolved 'as fast, as  appropriately and as
cleanly as possible.'

   Krugman said FDA officials told him Tuesday during his trip  to Washington
that the agency was drafting a response to CU's Oct.  12 list of proposed and
imposed remedies.

   'Each week, it's potentially 'next week,' - said Dennis  Lezotte, president
of the medical school faculty senate.

   While there has been significant work on restarting the review  process,
faculty and administrators worry about patients being  forced to go elsewhere,
disrupted research, lost contracts and  grants, potential layoffs of experienced
staff and a battered  reputation for the institution.

   'It's hard to be specific' about when the FDA may act and, more  importantly,
when research will be fully resumed, Krugman said.

   Officials of other institutions around the country which  recently have been
sanctioned said the recovery process took  anywhere from several months to more
than a year. Costs for those  programs are still being tallied.

   'The full effects of the suspension won't be known for a long  time,' said
Dr. Robert 'Chip' Schooley, head of infectious disease  at CU and an
internationally known AIDS researcher. 'But it does  involve hundreds of
patients and millions of dollars.'

   CU Regent Bob Sievers said he didn't want to underestimate  'the damage that
has occurred, but I also don't think we should be  paralyzed by this. It can and
is being fixed.

   'It's not what you'd like to see happen,' he said of the  FDA's action. 'But
I don't think it has diminished the excellence  of the faculty or reduced the
importance of health care at the  Health Sciences Center.'

   The cost of revamping the review process 'comes right out of  our hides,'
Sievers said. The regents 'are gonna track this like  junkyard guard dogs.'

   Money held in reserves will be drawn on to help cover costs  of more review
board staff and equipment, said Dr. Jim Shore,  chancellor of the Health
Sciences Center.

   'There is no question this is a very serious issue.' In  particular, Shore
said, 'It makes people question how you've been  running the research effort. We
want to correct this as quickly as  possible.'

   Dr. Steven Dubovsky, acting chairman of CU's psychiatry  department, said
that to say 'this is really disruptive is an  understatement.'

   'Hundreds and hundreds' of psychiatry department studies are  in limbo,
Dubovsky said. Potential new treatments for Alzheimer's  disease and depression
have been put on hold. Those patients 'will  have to wait and it's a hardship on
them,' he said.

   A large project to assist Columbine community members with  the mental-health
aftermath of the school shootings - scheduled to  begin around the six-month
anniversary - also has been delayed.

   Dubovsky said a 'number' of faculty researchers in the  psychiatry
department, the medical school's second-largest  department, have been called by
study sponsors with concerns about  whether they'll be able to meet deadlines
specified in study  contracts.

   Then there's the concern about damage to CU's reputation.

   'Your reputation determines how easy it is to secure  additional fundings for
these kinds of studies. When research  suffers, the community suffers,' Dubovsky
said. 'The job of a  university is to produce new knowledge. People look to a
university to be a leader. If you can't do that, the whole  community suffers.'

   Dubovsky also noted that the Health Sciences Center is among  Denver's
largest employers. When the research can't be done, the  money stops. That puts
experienced staff people like research  technicians and assistants in peril.

   How to keep well-trained research assistants, who are hard to  attract in the
first place, is a big concern, said Robin  Hohsfield, clinical investigations
core coordinator for the CU  Cancer Center.

   Hohsfield said it takes up to a year and a half to fully  train someone, and
with no money coming in to pay them, cutbacks  in their schedules or layoffs
might be necessary.

   'How long can I continue to run my office?' Hohsfield asked.  'I don't want
to lay them off     They have a wealth of  experience. We may just have to go in
the hole and try for a  balanced budget by June 30.'

   Drug companies that rely on clinical tests to prove their  products'
usefulness have been fairly understanding so far,  Hohsfield said. But there
have been occasions where CU has been  bypassed for new studies because the
companies have to meet  deadlines for when the drug has to have been studied.

   A couple of drug companies have taken lucrative and critical  studies
elsewhere as a result of the restrictions, said Dr. Harley  Rotberg of
Children's Hospital.

   'We're not a very desirable site for new work,' Hohsfield said.

   Concerns focus on review board

   The FDA's concerns focus on the Colorado Multiple  Institutional Review
Board, or COMIRB. The board reviews and  monitors studies conducted by CU
faculty and at Denver Health,  Children's Hospital, Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, the Colorado  Prevention Center and the University of Colorado Hospital.

   There are varying opinions on how the CU review board got  into trouble.

   'We got into this mess by cutting corners, doing things not  exactly the way
the federal government wants it done,' John  Moorhead, associate dean of
research affairs, recently told the  faculty. 'We didn't break any rules, but
there were gray and  sloppy areas' in documentation.

   Faculty members contend there has been insufficient staff in  the COMIRB
office for many months, and that requests for more  staff were denied.

   While the restrictions are 'part of the new regulatory  environment,'
Schooley, the head of infectious disease at CU, and  other faculty members said
they may stem from money and efforts  being diverted toward moving the academic
center to the former  Fitzsimons Army Medical Center in Aurora.

   'They've been aware for a long time that there was  insufficient staff in the
COMIRB office,' Schooley said of  administrators. 'They've been trying to find
the resources to deal  with it, but the institution got itself into a position
that is  cutting corners on a lot of administrative functions because of  Fitz
and other priorities.'

   Moorhead, the associate dean of research affairs,  wouldn't comment on what
went wrong, saying simply, 'I'm not going  to throw any rocks.' Instead, he said
he wants to focus on  'getting this ship righted.'

   Toward that goal, CU has increased the number of internal  boards from one to
three to help expedite review studies under  new, stricter guidelines. CU also
has contracted with Western IRB,  a commercial Washington State research review
board, to review up  to 600 studies that are FDA-regulated and privately funded.

   And a massive prioritization process has begun on studies  that need initial
review or re-review in anticipation of the FDA  lifting its order. The internal
review boards have begun what is  expected to be a lengthy process of reviewing
about 2,000  federally funded studies.

   Restart will take time

   Even when the FDA lifts the restrictions, it will take time  to get research
back on track.

   School of Medicine Dean Richard Krugman, who likened the  current COMIRB
environment to 'a war room,' said it may take a  month of testing the new review
process before it is rolling  smoothly.

   'I'm not sure we can move very fast,' Lezotte said. 'If we  open up full
blast in one day, we may present ourselves with  additional problems.'

   Similar restrictions have been imposed by federal regulators  on
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago, the  University of
Illinois at Chicago, the University of Minnesota,  Duke University, UCLA, Mt.
Sinai, the University of Southern  Florida and the University of Rochester.

   Dr. Cynthia McGuire Dunn, director of the clinical research  institute at the
University of Rochester, went through a similar  situation in 1995. That school
was cited for having inadequate  staff to support the volume of studies being
reviewed.

   'We probably devoted about a half-million dollars in  emergency short-term
resources,' Dunn said. The budget for the  board has been increased from about $
125,000 annually to close to  $ 800,000.

   Rochester, which has about half as many studies as CU, spent  about a year
and a half getting the research enterprise back on  its feet.

   Dunn, who is a consultant for CU, said 'you could hear the  wind go out of
their sails' when she told CU officials about the  time needed for an
institution to recover.

   Despite the angst and hard work at Rochester, Dunn said the  experience was
worthwhile in assuring that research patients are  well protected.

   'You need a crash at the intersection before people realize  that they need a
light there. Then it's much better for  everybody,' she said. 'It's a wake-up
call that hopefully many  institutions are paying attention to.'

   At Rush-Presbyterian, research was shut down a year ago for  documentation
problems similar to CU.

   'The new playing field requires     a fairly sophisticated  knowledge of
policies,' said Dr. David Clark, research director at  Rush-Presbyterian. The
expectations of regulators 'are new and are  radically different.'

   Clark said there are plenty of 'political and conspiracy  theories' about why
the regulatory agencies are flexing their  muscles. But he believes that the
answer lies in an executive  order signed by President Clinton about a year ago.

   Clinton's letter ordered the regulators to close down  research activity when
the facilities don't meet regulations  instead of imposing probationary
sentences.

   Clark, who spoke to CU's faculty Thursday, said it took eight  months before
the last of 1,500 research projects were back on  line and Rush-Presbyterian is
still rebuilding its research effort.

   'It's just now that the dust is settling,' Clark said. The  cost is still
unknown, although he said it 'was just a big hit to  our bottom line.'

   He figured that Rush-Presbyterian easily lost about $ 2  million in clinical
trials income when the studies went elsewhere.  No federal money appears to have
been lost.

   Clark cautioned the CU faculty that getting up and rolling  'will not go near
as fast as all of you may wish.'

   CU's Shore acknowledged there are 'no shortcuts,' but he  remains hopeful the
'big stuff will come back on line' soon after  the FDA lifts the sanctions.

   Asked how long the research recovery may take, Shore said,  'My goal is by
the end of the calendar year,' he said.

   But no matter how long the hiatus lasts, it has disrupted  not just research,
but lives,as the case of Mike Ashton  demonstrates.

   The 55-year-old Englewood man was diagnosed with Hodgkin's  disease in early
October, about a week after the FDA restrictions  were imposed. Ashton has
worked for about five years as a  professional research assistant in the lab of
Dr. Paul Bunn,  director of the CU Cancer Center, and more years in other
research  labs.

   Bunn was able to get Ashton on an experimental drug regime,  but he couldn't
be part of the study because of the restrictions.

   'It's a loss to research,' said Ashton, who knows how  important it is to
test drugs before they are placed on the  market. 'This study has been going on
since 1989, and it would be  great to get more patients so the study can be
completed and the  drugs can be offered to people.'


GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Denver Post/Craig F. Walker Courtyard in front of the CU
Health Sciences Center, which has begun to scrutinize organizational structure
and policies supporting research. Shannon Kline of Parker has cancer and had
hoped to take part in a new chemotherapy study, but the Food and Drug
Administration has suspended that study and many others run by the University of
Colorado.

LOAD-DATE: November 01, 1999


                             1232 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       OCTOBER 31, 1999 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. I01

LENGTH: 1255 words

HEADLINE: SELF MOTIVATION FROM A REFORMED VAMPIRE TO FORTYISH LOVERS, IT SEEMS
EVERYBODY ON TV THESE DAYS IS TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHO THEY ARE. IS IT BECAUSE
OF MASSIVE SOCIETAL CHANGES? THE INFLUENCE OF THE INTERNET? OR JUST THOSE
BOOMERS AGAIN, COPING WITH GROWING OLD?

BYLINE: Jennifer Weiner, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   If you are a John Goodman-sized insurance executive whose brain now resides
in the body of a government-engineered hottie, who are you, really?

   If you're a vampire who's been bad for 240-odd years, and now you're living
in Los Angeles, trying to make amends by helping human beings you don't really
understand (all the while fending off their clumsy pickup lines), how do you
make sense of your life?

   If you're a divorced mother groping tentatively toward clandestine,
teenage-style love . . . a curly-haired plastic surgeon or judge moving back
home . . . or the Pretender, turning into somebody else every week . . . or any
one of the alien teens or winsome witches populating the WB . . . then you're
dealing with the central question of some of the fall's hottest, most
interesting shows, a question put precisely by Ross Perot's 1992 running mate:

   Who am I? Why am I here?

   Identity has been a preoccupation of literature, opera, and high art
throughout the years. But it's also a particularly American issue, says Robert
Thompson, chair of Syracuse University's Center for the Study of Popular
Television.

   "In America, so many things are stripped away. You're not born into a caste,
where you know who you are because everything tells you. You're not born a duke
or a peasant, where your identity is immutable."

   Geography and bloodlines were both no big deal in the New World: "You could
come here as an immigrant, eliminate your past, move west, reinvent yourself."

   But throughout time, invention and reinvention have never come without
consequences.

   Whether you were Dr. Frankenstein making a monster or Jay Gatsby remaking
yourself, whether you were meddling with science or society, there has always,
inevitably, been a price to pay for having a new life.

   Take Dr. David Banner, physician, scientist and star of the 1978-1982 series
The Incredible Hulk - a precursor to shows such as the WB's new Angel and CBS's
surprise hit Now And Again. All Dr. Banner wanted to do was tap into human
potential. Instead, he wound up large, green and fractured: easily enraged,
terminally misunderstood, doomed to wander the world alone, among humans but
always apart from them.

   Sort of like David Boreanaz's Angel. Substitute "brooding" and "hunky" for
large and green, and you've got Angel, gorgeously adrift in the
go-for-the-jugular world of Los Angeles. "The whole appeal of the vampire," says
Angel creator Joss Whedon, "is the idea of somebody who is alienated, somebody
who is not able to be part of the world, but in a cool, exalted, chiseled kind
of way."

   Like the Hulk, Angel has to sort out his role in a world of humans. "His
identity has changed so much. He was this evil fellow just having a great time.
Then suddenly he got his soul back, became moral, and got freaked out by what
he'd done," said Whedon. "He has to reinvent himself. His question of 'Who am
I?' is more literal than anybody's."

   And like the big-haired gals of Providence and Judging Amy, Angel is also
struggling to define himself within a community. He wants nothing more than to
find a safe haven, a family, a home, in a world, Whedon says, where those ideas
are increasingly under attack.

   "I do think we're creating ways in which we do not need to interact," Whedon
said. "Community as a concept is falling apart. And Angel reaches out toward an
idea of community. It says come home, have a family, have your mentor, your girl
Friday. Ultimately, it's a rejection of isolation."

   Another tenet of Identity TV: Not even a great body - even if it's someone
else's - can guarantee that you'll be happy in your own skin.

   Angel proves that. So does dreamy Michael Wiseman, he of John Goodman's brain
in actor Eric Close's body.

   Glenn Gordon Caron, the creator of Now And Again, said he based his sci-fi
fantasy/domestic romance on the 1950s movie of the musical Damn Yankees. You
remember: Middle-aged sports fan yearns for his beloved Washington Senators to
finally win the pennant, so much so that he sells his soul to the devil for a
shiny new body and a strong batting stroke, only to find that he misses his
wife.

   Caron says he wanted to do a show about longing, and ardor, and passion -
subjects usually confined to the Dawson's Creek demographic, at least during
prime time. "So I started to think. What if one member of the couple was younger
than the other? What if it was the guy?"

   And so you've got a classic outsider love story - cute, lost young man
searching for his forsaken bride, while saving the world in the meantime. And
what a different world it is. Years ago, immigration was what allowed you to
become unmoored from the things that had defined you: name, age, station,
religion, geography, family. Today, you can hop online and become somebody else
with a few keystrokes.

   Years ago, women were defined by their roles as homemakers, and men went to
work for one company and stayed there until they retired.

   Now, everything's in flux. Women work, companies merge, people are laid off -
movement, rather than stasis, is the norm, and the institutions that conferred
identity, whether they were marriages or corporations, are changing.

   Years ago, you were born with a body and you kept it until you died. Biology
was destiny, at least in terms of when in your life you could do things like
bear children.

   Today, people walk around with artificial hip joints and transplanted hearts,
with breasts and thighs and noses that came courtesy of plastic surgery instead
of Mom and Dad. Science is making designer babies possible, and living past 100
no longer seems farfetched.

   "The familiar landmarks are shifting," says Arthur Caplan, an ethicist at the
University of Pennsylvania. "You used to have kids in your 20s or 30s and retire
in your 60s. Now, all of that's up for discussion, because of changes in
science, and because of people living longer."

   Gene therapy, transplants, Internet disconnect, shifting gender roles, plus a
dash of millennial anxiety - is it any wonder, asks Caplan, that there's
confusion about how we determine who we are?

   Then there's the whole boomers-getting-older thing. Ten years ago, the pop
culture expert Thompson points out, there were four movies, including Big and
Vice Versa, that involved some version of the old brain/young body switcheroo.

   Why? Because that's when the first wave of boomers turned 40, and had to stop
seeing themselves as a generation of angry young protesters and start seeing
themselves as authority figures, responsible adults, parents - the very things
they'd rebelled against.

   Ten years later, with many boomers now parenting kids who are old enough to
occupy the psychic space that they once called their own, the redefinition
continues.

   "Am I a parent or a single person seeking love? Am I the authority or am I
the kid?" asks Marshall Herskovitz, whose divorced lovers grapple with those
questions on Tuesday nights on ABC's Once and Again. "It's a big issue for our
generation. . . . I think a lot of people are now trying to find a way to be an
authority . . . without being blind and unthinking."

   And the search for identity is complicated by divorce. "It's asking the
question of what you can find in your life when your original plan didn't work
out: whether your dreams can still come true, whether you have to create new
dreams or dispense with dreams, and that certainly has to do with identity,"
Herskovitz said. "We define ourselves by our dreams."

   Jennifer Weiner's e-mail address is jwein@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1233 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 30, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 260 words

HEADLINE: INSIDE

BODY:


   Nasdaq Hits a Record
Stocks extended their rally as the Nasdaq composite index reached record
territory and the Dow Jones industrial average pulled to within 5 percent of its
peak.   PAGE C1

Governing in Pakistan
Why did Pakistanis rejoice when the military smashed their democracy? Because,
many say, democracy Pakistani-style has meant only oppression for the poor.
PAGE A8


   140 Killings in Colombia
A Colombian has confessed to killing 140 children over five years, a prosecutor
said. Many victims were children of street vendors.   PAGE A6

Shining Light on Gene Tests
Members of a Federal committee overseeing gene therapy experiments plan to
rewrite their rules to require more disclosure by investigators.   PAGE A10

British Beef Wins a Round
A panel of European Commission scientists has found British beef safe to eat,
overruling French arguments for a continued ban to guard against so-called mad
cow disease.   PAGE A8

McCain Gains Momentum
After a strong showing in a Republican candidates' forum and in polls that show
him gaining on George W. Bush, Senator John McCain is having fun on the stump.
   PAGE A11

Plot Seen at Ohio School
Four students were arrested and seven were questioned after the authorities were
told that a killing rampage was planned at their high school in Cleveland.
PAGE A16

Day-Care Funds Are Stalled
There is room for more children in many day-care centers, and state money to
subsidize the care, but the money is not being spent.   PAGE B1


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1999


                             1234 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 30, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1309 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

To Keep Out Illegal Cars, Mexico Plans Huge Fee
A Mexican Government plan to make travelers who drive cars with American plates
into Mexico pay a deposit of up to $800 has provoked criticism that it could
persuade hundreds of thousands of tourists to cancel trips to Mexico.   A1

Bank Investigation Limping
Law enforcement officials say the global money-laundering inquiry has bogged
down and may never be resolved unless Russia or other countries help American
prosecutors crack the case.   A8


   Senate Delays Trade Bills
The Senate temporarily set aside a package of trade bills for African and
Caribbean nations while Republican and Democratic leaders tried to break a
partisan impasse over several unrelated amendments.   A4

Backing for British Beef
Britain won a big victory when a panel of European Commission scientists ruled
that British beef was safe to eat, despite French arguments to continue a ban to
guard against so-called mad cow disease.   A8

Winter Fears in Chechnya
The approaching winter is a major worry of the few international aid agencies
working to help refugees in Chechnya, as more Chechens become displaced while
the Russians advance. Russian planes and artillery fired wave after wave of
strikes on Chechnya, and Chechen officials said at least 50 refugees died when a
Russian missile hit a convoy that was fleeing the conflict.   A3

China Sect Presses Its Protests
Dozens more followers of the banned Falun Gong spiritual movement were detained
in Tiananmen Square in the fifth straight day of protests; hundreds and perhaps
thousands of fugitive adherents were said to remain hidden around the city.   A4


Confession in Colombia Killings
A 42-year-old man arrested in April has confessed to abducting and killing 140
children during a five-year period, Colombia's chief prosecutor said.   A6

Step for World Tobacco Treaty
More than 100 nations agreed in Geneva this week on the need for a global treaty
to control tobacco sales, but the hurdles to putting such a pact together and
getting it ratified were considered formidable.   A5

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A9-13, 16

New Medical Privacy Rules Dissatisfy Some Doctors
President Clinton unveiled new rules to safeguard the privacy of medical
records. His action kicked off an intense debate over how to protect the privacy
of such records in an era when doctors can test their patients for genetic
defects and send the information around the world with the click of a computer
mouse. Some doctors said the rules were inadequate and could actually erode some
existing protections. Several physician groups declined invitations to the White
House ceremony.   A1

Disclosure on Gene Therapy
Members of a Federal oversight panel, addressing concerns about information on
patient deaths and side effects involving gene therapy, are planning to rewrite
their rules to force greater disclosure. The move follows the recent death of an
18-year-old Arizona man who had undergone gene therapy.   A10

Fighting Strip-Mining Limits
The West Virginia Congressional delegation, led by Senator Robert C. Byrd, is
planning 11th-hour legislation to block a Federal court ruling that severely
restricts the state's strip mining of mountaintops. Environmental groups said
the Clinton Administration had decided not to oppose the West Virginia effort.
   A9

$20 Million for King Papers
The Library of Congress has reached a tentative agreement with the family of the
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to buy the private papers of the slain civil
rights leader for $20 million. The price is the largest amount the Library of
Congress has ever paid for a collection, though some researchers question the
material's historic value.   A10

Concern That Virus May Spread
A dead crow found in Maryland tested positive for the West Nile virus, the
disease that killed seven people in the New York region this summer and made
dozens of others ill, officials said. The virus is carried by birds and can be
transmitted to humans through mosquito bites.   A10

Students Accused of Plot
Four white students in Cleveland were arrested after the authorities were told
that a killing rampage was planned at their predominantly black high school.
A16

Beliefs   A13

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

City Pays Tribute To Yankees on Parade
A joyous crowd turned out for a ticker-tape parade honoring the World Series
Champions, but there was rowdiness: at least 30 injuries and at least 6 arrests
were reported.   A1

The Giuliani administration did not invite legislators who had voted to repeal
the commuter tax.   B7

Thousands of youngsters, with or without parental permission, skipped school to
attend the parade.   B7

A Bad Year for Pumpkins
Extreme weather -- summer heat and drought followed by floods caused by Tropical
Storm Floyd -- have been disastrous for the pumpkin supply in New York, the
nation's second-largest pumpkin-growing state.   B1

Nassau Budget Raises Taxes
The County Legislature approved a 2000 budget that eliminated this year's $300
million deficit, cut spending next year by $45 million and raised property taxes
for the average homeowner by what officials said was 9 percent, or about $90.
B1

Mistrial in Basketball Killing
A Brooklyn judge declared a mistrial in the case of Yasser Ashburn, 16, who is
accused of stabbing a 14-year-old in a dispute stemming from an after-school
basketball game.   B2

SPORTS   D1-8

Payne Stewart Memorial
More than 3,000 people gathered at a memorial service for Payne Stewart in
Orlando. The Tour Championship in Houston was suspended for the day to let
players attend.   D1

Tyson to Get His Money
The Nevada Athletic Commission voted not to sanction Mike Tyson for his late
punch to Orlin Norris and released Tyson's $8.7 million purse.   D4

ARTS & IDEAS   B11-20

OBITUARIES   B10

Julio Martinez
A former drug addict who helped found the Phoenix House and Project Return
programs, he was 55.   B10

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

$1 Billion Laptop Settlement
Toshiba said it would spend about $1 billion to settle a class action brought by
two people who contended that it sold five million defective machines in the
United States since 1987. The settlement covers Toshiba notebooks bought in this
country.   A1

Stocks Continue Their Rally
On the 70th anniversary of Black Tuesday, the Dow rose 107.33 points, or 1
percent, to 10,729.86; the S.& P. 500 climbed 20.49 points, to 1,362.93, and the
Nasdaq surged 91.21 points, to a record 2,966.43.   C1

Lining Up Heirs at Coke
Three Coca-Cola executives -- James E. Chestnut, Douglas N. Daft and Jack L.
Stahl -- will assume more authority, apparently setting up a succession contest
for the top job and easing criticism that M. Douglas Ivester has no deputy.   C1


Auto Maker's Executive Shuffle
DaimlerChrysler announced a reorganization of its American executive ranks, a
move intended to preserve a good deal of autonomy for the former Chrysler
Corporation, which Daimler-Benz bought in November. The changes indicated that
Thomas C. Gale would not be departing.   C1

Hard Times for Big Contractor
Lockheed Martin, the nation's largest military contractor, posted a 32 percent
decline in third-quarter income and, after cutting its profit forecast in half
for next year, said its president would retire.   C4

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: Flat-tax follies; meddling with Oregon's law; Armenia's tragedy; a
contract for principals.

Bridge   B18

TV Listings   B20

Crossword   B18

Weather   C16


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1999


                             1235 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 30, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

HEADLINE: U.S. Panel Moves to Force Disclosure in Gene Testing

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29

BODY:

   Concerned that investigators in gene therapy experiments are trying to keep
information about patient deaths and serious side effects out of public view,
members of a Federal oversight panel are planning to rewrite their rules to
force greater disclosure.

   The move by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee comes six weeks after the
death of an 18-year-old Arizona man, Jesse Gelsinger, apparently the first
person to die as a result of gene therapy. Researchers at the University of
Pennsylvania, where the experiment was conducted, were quick to report the death
and have spoken about it publicly.

    At this point there is no evidence that any other patients have died as a
direct result of receiving gene therapy. But the committee is concerned that
some scientists and companies have not always been forthcoming with information
about side effects experienced by gene therapy patients, or about patients who
died from causes other than the therapy.

   In one case, a researcher reported the death of a patient with advanced heart
disease last year and asked that it be "kept confidential and not part of the
public record." In another, a drug company, the Schering-Plough Corporation, has
insisted that information about side effects be classified as a trade secret.

   "Things that might be patentable are things that a company should rightfully
hold as confidential," said the panel's chairwoman, Dr. Claudia Mickelson,
biosafety officer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. "Adverse events,
we do not feel, fall into that category, and so we are changing the language to
be more explicit."

   At issue, Dr. Mickelson and others say, is how much information scientists
and companies should share with their competitors in what is still a novel, and
relatively unsuccessful, scientific field. Typically, companies experimenting
with drugs and therapies report solely to the Food and Drug Administration, and
the information they generate is kept confidential until the drug is approved.

   But gene therapy experiments are treated differently; they are submitted to
both the F.D.A. and to the advisory committee, a group that was established in
the early days of the research to foster public discussion. The committee, which
reports to the director of the National Institutes of Health, no longer has
authority to approve gene therapy experiments, but is authorized to review and
publicly discuss experiments, except for proprietary information.

   The question of just what is proprietary is a sticking point between the
committee and at least one company, Schering-Plough. A spokesman for the
company, Robert Consalvo, says it believes information about the design of gene
therapy experiments and patient safety data is proprietary and should be kept
confidential.

   "That is the same information that goes to the F.D.A. and remains
confidential there," Mr. Consalvo said.

   The committee greeted that suggestion with "a sufficient amount of outrage,"
said another member, Dr. Ruth Macklin, a professor of bioethics at Albert
Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.

   In addition, Dr. Macklin and others said, the committee is aware of deaths
that have been reported to the F.D.A. but not to the panel. She said it was
important that information about deaths be made public so that scientists could
learn from them.

   The debate reached a boiling point at the committee's meeting in September,
before Mr. Gelsinger died. At that time, the panel received information about
Schering-Plough.

   Also, to bolster their case that patient deaths were not being discussed
publicly, staff members gave the committee a copy of a 16-month-old confidential
letter from Dr. Ronald G. Crystal of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He wrote on May 14, 1998, to report on a patient with advanced heart disease who
died during a gene therapy trial.

   Although Dr. Crystal asked that the information be kept confidential at the
time, he said today that he had since publicly discussed that death and others
indirectly related to gene therapy at scientific meetings. He noted that the
letter advised members of the committee, known as the RAC, to call him with any
questions. "There was no intention of holding this back from members of the
RAC," he said.

   Dr. LeRoy Walters, a bioethicist at Georgetown University who served as
chairman of the committee until 1996, said that as far as he knew Dr. Crystal's
letter represented the first time an investigator had asked that a death in a
gene therapy trial not be publicly disclosed.

   "The premise of the RAC review process from its inception was that all
nonproprietary details about the protocol itself and all adverse events would be
publicly reported," Dr. Walters said, "and in a timely way."




   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1999


                             1236 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   October 30, 1999, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: Sponsors Want to Keep Gene Test Deaths Secret; Requests Spur Debate
About Openness

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:



   A leading scientist and a drug company have asked federal regulators to keep
information secret about the death and illnesses of patients undergoing
experimental gene therapy, stirring controversy in a field of medical research
that has prided itself on openness.

   In one case, the researcher provided sketchy details of a patient's recent
death and his conclusion, in a letter to the National Institutes of Health, that
it was not caused by the experimental treatment. But he asked that "this letter
be kept confidential and not part of the public record," even though that office
has traditionally made all such reports public.

   The death notification, which is required under federal regulations, and the
accompanying request for confidentiality came just two weeks after the
biotechnology company the scientist founded had filed for an initial public
offering of stock.

   Details of his request, and separate ones from a drug company,
Schering-Plough Corp., came to light through interviews and documents obtained
by The Washington Post, after weeks of grumbling by NIH insiders concerned about
a growing number of secrecy requests from researchers. NIH officials objected to
the confidentiality claims, but government lawyers concluded that the
regulations insisting that researchers make such reports public were imperfectly
worded, and so might not be enforceable.

   The revelations come at a time of increased interest in the safety of gene
therapy, an experimental field in which genes are given to patients to correct
inherited disorders and treat cancer. Last month, researchers at the University
of Pennsylvania reported the first publicly acknowledged death thought to be
caused by gene therapy. Scientists and federal officials praised those
researchers for their speedy and open reporting of that tragedy.

   Ronald Crystal, the New York gene therapist who sought to keep his patient's
death confidential, said yesterday that the death was not caused by his widely
publicized gene experiment, which aims to grow new blood vessels around blocked
ones in patients' hearts.

   Crystal said the 61-year-old man died from his preexisting heart condition 40
days after undergoing the therapy and a bypass operation.

   He said he reported it promptly in May 1998 but did not want the details
disclosed until he had more time to investigate it. He said he was not trying to
keep news of the death from hurting the pending stock offering of the company he
founded, GenVec, based in Rockville.

   The company later dropped plans to offer stock. And Crystal said he has
openly discussed the death at scientific meetings over the past year. Two months
ago he described the death and two others in the same experiment in a scientific
journal. He said there has been a fourth death, but none have been related to
the gene therapy.

   "I'm stunned by all this," he said yesterday. "I'm caught up in someone's
agenda. I'm one of the few senior people in this field that have been
supportive" of the government's policy of openness about gene therapy
experimentation.

   NIH regulations require that any serious illnesses or deaths involving
patients getting gene therapy be reported to the NIH Office of Recombinant DNA
Activities (ORDA), the Food and Drug Administration and local review boards at
the institution where the research was conducted. Researchers can make a
preliminary determination as to whether the death was caused by the therapy, but
the FDA has the final say.

   Crystal said he does not know if the FDA has concurred with his determination
that the deaths in his study were unrelated to the treatment, and the FDA has
not yet decided whether it will act on requests by The Washington Post for that
documentation. Crystal said his heart study is now sponsored by another drug
company, Parke-Davis, which is responsible for dealing with the FDA and other
regulators.

   Officials from Parke-Davis and Schering-Plough could not be reached late last
night, when The Post obtained details about the confidentiality requests. The
Schering-Plough cases involved two patients who became seriously ill while
participating in a gene therapy study. No additional details were available.

   The first gene therapy experiment, in 1990, was held up for years while
scientists, government officials, ethicists and others debated the medical and
ethical implications of so radically intervening in a person's molecular
identity.

   To ease public concern, the NIH created within ORDA the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, or RAC, a panel of geneticists, theologians, patient
advocates and others to review every proposed gene therapy protocol and be told
of any serious adverse outcomes.

   The issue of confidentiality requests was a major topic of discussion at last
month's RAC meeting, which has watched over the years as gene therapy has
shifted from a publicly funded venture led by university and government
scientists to a field largely sponsored by private companies with strong
proprietary interests.

   Members received a few details of the death and two illnesses at that
meeting, but could not get further details or discuss the events outside the
meeting. Expressing their frustration with the situation, members proposed new
language for the NIH guidelines that would remove any doubt about the public
accessibility of all reports to the RAC. That language is to be finalized at the
RAC's December meeting.

   Openness about adverse events has scientific value, too, said Amy Patterson,
an ORDA official. "This field is a new science where the experience with one
patient should inform the experiments performed on the next. And in this day and
age when we can communicate in a nanosecond, there's no excuse to keep repeating
the same adverse events if we can prevent them," Patterson said.


LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1999


                             1237 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                            October 29, 1999, Friday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 016

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: DOCS FIND HEART-FAILURE GENE

BYLINE: ANDY GELLER

BODY:

   Researchers say they have discovered a gene that causes congestive heart
failure, a disease that affects 3.5 million Americans.

   Blocking the gene stops the disease, they say.

   Although the work was done on genetically engineered mice, scientists at the
University of California at San Diego say it could lead to drugs that halt the
progression of the illness, which causes the heart to pump less forcefully than
it should.

   The research also "opens the door for gene therapy" for people whose heart
failure is caused by a genetic defect, said Dr. Kenneth Chien, leader of the
research team, whose study appears in the science journal Cell.

   The gene - called phospholamban, or PLB - serves as a gatekeeper, helping to
regulate the movement of calcium in and out of heart-muscle cells.

   Congestive heart failure - which can lead to a potentially deadly buildup of
fluid in the body - occurs when PLB exercises too much control, putting the
brakes on the flow of calcium.

   To test the effect of PLB, the Chien team mated a mouse genetically
engineered to develop heart failure with a mouse that lacked the PLB gene.

   Their babies did not develop heart failure.

   They also created mice carrying a defective form of PLB and injected the
defective genes into other mice.

   In that part of the experiment, the babies of mice bred to develop heart
failure had a normal life span with no side effects.

   The defective gene "is a potential therapeutic agent," Chien said, and
researchers may be able to come up with drugs that directly inhibit it.

   Further tests should be conducted to see if a similar problem causes the
heart failure that follows a heart attack, he said.

   Dr. Dan Fischer, a senior cardiologist at NYU Medical Center, said the
results were "promising" because "this is a novel way to treat heart failure."

   But he warned that drugs to stop PLB are a long way off.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1999


                             1238 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                 October 29, 1999, Friday, 33REGION 13 EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. A-21

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: ELLEN GOODMAN EGGS ONLINE: UGH HOAX OR NOT, AN AUCTION FOR MODELS' OVA
OFFENDS;
0

BYLINE: ELLEN GOODMAN IS A SYNDICATED COLUMNIST FOR THE BOSTON GLOBE.

BODY:


   BOSTON

   Now it's time for a pop quiz in genetics. What happens when you combine the
sperm of Internet entrepreneurship and the egg of a beauty-obsessed culture, and
then enhance this embryo with a few extra genes of gall?

   Congratulations! You have just given birth to ronsangels.com, the Web site
allegedly set up to auction off the eggs of beautiful babes to the highest
bidder.

   This is the brainchild, or brain ovum if you prefer, of Ron Harris, a fashion
photographer, Arabian horse breeder and purveyor of soft-core exercise videos.

   Ron is himself more a creature of nurture than nature. His career path in
beauty, sex and breeding led inexorably to the idea of a prenatal, indeed
preconceptual, market in beauty.

   Having grown up in a culture that makes beauty a commodity, he developed the
Web site philosophy that "choosing eggs from beautiful women will profoundly
increase the success of your children and your children's children, for
centuries to come."

   Or, as he said to one reporter, "What mother wants an ugly child?"

   It's not clear whether Ron is an Internet hustler trying to get folks to ante
up their $ 24.95 a month for a peek at the babes who could be moms of their
babes, or whether these women will really auction off their genetic maternity.
But Ron's Internet egg market has gotten attention for the simplest of reasons:
It was predictable. It was inevitable.

   Let's go back to those wonderful yesteryears in the annals of reproductive
technology when a California entrepreneur opened up a sperm bank of Nobel Prize
winners. It turned out that dozens of women wanted a brief, if artificial,
encounter that might result in a genius.

   Just last spring someone placed an ad in Ivy League college newspapers
offering $ 50,000 to a 5-foot-10 Ivy Leaguer with a combined SAT score of 1400.
Many were willing to trade an egg for a nest egg.

   Today you can point and click to any number of infertility dot.coms that
offer physical descriptions of their would-be "donors" - a word now hopelessly
perverted beyond its altruistic roots - and check out the merchandise. Looks are
part of the package set before all the "customers."

   What is a surprise is not the free enterprise system at work on the Net. It's
the entire direction of the market economy in selling better and better
products, i.e., children.

   Once upon a time, says Lori Andrews, a law professor and author of "The Clone
Age," "infertile couples wanted children who looked as much like them as
possible, right down to the acne." Now it's assumed that would-be parents want
or should want, as Ron says, "to give their children an advantage."

   The beauty egg auction, whether it turns out to be real or a scam, is only a
modest example of what may happen when gene therapy takes off. We are moving
toward genetic technology that may allow us to add selective traits to an
embryo.

   Not long ago, a Louis Harris poll reported that 43 percent of parents would
use genetic enhancement to make their children more attractive.

   Here's a second genetics pop quiz. Are you buying the nature of the DNA? Or
the nurture of a collagen-enhanced, nose-bobbed, boob-jobbed, aerobicized,
silicon-implanted and liposuctioned angel? I have one wish for this Web site. In
the words of the auctioneer: going, going, gone.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1999


                             1239 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                 October 29, 1999, Friday, 212REGION 26 EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-10

LENGTH: 508 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE

BODY:


   Gene therapy may curb hand, foot numbness

   The gene that controls production of a protein called nerve growth factor may
find use as a therapeutic agent to prevent peripheral neuropathy, a common nerve
disorder that causes numbness, tingling or pain in the hands and feet.

   University of Pittsburgh researchers say they've delivered the gene into the
knee joints of healthy rabbits and monkeys, causing a rise in nerve growth
factor in the bloodstream and a doubling of nerve endings in the animals' feet.

   These findings suggest that the gene therapy might help counteract
nerve-damaging effects of diabetes, chemotherapy and other factors known to
cause peripheral neuropathy, said William Goins, a molecular geneticist at the
Pitt medical school.

   Darren Wolfe, the research associate who presented the findings yesterday at
the Society for Neuroscience meeting in Miami, said tests of the gene's
protective effects in monkeys that have diabetes are planned.

   Preliminary results of a separate study, directed by Pitt's Dr. David Fink
and also presented in Miami, indicate the gene may be warding off neuropathy in
mice that have been given overdoses of Taxol, a cancer-killing drug that can
induce peripheral neuropathy.

   In both studies, the nerve growth factor gene is delivered using a herpes
virus that has been modified so that it can't replicate itself or cause disease.
It retains enough of its viral machinery, however, to enable it to penetrate
cells, carrying the gene with it.

   This combination of virus and gene, called a vector, also contains a
component that turns the gene on, so that the growth factor protein is produced.

   In a previous study in rats, Goins showed that the same vector could salvage
dying nerve cells in the bladder, reversing the symptoms of incontinence
associated with diabetes. The vector infected nerve cells in the bladder,
causing those cells to continually produce a low level of nerve growth factor

   In rabbits, and subsequently in monkeys, Goins and Wolfe found that by
injecting the vector into knee joints, nerve growth factor would not only be
produced in the joint area, but would enter the blood stream and circulate
throughout the body. When small tissue samples were removed from the animals'
footpads, the researchers found that the number of nerve endings had doubled.

   Production of the protein ebbs over time, Wolfe acknowledged, but the herpes
virus vector developed at Pitt can be given repeatedly without triggering an
allergic reaction.

   Wolfe and Goins suggested the vector might be given to diabetics to help
prevent peripheral neuropathy. It also might be given to cancer patients in
conjunction with chemotherapy; Goins said peripheral neuropathy is a
complication of chemotherapy that often forces doctors to halt therapy before
the cancer can be obliterated.

   Further animal studies will be necessary to determine if the gene therapy
actually can prevent or reverse nerve disease. Clinical trials might be possible
within a year or two, however, Goins said.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1999


                             1240 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               October 29, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      October 29, 1999 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 11B

LENGTH: 779 words

HEADLINE: THE HIGHEST BIDDER GETS THE CUTE BABE

BYLINE: By Ellen Goodman

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Now it's time for a pop quiz in genetics.

   What happens when you combine the sperm of Internet entrepreneurship and the
egg of a beauty-obsessed culture, and then enhance this embryo with a few extra
genes of gall?

   Congratulations! You have just given birth to ronsangels.com, the Web site
allegedly set up to auction off the eggs of beautiful babes to the highest
bidder.

   This is the brainchild, or brain ovum if you prefer, of Ron Harris, a fashion
photographer, Arabian horse breeder and purveyor of soft-core exercise videos.

   Ron is himself more a creature of nurture than nature. His career path in
beauty, sex and breeding led inexorably to the idea of a prenatal, indeed
preconceptual, market in beauty.

   Having grown up in a culture that makes beauty a commodity, he developed the
Web site philosophy that "Choosing eggs from beautiful women will profoundly
increase the success of your children and your children's children, for
centuries to come."

   Or, as he said to one reporter, "What mother wants an ugly child?"

   It's not clear whether Ron is an Internet hustler trying to get folks to ante
up their $24.95 a month for a peek at the babes who could be moms of their
babes, or whether these women will really auction off their genetic maternity.
But Ron's Internet egg market has gotten attention for the simplest of reasons.
It was predictable. It was inevitable.

   Let us go back to those wonderful yesteryears in the annals of reproductive
technology when a California entrepreneur first opened up a sperm bank of Nobel
Prize winners. It turned out that dozens of women wanted a brief, if artificial,
encounter that might result in a genius.

   Just last spring someone placed an ad in Ivy League college newspapers
offering $50,000 to a 5-foot-10 Ivy Leaguer with a combined SAT score of 1400.
Many were willing to trade an egg for a nest egg.

   Today you can point and click to any number of infertility dot.coms that
offer physical descriptions of their would-be "donors"- a word now hopelessly
perverted beyond its altruistic roots - and check out the merchandise. Looks are
part of the package set before all the "customers."

   What is a surprise is not the free enterprise system at work on the Net. It's
the entire direction of the market economy in selling better and better
products, i.e. children.

   Once upon a time, says Lori Andrews, a law professor and author of "The Clone
Age," "infertile couples wanted children who looked as much like them as
possible, right down to the acne." Now it's assumed that would-be parents want
or should want, as Ron says, "to give their children an advantage."

   The beauty egg auction, whether it turns out to be real or a scam, is only a
modest example of what may happen when gene therapy takes off. We are moving
toward genetic technology that may allow us to add selective traits to an
embryo. As Andrews says, "parents maybe be able to pay to give their children
traits they don't have."

   Not long ago, a Louis Harris poll reported that 43 percent of parents would
use genetic enhancement to make their children more attractive. If we can make a
kid taller or prettier, if we can eliminate baldness or obesity, will we? In a
world of competitive parenting, will those who want "the best" for their
children come to see genetic engineering more like tennis lessons or private
school?

   "We actually do start down the road of treating people like products," says
ethicist George Annas, who found himself unwillingly linked to this Web site.
"In the name of individual liberty, are we are going to actually custom-make our
kids the way we want them to be?"

   There is, in fact, nothing to prevent it. Reproductive technology is the Wild
West of the medical world. We can't legally sell sex. We can't sell organs. We
can't sell babies. But there is nothing to prevent selling sperm or eggs. And
there are no rules on the future sale of genes.

   As Annas says, "We don't want to take Ron Harris seriously, but we do want to
take genetic engineering seriously. We have a giant industry, the marriage of
biotechnology and assisted fertility. It's all hype and nobody is thinking about
it seriously."

   In the meantime, before you bid on a mother egg, think about this seriously.
If beauty is the ultimate life advantage, how come angel Misty-Lee McFern
described her life options as either egg sales or posing for Penthouse?

   And oh yes, a second genetics pop quiz. Are you buying the nature of the DNA?
Or the nurture of a collagen-enhanced, nose-bobbed, boob-jobbed, aerobicized,
silicon-implanted and liposuctioned angel? I have one wish for this Web site. In
the words of the auctioneer: going, going, gone.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1999


                             1241 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 29, 1999 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 962 words

HEADLINE: UCSD mice may hold a key to heart failure;
Research could lead to gene therapies

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In one corner of a lab bowl at UCSD hovers Archie, as in Archie Bunker, a
mouse specially bred with a high susceptibility to heart failure.

   Archie's enlarged heart makes his chubby chest heave as he struggles to
breathe and move. In the same bowl is Archie's lean and nimble cousin Michael,
as in Michael Jordan.

   Bred to have a slightly different genetic makeup, Michael moves and jumps
with ease. The two mice are the result of years of research by scientists at
UCSD School of Medicine seeking a way to prevent heart failure, a chronic and
debilitating disease. Inhibiting a single gene called phospholamban, or PLB,
worked surprisingly well, they say, at least in their special breed of mice.

   By modifying one tiny piece of PLB's genetic sequence, they corrected the
condition. A report on the research by Dr. Kenneth Chien, director of the
UCSD-Salk Program in Molecular Medicine, and colleagues in Cincinnati and
Ontario, Canada, is being published today in the journal Cell. "Developing new
drugs that inhibit this gene could mean exciting new targets for heart failure
patients," Chien said.

   "We're working toward that end intensely with a large pharmaceutical company
right now." Chien said the research also opens a door to possible gene therapy
for the condition. Heart failure afflicts 3.5 million Americans, and adds a huge
cost to the nation's health-care bill. "This work is extremely important as it
sheds new insights into the causes of heart failure," said Dr. Betsy Nabel of
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the research arm of the federal
government that funded the UCSD study.

   It is "likely to lead to new therapies for heart failure." Yesterday, in his
lab, as he marveled at the differences between Archie and Michael, Chien
described the research that made them possible. The strategy involved the
development of a "double knockout" strain of mice, a feat of genetic engineering
that crossed a type of mouse like Archie -- highly susceptible to heart failure
-- with a type bred without the PLB gene. While the Michael offspring carry the
genetic defects of heart failure, they are protected from that defect by the
deletion of the PLB gene. Release of calcium Researchers studying the chemical
cascade leading to heart failure previously realized that healthy heart function
depends on a balanced release of calcium from an internal storage site to keep
the heart pumping oxygen-rich blood through the body. Calcium triggers heart
muscle contraction; the amount of calcium released determines the strength of
the heart action. Release of the hormone adrenaline makes the heart beat
stronger by increasing the calcium pump within heart cells. The PLB gene,
however, acts like a brake to block the calcium pump. After a heart attack,
damage to the heart muscles eventually causes an increase in the blockage of the
pump by PLB. If the brake is on too tight, calcium is restricted and heart
function weakens. Chien and his colleagues bred more than 100 Michaels, and the
results so far are remarkable.

   Now seven months old, they have lived one-fourth their life span "with no
evidence of heart disease long after they should have developed it," Chien said.

   "They appear to be able to live a normal life span and have no detectable
side effects, and no scarring of the heart." Without the deleted PLB gene,
Archie, who also is seven months old, is struggling and may not survive much
longer. Refining their experiment, the researchers tried one more test. Dr.
Susumu Minamisawa and Dr. Masa Hoshijima, cardiologists in Chien's lab, figured
out through a series of genetic experiments the exact portion of amino acid in
PLB that leads to blockage of the calcium pump. With Chien, they then figured
out a way to insert the mutated PLB gene into a viral housing that would land in
just the heart muscle cells where it was needed in newborn Archie Bunker mice.
Cells from the hearts of these mice were extracted four weeks later and appeared
to function without any disease.

   In fact, they looked just like cells taken from the Michael line of mice.
UCSD owns rights Chien said UCSD currently owns the rights to the double
knockout mice and the development of new drugs that might block the brake of
PLB. UCSD will make money from the research if effective drugs are developed.
One especially promising aspect of the finding is its application for people who
have had heart attacks but survived with treatments such as angioplasty or
clot-busting drugs. Although death rates from first heart attacks have been cut
significantly in recent years, scarring of the heart tissue remains, and the
heart can't regenerate itself.

   The heart enlarges to compensate, which means it gets weaker and eventually
can no longer function normally. "The bad news is that even though you survive a
heart attack, you're on the road to heart failure," Chien said. A gene therapy
approach with PLB blockers would have a great advantage over drugs such as
adrenaline or epinephrine, which often have long-term side effects such as an
abnormal heart rhythm and an increased risk of sudden death. The researchers
hope to test their technique in a genetically modified species of pig and,
eventually, in humans. There are still many problems to overcome, however. While
PLB-mutated gene therapy may work for a genetic version of heart disease,
there's no guarantee it will work for the kind of heart failure that can follow
heart attacks in humans.

   There also may be yet-unrealized side effects or psychological problems
induced by overactivity. For now, the finding is a huge scientific leap for
heart disease, Chien said.

   "We've shown the value of using genetically engineered animal models of
complex human diseases to find candidate genes that can be targets for drug
development."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Special breed: UCSD researcher Dr. Kenneth Chien
held Archie and Michael, mice used in his heart-failure research. 2. Medical
marvels: Dr. Kenneth Chien, director of the UCSD-Salk Program in Molecular
Medicine, sat in his lab next to two mice -- Archie and Michael -- that have
been bred with slightly different genetic makeups. (A-18); PHOTOBY: 1,2. NELVIN
CEPEDA / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1242 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 28, 1999, Thursday ,City Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 785 words

HEADLINE: The ugly truth about the beauty egg Web site;
ELLEN GOODMAN

BYLINE: By Ellen Goodman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Now it's time for a pop quiz in genetics.

    What happens when you combine the sperm of Internet entrepreneurship and the
egg of a beauty-obsessed culture and then enhance this embryo with a few extra
genes of gall?

    Congratulations! You have just given birth to ronsangels.com, the Web site
allegedly set up to auction off the eggs of beautiful babes to the highest
bidder.

    This is the brainchild, or brain ovum if you prefer, of Ron Harris, a
fashion photographer, Arabian horse breeder, and purveyor of soft-core exercise
videos.

    Ron is himself more a creature of nurture than nature. His career path in
beauty, sex, and breeding led inexorably to the idea of a prenatal, indeed
preconceptual, market in beauty.

    Having grown up in a culture that makes beauty a commodity, he developed the
Web site philosophy that "Choosing eggs from beautiful women will profoundly
increase the success of your children and your children's children for centuries
to come."

    Or, as he said to one reporter, "What mother wants an ugly child?"

    It's not clear whether Ron is an Internet hustler trying to get folks to
ante up their $24.95 a month for a peek at the babes who could be moms of their
babes or whether these women will really auction off their genetic maternity.
But Ron's Internet egg market has gotten attention for the simplest of reasons:
It was predictable. It was inevitable. Let us go back to those wonderful
yesteryears in the annals of reproductive technology when a California
entrepreneur first opened up a sperm bank of Nobel Prize winners. It turned out
that dozens of women wanted a brief, if artificial, encounter that might result
in a genius.

    Just last spring someone placed an ad in Ivy League college newspapers
offering $50,000 to a 5-foot-10 Ivy Leaguer with a combined SAT score of 1400.
Many were willing to trade an egg for a nest egg.

    Today you can point and click to any number of infertility dot-coms that
offer physical descriptions of their would-be "donors" - a word now hopelessly
perverted beyond its altruistic roots - and check out the merchandise. Looks are
part of the package set before all the "customers."

    What is a surprise is not the free enterprise system at work on the Net.
It's the entire direction of the market economy in selling better and better
products, i.e., children.

    Once upon a time, says Lori Andrews, a law professor and author of "The
Clone Age," "infertile couples wanted children who looked as much like them as
possible, right down to the acne." Now it's assumed that would-be parents want
or should want, as Ron says, "to give their children an advantage."

    The beauty egg auction, whether it turns out to be real or a scam, is only a
modest example of what may happen when gene therapy takes off. We are moving
toward genetic technology that may allow us to add selective traits to an
embryo. As Andrews says, "Parents maybe be able to pay to give their children
traits they don't have."

    Not long ago a Louis Harris poll reported that 43 percent of parents would
use genetic enhancement to make their children more attractive. If we can make a
kid taller or prettier, if we can eliminate baldness or obesity, will we? In a
world of competitive parenting, will those who want "the best" for their
children come to see genetic engineering more like tennis lessons or private
school?

    "We actually do start down the road of treating people like products," says
ethicist George Annas, who found himself unwillingly linked to this Web site.
"In the name of individual liberty, are we are going to actually custom-make our
kids the way we want them to be?"

    There is, in fact, nothing to prevent it. Reproductive technology is the
Wild West of the medical world. We can't legally sell sex. We can't sell organs.
We can't sell babies. But there is nothing to prevent selling sperm or eggs. And
there are no rules on the future sale of genes.

    As Annas says: "We don't want to take Ron Harris seriously, but we do want
to take genetic engineering seriously. We have a giant industry, the marriage of
biotechnology and assisted fertility. It's all hype, and nobody is thinking
about it seriously."

    In the meantime, before you bid on a mother egg, think about this seriously.
If beauty is the ultimate life advantage, how come angel Misty-Lee McFern
described her life options as either egg sales or posing for Penthouse?

    And, oh yes, a second genetics pop quiz. Are you buying the nature of the
DNA? Or the nurture of a collagen-enhanced, nose-bobbed, boob-jobbed,
aerobicized, silicon-implanted, and liposuctioned angel? I have one wish for
this Web site. In the words of the auctioneer: Going, going, gone.

   8

LOAD-DATE: November 02, 1999


                             1243 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       October 28, 1999 Thursday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: BEAUTY ON THE DNA AUCTION BLOCK

BYLINE: Ellen Goodman is a columnist for The Boston Globe.

BODY:

   Now it's time for a pop quiz in genetics.

   What happens when you combine the sperm of Internet entrepreneurship and the
egg of a beauty-obsessed culture and then enhance this embryo with a few extra
genes of gall?

   Congratulations! You have just given birth to ronsangels.com, the Web site
allegedly set up to auction off the eggs of beautiful babes to the highest
bidder.

   This is the brainchild, or brain ovum if you prefer, of Ron Harris, a fashion
photographer, Arabian horse breeder and purveyor of soft-core exercise videos.

   Ron is himself more a creature of nurture than nature. His career path in
beauty, sex and breeding led inexorably to the idea of a prenatal, indeed
preconceptual, market in beauty.

   Having grown up in a culture that makes beauty a commodity, he developed the
Web site philosophy that "Choosing eggs from beautiful women will profoundly
increase the success of your children and your children's children for centuries
to come."

   Or, as he said to one reporter, "What mother wants an ugly child?"

   It's not clear whether Ron is an Internet hustler trying to get folks to ante
up their $24.95 a month for a peek at the babes who could be moms of their babes
or whether these women will really auction off their genetic maternity. But
Ron's Internet egg market has gotten attention for the simplest of reasons. It
was predictable. It was inevitable.

   Let us go back to those wonderful yesteryears in the annals of reproductive
technology when a California entrepreneur first opened up a sperm bank of Nobel
Prize winners. It turned out that dozens of women wanted a brief, if artificial,
encounter that might result in a genius.

   Just last spring, someone placed an ad in Ivy League college newspapers
offering $50,000 to a 5-foot-10 Ivy Leaguer with a combined SAT score of 1400.
Many were willing to trade an egg for a nest egg.

   Today, you can point and click to any number of infertility dot.coms that
offer physical descriptions of their would-be "donors" - a word now hopelessly
perverted beyond its altruistic roots - and check out the merchandise. Looks are
part of the package set before all the "customers."

   What is a surprise is not the free enterprise system at work on the Net. It's
the entire direction of the market economy in selling better and better
products, i.e., children.

   Once upon a time, says Lori Andrews, a law professor and author of "The Clone
Age," "infertile couples wanted children who looked as much like them as
possible, right down to the acne." Now it's assumed that would-be parents want
or should want, as Ron says, "to give their children an advantage."

   The beauty egg auction, whether it turns out to be real or a scam, is only a
modest example of what may happen when gene therapy takes off. We are moving
toward genetic technology that may allow us to add selective traits to an
embryo. As Andrews says, "parents maybe be able to pay to give their children
traits they don't have."

   Not long ago, a Louis Harris poll reported that 43 percent of parents would
use genetic enhancement to make their children more attractive. If we can make a
kid taller or prettier, if we can eliminate baldness or obesity, will we? In a
world of competitive parenting, will those who want "the best" for their
children come to see genetic engineering more like tennis lessons or private
school?

   "We actually do start down the road of treating people like products," says
ethicist George Annas, who found himself unwillingly linked to this Web site.
"In the name of individual liberty, are we are going to actually custom-make our
kids the way we want them to be?"

   There is, in fact, nothing to prevent it. Reproductive technology is the Wild
West of the medical world. We can't legally sell sex. We can't sell organs. We
can't sell babies. But there is nothing to prevent selling sperm or eggs. And
there are no rules on the future sale of genes.

   As Annas says, "We don't want to take Ron Harris seriously, but we do want to
take genetic engineering seriously. We have a giant industry, the marriage of
biotechnology and assisted fertility. It's all hype, and nobody is thinking
about it seriously."

   In the meantime, before you bid on a mother egg, think about this seriously.
If beauty is the ultimate life advantage, how come angel Misty-Lee McFern
described her life options as either egg sales or posing for Penthouse?

   And, oh yes, a second genetics pop quiz. Are you buying the nature of the
DNA? Or the nurture of a collagen-enhanced, nose-bobbed, boob-jobbed,
aerobicized, silicon-implanted and liposuctioned angel?

   I have one wish for this Web site. In the words of the auctioneer: Going,
going, gone!

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1999


                             1244 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               October 25, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      October 25, 1999 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 2F

LENGTH: 127 words

HEADLINE: NEW PROSTATE CANCER THERAPY IN TRIAL AT CLEVELAND CLINIC

BODY:

   The Cleveland Clinic is among three U.S. medical centers participating in a
clinical trial of a new form of gene therapy for prostate cancer.

   The study involves Leuvectin, a DNA complex that produces a protein known as
interleukin-2. The protein has been shown to inhibit the growth of prostate
cancer cells.

   Leuvectin will be injected into the prostates of men with cancers that are
resistant to standard therapies.

   Study participants will receive two injections. One set of patients will
undergo surgery to remove the prostate and another set will not.

   Prostate cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer deaths among American
men. Last year, 40,000 men died from it.

   Men who are interested in participating in the trial can call 1-800-862-7798.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1999


                             1245 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                        October 24, 1999, Sunday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,1A

LENGTH: 1582 words

HEADLINE: Cancer center set to expand; Hopkins consolidating scattered
facilities in two modern buildings; Advances in care, research

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor and Diana Sugg

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   The Johns Hopkins Cancer Center will soon leave its cramped, outdated
quarters for a pair of spacious buildings that are designed for a new era of
cancer research and treatment.

    Standing on opposite sides of North Broadway, the $125 million clinical
center and $59 million research building will open at a time of mounting
competition among hospitals and explosive growth in scientists' understanding of
the disease.

    The nine-story clinical tower, with 132 patient beds and room for hundreds
of outpatients, will be formally dedicated tomorrow at ceremonies in its tall,
airy atrium. It will open to patients in January. In December, scientists will
begin setting up laboratories in the 10-story research building, which has room
for more than 400 researchers.

    "The medical and scientific advances have had us bursting at the seams,"
said Dr. Martin Abeloff, director of the cancer center. "This is an opportunity
to introduce all sorts of new treatments and respond to the demands imposed by
this very fierce disease we call cancer."

    Although Hopkins is one of the most advanced cancer centers in the nation,
receiving the third-highest amount of federal funding, doctors and nurses say
their facilities became outmoded soon after they opened in 1977.

    Scientists in cramped laboratories are careful not to jostle each other
while carrying delicate specimens. Tiles in a research building that was once a
grocery store come unglued because the floor is saturated with animal fat.
Patients have been known to stand in hallways or sit on the floor before
appointments.

    "I have no idea what the new building will be like, but anything will be an
improvement," said Bettye Balland Griffin, who has kidney cancer. The White
Marsh woman said the existing center's dingy walls and cramped rooms make
patients who are ill and anxious feel worse.

    Though the cancer center occupies a four-story building off the main
hospital lobby, laboratories and patient rooms are also scattered across the
sprawling medical campus in East Baltimore. With the opening of the new center,
activities will be concentrated in the two buildings.

    They are named the Harry and Jeanette Weinberg Building and the
Bunting-Blaustein Cancer Research Building, in recognition of foundations that
made large donations.

    Patients and scientists

    The new center, which also received $45 million in state funding, should
ease the stress on patients who are now herded from one building to another for
different services.

    Also, by concentrating scientists under one roof, the research center should
provide more opportunities for discussions -- both planned and accidental --
that stimulate ideas.

    "It might sound trivial, but it's not," said Dr. Bert Vogelstein, who runs a
cancer genetics laboratory. "If you're seeing someone in the hall, the chances
for productive interactions just multiply."

    The buildings were planned with the help of nurses, doctors and scientists.

    For the clinical center, nurses insisted on privacy curtains that could be
drawn around beds, though all the rooms are private. In the research building,
labs were designed to suit the preferences of scientists who run them. One
researcher likes to have his staff of 25 people work in a large open lab;
another likes his staff divided among several laboratories.

    While there will be more room for patients, the new clinical center will
open with one fewer bed, a reflection of the shift to outpatient care. The
number of hospital beds could decline in years to come.

    The hospital already treats some of its bone marrow transplant patients on
an outpatient basis and has designed the clinical center with contiguous wings
for inpatients and outpatients. The building was designed so that inpatient
rooms can be converted into clinic space as the practice is more widely
embraced.

    It is one of many features recommended by Gina Szymanski, a nurse manager
who was brought into the planning process four years ago but who says she has
been imagining new layouts since she came to Hopkins.

    "For me, the gestation has been going on for 18 years," she said.

    Decades of change

    Large centers devoted to cancer are a relatively new phenomenon. "When I was
training in Boston in the late 1960s, the idea of a coordinated, comprehensive
cancer center wasn't a glimmer in anyone's mind," said Abeloff. "For most
people, if you had cancer, you were ashamed to talk about it."

    The words weren't used. Physicians just avoided it, and getting multitudes
of specialists together was very difficult."

    In the years after Hopkins built its first oncology center, cancer became
"something that truly came out of the closet," he said, and the demand for
treatment exploded. The ability to diagnose cancers early also meant patients
were getting therapy more readily.

    The past decade has also seen breakthroughs in research, with scientists
gaining insights into the origins of the disease. This has spawned research into
novel ways that cancers might someday be treated: gene therapies, cancer
vaccines and drugs that starve tumors by depriving them of their blood supply.

    As oncology has grown, so has the demand for laboratory space. Twelve years
ago, Hopkins became so pressed for space that it purchased Brown's Market, a
neighborhood grocery store, and turned it over to cancer research. The building
is a dizzying maze of partitions, offices and laboratories.

    Dr. Stephen Baylin, associate director of cancer research, says that with
the new center, the program will finally have room to expand its force of
talented young researchers.

    "Until now, the first thing I ask myself in hiring someone is whether I have
the bench where that person can work," Baylin said, "We're at a critical
juncture. There are many things we can try. It's a matter of having the space,
good people and the support."

    Hopkins is one of 36 " comprehensive cancer centers" recognized by the
National Cancer Institute.

    To earn the designation, the centers, which conduct some of the most
important clinical trials in the country, must have a high concentration of
doctors engaged in cutting-edge research, treatment and education.

    The designation gives medical centers an advantage in attracting federal
funds. Hopkins will receive $45 million from the National Cancer Institute this
year, trailing only the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle and
the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

    Local competition

    Despite its national prominence, Hopkins is facing stiff competition from
community hospitals that are luring cancer patients to plush facilities away
from the central city.

    In Towson, the Greater Baltimore Medical Center offers bone marrow
transplants and is considering building a dedicated cancer building. In June,
Sinai Hospital opened a cancer institute where physicians conduct stem cell
transplants -- another expensive, high-tech procedure.

    "They want to get into the most profitable lines," said Russell Frank of
RAFrank Associates, a consulting firm that advises health care organizations on
how to attract patients.

    The rivalry can be intense, and some community hospitals argue that they
offer equivalent care and focus more on patients than a research institution
such as Hopkins.

    The University of Maryland's Greenebaum Cancer Center has recruited about a
dozen top physicians during the past few years, and that expertise has drawn
patients. The number of patient visits has increased by a third during the past
18 months, and the center is planning an expansion that will double its space.

    At Hopkins, designers included features to ease the strain on cancer
patients and their families. Rooms have expansive windows that provide natural
light and views of the city. Waiting areas offer stuffed chairs and love seats.
Hallways are painted warm colors.

    "The building will be a part of therapy, a marked contrast to what our
building is now," said Abeloff.

    While praising the Hopkins staff, patients have criticized the current
facilities, describing parking as terrible, examination rooms as cramped and
clinics as depressing. To reach MRI and CT scanners, patients have to march down
a long, dimly lighted corridor often littered with food trays.

    "They do the best they can, " Griffin, the kidney patient, said of the
staff. "But everybody is smushed in there together."

    Szymanski, who manages 40 nurses, works out of an 8-by- 9-foot office packed
with computers, file cabinets and cardboard boxes. It is also where nurses hang
their coats and pick up their mail, and where Szymanski talks to families
struggling to cope with relatives' illnesses.

    In the new building, Szymanski will have a private office, and the nurses a
locker room and lounge. Families will have sitting areas near the hospital rooms
where they can have private conversations.

    Hopkins originally envisioned one building for patient care and research but
quickly realized that such a facility would lack the needed space. Dr. Georgia
Vogelsang, who treats patients with leukemia and lymphoma, said splitting the
laboratories from the hospital space was a necessary compromise.

    "There's no question that cancer research has exploded, and it's continuing
to explode in terms of new findings and treatments that are becoming available,"
she said. "The new therapies really do require specific research areas -- and
facilities where we can give therapies back to the patients."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) 1. Lunchtime: Carpenters Dale Costlow (left) and Rob Langrehr
take a lunch break at Johns Hopkins' new cancer center. The workmen enjoy a view
of the multistory atrium.
 2. Medical efficiency: A new nurses' station awaits staffers and patients at
the clinical center, which will open in January.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1999


                             1246 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     October 24, 1999, Sunday ,City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. F2

LENGTH: 956 words

HEADLINE: Business Review;
Highlights of the week: Oct. 17-23

BODY:

   Region

   Don't forget the dot

   Portraying the Bay State as a world center of computing technology, Governor
Paul Cellucci and dozens of the state's top high-tech business leaders gave
Massachusetts another nickname - the ".commonwealth." State officials and
business leaders said they intend to exploit the new nickname to promote
Massachusetts for further high-tech business investment and employment. With a
nationwide shortage of high-tech workers, industry leaders say Massachusetts
needs a program that will attract competent employees from out of state.

   Bio-union

    Looking to strengthen its gene-therapy program and gain a West Coast
presence, Genzyme Corp. will acquire Foster City, Calif.-based Cell Genesys Inc.
for about $350 million. Cell Genesys provides Cambridge-based Genzyme with a
strong patent portfolio in gene activation, access to gene-therapy technology -
particularly for getting specific genes into certain diseased tissue - and a
West Coast presence. Genzyme says Cell Genesys has more than 200 issued or
granted patents and more than 330 patent applications pending. And Cell Genesys
will be able to get some of its proposed gene-therapy drugs to market more
efficiently with Genzyme's financial help.

   All along the waterfront

    One of the last buildable sites on the North End waterfront is being
targeted for condos and a 125-room bed and breakfast. Philip DeNormandie's $50
million Lewis Wharf development would consist of up to eight three-story
buildings on two finger piers. Another building would be erected at the end of
the existing Lewis Wharf building, between the two piers. A public walkway is
expected to wind along the edge of the redeveloped piers, extending the city's
Harbor Walk. DeNormandie said he got a positive reaction in early talks with the
Boston Redevelopment Authority and expects to file a written proposal soon. But
he hasn't yet presented the project to the neighborhood, which at times has
objected vociferously to waterfront development proposals.

   Feeling hot, hot, hot

    Sycamore Networks Inc., a tiny Chelmsford company with just two customers,
set Wall Street on fire Friday with its initial public offering of stock, its
share price exploding fivefold, from an opening price of $38 a share to a close
of 184 3/4. That makes Sycamore, a manufacturer of fiber-optic network products
for carrying Internet traffic, worth $14 billion, setting a record for the
highest market value ever achieved by an Internet company in its first day of
trading. It also makes Sycamore, a company with little more than $11 million in
revenue since May when it shipped its first product, Massachusetts'
fourth-highest-valued company, dwarfing Staples Inc., Raytheon Co., and TJX
Cos., operator of TJ Maxx clothing stores. The market exuberance over Sycamore
is just the latest in a string of record-setting IPOs of Internet-related
companies, demonstrating an almost insatiable demand for a relatively limited
supply of such stock.

   Deal in store

    Iron Mountain Inc., a Boston operator of document storage warehouses, has
agreed to buy Pennsylvania-based rival Pierce Leahy Corp. for $1.2 billion in
stock and debt. The acquisition, which requires regulatory approval, creates a
storage company with 350 warehouses in 33 countries and 35 percent of the US
document storage market. Though the onset of a computer age was touted to herald
a paperless era, most organizations continue to keep space-consuming paper
records for years. Tax records, medical records, and receipts are among the many
items still stored on paper.

   Nation/world

   Going public

    Insurance giant Sun Life of Canada, which makes its US headquarters in
Wellesley, plans to go public, joining a wave of mutual insurance companies
restructuring to transfer ownership from policyholders to shareholders.
Toronto-based Sun plans to offer more than 1 million policyholders shares in a
new company called Sun Life Financial Services of Canada Inc. Company officials
said the move will have positive implications for Boston-based MFS Investment
Management - a Sun Life subsidiary that has 1,500 employees and $112 million
under management - by giving MFS more money to finance expansion plans. Sun Life
policyholders will vote on the plan at a special December meeting.

   Nissan's game plan

    Nissan Motor Co. announced a sweeping restructuring plan. New chief
operating officer Carlos Ghosn said the company plans to close five factories;
cut 21,000 jobs in the next three years; pare $9 billion in costs; overhaul its
supply system; stop selling bland cars; and fundamentally alter its Japanese
management practices. The job cuts aren't expected to affect US operations,
where about 500 employees were laid off late last year. Troubled Nissan's fall
has been spectacular - $19 billion in debt, losses in six of the last seven
years, and the humbling sale of a controlling interest to Renault in March.

   Delta, Comair deal

    Atlanta's Delta Air Lines Inc. agreed to buy the 78 percent of Comair
Holdings Inc. that it doesn't already own for $1.91 billion, giving the
third-largest US airline the biggest regional carrier and feeding more travelers
from smaller cities onto its routes. Delta said it would pay $1.8 billion and
assume $110 million in Cincinnati-based Comair's debt.

   Agenda

    Tomorrow: Treasury holds T-bill auction.

   Tuesday: Conference Board releases the consumer confidence index.

   Wednesday: Commerce Department reports September durable goods. Treasury
holds T-note auction.

   Thursday: Labor Department reports weekly jobless claims. Commerce reports
third-quarter gross domestic product.

   Friday: Commerce reports September new-home sales.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1999


                             1247 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 24, 1999, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1118 words

HEADLINE: Brain tumors are elusive and varied, but they're not always deadly

SOURCE: New York Times

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   Ruth had undergone a mysterious personality change that defied psychiatric
explanation. Charles awoke each morning with a severe headache that eased as the
day progressed. Kathleen experienced partial facial paralysis, slurred her words
and drooled. Marlys suffered a grand mal seizure that rendered her unconscious
for about 15 minutes.

   All four had different kinds of brain tumors. Ruth's was benign and grew
slowly, but it was not detected for years, too late for treatment that could
have saved her.

   Charles' tumor was malignant, and despite the best therapy available at the
time, he succumbed to primary brain cancer within two years.

   Kathleen's tumor was also malignant, but it had not started in the brain.
Rather, it turned out to be the spread of a lung cancer that ultimately took her
life.

   Marlys was the lucky one. Her benign tumor was detected by modern imaging
while it was small and in an area that permitted surgical removal without any
harm.

   For reasons yet to be determined, brain tumors are becoming more common,
especially in older people. The latest well-known victim is Cardinal John
O'Connor, archbishop of New York, whose small tumor was surgically removed this
month at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Although the state of the tumor
has not been revealed, O'Connor, 79, will undergo several weeks of radiation
therapy, which is typically used to prevent the spread of cancer from cells that
may have escaped the surgeon's scalpel.

   Since the mid-1980s, the yearly total of Americans given diagnoses of brain
tumors has doubled, and it is expected to exceed 100,000 this year. More than
half the increase has occurred in people over 65.

   Survival rates, too, have been inching up, thanks to improved diagnostic
techniques and more precise and inventive treatments, such as stereotactic
radiosurgery (a pinpoint form of radiation) and laser surgery with a gamma
knife. More progress is expected to result from experimental treatments,
including immunotherapy, gene therapy and implanted wafers of chemotherapeutic
agents.

   Only about 20 percent of brain tumors are primary - that is, tumors that
start in brain tissue. Half of these are brain cancers, and half are benign
tumors that can nonetheless become life-threatening because they grow inside a
skull that cannot expand. As they do, they can press on vital tissues, which may
sometimes preclude their removal.

   The remaining 80 percent of brain tumors are secondary, originating from
cancers elsewhere in the body - although, as in Kathleen's case, the primary
cancer is sometimes not detected until after the metastatic brain tumor has been
found. Lung, breast and colon cancers, as well as melanomas, often spread to the
brain.


   Studying causes


   There has been much speculation about the possible causes of brain cancers,
and especially their apparent increase. About 5 percent are hereditary. Among
suggested environmental factors are low-energy electromagnetic fields from
objects such as cellular phones, power lines and household appliances, although
considerable research into the matter has yet to yield any definitive evidence
of such a risk.

   To be sure, high-dose radiation delivered to the head, including therapy for
brain tumors, can increase the risk of brain cancer. There is no link, however,
to low-dose radiation delivered through diagnostic X-rays or workplace exposure
to ionizing radiation.

   But industrial chemicals may be a problem. Workers regularly exposed to
substances such as acrylonitrite, vinyl chloride, formaldehyde, lubricating
oils, N-nitroso compounds, phenols, pesticides, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
and organic solvents develop brain tumors with greater-than-average frequency.
Pregnant women and parents of infants should be especially careful to avoid such
chemicals, because animal studies indicate that exposure in utero and in infancy
incurs the greatest risk.

   Also, pregnant women would be wise to take supplements containing vitamins C,
A, E and folate throughout their pregnancies. A three-continent study indicated
that the children of women who took such vitamins were half as likely as the
children of nontakers to develop brain tumors before age 5.

   Benign brain tumors can often be treated successfully, although there may be
lasting effects, depending on size and location. But because the most common
type of brain cancer, glioblastoma multiforme, is fast-growing and highly
invasive, and because early symptoms of brain tumors often mimic other problems,
delaying diagnosis, brain cancer is associated with a five-year survival rate of
only 30 percent. This rate is half that for cancers overall, but still much
better than the survival rates for cancers of the lung, pancreas and esophagus.


   Silent disturber


   The problem with brain tumors is their ability to grow silently for years
and, when they finally do produce symptoms, become confused with other problems
such as migraine headaches, inner-ear problems, epilepsy or stroke. For example,
Kathleen, who had speech problems and drooling, thought at first she might have
had a stroke.

   If everyone with symptoms such as headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting,
memory loss, personality or behavioral change, hearing problems, difficulty
walking, decreased sensation, seizures or blurred or double vision underwent a
thorough work-up for a brain tumor, it could easily overwhelm the health-care
system.

   But if such symptoms persist or keep recurring, patients should insist on
being examined for possible brain tumors.

   A proper diagnostic should include a complete neurological exam, including
abstract thinking and memory tests and a scan of the brain.

   The treatment of choice depends on the patient's age (children under 3 are
generally not given radiation therapy), the size and location of the tumor, the
sensitivity of the tumor to radiation and chemotherapy, and the general health
of the patient. The three common cancer treatments - surgery, radiation therapy
and chemotherapy - are most often used for brain tumors as well. But there are
now highly sophisticated ways of "operating" on the brain, including the use of
pinpoint radiation and laser beams that can destroy the tumor without damaging
normal surrounding tissue.

   A large number of clinical trials are also under way, exploring the potential
of new chemotherapeutic techniques and immunotherapy. In fact, patients are
often encouraged to enroll in a trial. More than 200 such trials are listed in
the National Cancer Institute's Physician Data Query database. It is available
by phone, at 800-422-6237, or via either of these Internet sites:
cancertrials.nci.nih.gov and cancernet.nci.nih.gov.











LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1999


                             1248 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1999 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    October 24, 1999, Sunday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1442 words

HEADLINE: Med School suffering from faculty losses;
Professors say the pressure to treat patients doesn't give them enough time to
teach and conduct research.

BYLINE: Maura Lerner; Staff Writer

BODY:

   Dr. Michael Shreve says that he loves to teach the art of medicine to medical
students and young doctors. So does Dr. Becky Carpenter. Yet in the past five
months, both pediatricians quit their jobs on the faculty of the University of
Minnesota Medical School to go into private practice.

        They have plenty of company.

        In the past four years, more than 90 professors have left the Medical
School _ including some of its most seasoned experts _ for a net loss of almost
one-fifth of the faculty, according to university officials.

        Although some of the reasons for this unprecedented brain drain are not
unique to the university, officials there admit that it's a dramatic symptom of
what's ailing the state's premier medical institution.

       The school that once basked in the glow of its world-class research and
training has been losing ground on both fronts, they say.

       Even university President Mark Yudof is worrying openly about the future.
"How do we keep this place afloat?" he asked.

       Dr. Frank Cerra is worried too. As the head of the university's Academic
Health Center, which includes the Medical School, he believes that the school
has been shaken to the core in the past few years by tectonic shifts in the
health-care system.

       At a meeting Monday he plans to ask faculty and staff members to help
figure out what to do about it.

       The main problem, he said, is that teaching and research are being
squeezed out by financial pressures. That could have a powerful impact on
Minnesota's ability to draw the best students, attract and keep the most
promising young doctors and provide the public with the most advanced
treatments.

       Already, the numbers are making people at the university nervous.

       Over the past four years, the number of applications for federal research
grants has plummeted at the Medical School. Its national ranking, in terms of
funds received, has sunk to a 28-year low.

       The anxiety is so great that earlier this year, when Fairview-University
Medical Center disappeared from U.S. News & World Report's annual rankings of
the best medical centers, many read it as the ultimate sign of a fall from
grace. In fact, its omission was traced to a bureaucratic error.

        But many say the Medical School's reputation has indeed suffered, and
they blame a bottom-line mentality.

        "When I came here in 1980, this was a mecca for medicine," said Dr.
Mendel Tuchman, an expert in genetic diseases who, out of frustration, left the
Medical School in August for Children's National Medical Center in Washington,
D.C. The message at the university now, he said, is that "cost is the most
important thing."

       For doctors such as Shreve and Carpenter, the problem was time, not
money, as well as a pervasive sense of gloom in their department. "There seemed
to be a lot of unhappy people around," said Shreve, who spent two years as an
assistant professor of pediatrics before leaving in August.

   .

   'More responsibilities'

       In the past few years, Shreve said, doctors in his department were under
so much pressure to see patients that they had little time for anything else _
including teaching. "More responsibilities were added to your 24-hour day
without adding any more hours," he said.

       Carpenter, a pediatric radiologist who still describes herself as
"intensely loyal" to the university, said that she expected to make sacrifices _
longer hours, lower pay _ when she started her academic career here 10 years
ago. But eventually, her situation became untenable, and she quit last spring,
she said. "You have less income to pay yourself," she said. "You have less time
to do the teaching. You have less time to do research. . . . It's hard to do
anything well."

         That, Cerra acknowledged, is the most common complaint that he has
heard from those who leave.

        Although few people outside the school realize it, the university has
long paid its doctor-professors only a fraction of the salaries that they
actually make, about a third on average, according to Cerra.

        The staff physicians have earned most of their paychecks _ and kept the
school afloat _ with fees from treating patients. They subsidized the Medical
School with a share of their fees _ as much as $53 million a year in 1995 _ but
they still had time for their other duties.

        "That could work in the pre-managed-care era," said Dr. Jonathan Ravdin,
chairman of the Department of Medicine. But not anymore.

        Today, with HMOs and Medicare squeezing doctor payments, the departments
are having a tougher time balancing their budgets. So the professors, much like
doctors in private practice, have to work more time in the clinic and see more
patients just to earn what they used to.

   .

   Market forces rule

        It was a clash just waiting to happen. HMOs, of course, had a mandate to
rein in skyrocketing costs, and nowhere were costs higher than teaching
hospitals. Historically, academic medical centers always charged more, to cover
the extra time and effort involved in training young doctors. And yet
managed-care officials have insisted that they can't be exempt from the market
forces that affect everyone else in medicine.

        Dr. David Knopman, a neurology professor and Alzheimer's specialist,
said that he couldn't even leave a 15-minute gap between patients, to chat with
a medical student, without getting "severely castigated." By whom? "It turns
out, it would be me," he laughed, noting that he has been named interim chairman
of his department. In that position, he said, he'll have to worry about
balancing the budget. That may mean telling others to work harder at seeing
patients,

       As faculty members, Cerra said, they still have an obligation to teach
and to do research _ but they have less time to do it. "So the mission [of the
medical school] is getting blown apart by the whole managed-care effect," he
said. "We're a victim of the marketplace."

         Of course, the University of Minnesota isn't alone in that respect.

       "The same kind of thing is going on all around the country," said Dr.
Gareth Parry, neurology chairman, who is leaving in November to return to his
native country, New Zealand. "But the University's got it in spades," he said,
because Minnesota has lower Medicare fees, and more managed care, than most
parts of the country.

       It's probably only a matter of time before the problem spreads.

        "I think there is a chance, not just in Minnesota, but nationally, that
[medical education] will lose its soul," said Yudof.

       Dr. Stephen Haines, who left the Medical School two years ago, agrees.

       "There's a grave danger that the whole country will experience what
Minneapolis has experienced, what the University of Minnesota has experienced,"
said Haines, who is now chairman of neurosurgery at the Medical University of
South Carolina. "That would be a true tragedy for the country."

       The irony, said Carpenter, is that she has more time to teach now that
she has left the University. Like many Twin Cities doctors, she trains medical
residents and students as they rotate through the area's hospitals and clinics.
She doesn't get paid for it, she said, but "I actually have more time off to
even prepare the lectures."

       As for research, many scientists are squeezing it into their free time.

       "I do most of my writing in the evenings and on weekends," said Knopman,
of his Alzheimer's research.

        And no one wins if research dries up.

       "What makes the Medical School special is bringing new special programs
to the bedside," said Ravdin, who holds an endowed chair in internal medicine. "
Gene therapy . . . liver transplants . . . cancer therapy. All that is based on
bringing research to the bedside."

        And others worry that it's going to get tougher to lure young doctors
into academic medicine. Many of them "see this as a very unstable, undesirable
career," said Dr. Thomas Hostetter, a professor of medicine. "So the idea of
staying in an academic post and having any kind of investigative career" seems
increasingly unlikely.

        Yet Cerra points out that the Medical School is on more solid footing
than it was just a few years ago, when its hospital was losing money. And just
last week, Yudof announced a $1.3 billion fund-raising campaign, in part to
recruit and retain Medical School faculty members.

        "I'm always an optimist," Cerra said. With the right choices, he said,
"we can restore the vibrancy of the place in the next three to four to five
years."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1999


                             1249 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   October 23, 1999, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 302 words

HEADLINE: MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY TREATMENT PROMISING

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:


   Muscles that had wasted away due to a type of muscular dystrophy were able to
grow back to their normal size and strength in a gene therapy experiment
involving hamsters.

   Researchers from the Children's National Medical Center in Washington, D.C.,
and the University of Pittsurgh successfully treated hamsters with limb-girdle
muscular dystrophy and hope to begin trials next year to see if the therapy is
safe for humans, they said yesterday at the American Society of Human Genetics
meeting here.

   "It looks to be very, very good," said Devin Dressman, a Pitt graduate
student in molecular genetics and biochemistry, who works at the Washington
medical center.

   Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies are a group of muscle diseases caused by the
lack of certain proteins called sarcoglycans.

   There are four types of sarcoglycans and if a person is lacking any one of
the four, muscle wasting can occur.

   "When you flex a muscle, [the combination of all four proteins] stabilizes
membranes so the muscle doesn't rupture," or so scientists believe, Dressman
explained.

   Dressman and Xiao Xiao, a Pitt molecular geneticist, conducted two
experiments on hamsters that had limb-girdle dystrophy. In one, a gene-virus
combination was injected into the muscle that runs along the hamster's shin.

   To test larger muscle groups, Dressman devised an instrument that could
perform 10 injections simultaneously.

   That instrument was used to inject the gene into the hamster's thigh.

   After a month, tests showed that the muscles had grown to normal size and had
doubled in strength.

   The needed protein was made continually for as long as eight months thus far.

   The therapy may be less effective in humans because the widespread nature of
the disease would mean all the muscles would have to be injected.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1999


                             1250 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 22, 1999, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: Grants worth $ 11.2 million target ovarian cancer

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center has received a five-year,
$ 10 million grant for ovarian cancer research from the National Cancer
Institute.

   The grant will fund basic science and clinical research in four areas,
including:

   Study of the prevention of ovarian cancer through drugs such as oral
contraceptives and vitamin A.

   Examination of a tumor suppressor gene and the role of an enzyme in
inhibiting tumor formation.

   Investigation of angiogenic factors as a diagnostic tool and target for gene
therapy. Angiogenesis is the formation of blood vessels that nourish tumors and
allow them to grow.

   The grant, announced Thursday at The Healthy Woman's Symposium on early
detection and prevention, also will provide start-up funds for young
investigators and seed money for developmental research programs in ovarian
cancer. M.D. Anderson was the host to the symposium, which was held at the Park
Plaza Warwick and featured former first lady Barbara Bush as the keynote
speaker.

   M.D. Anderson was one of four institutions nationwide to be awarded a SPORE
(Specialized Program of Research Excellence) grant this month from the National
Cancer Institute for ovarian cancer research.

   Other SPORE recipients were the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in
Seattle, Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia and the University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Ala.

   The grant supports research that may have an immediate impact on improving
cancer care and prevention.

   Over the next five years, M.D. Anderson will work on several research
initiatives with investigators from Baylor College of Medicine, the University
of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio, the University of California at
San Francisco, Northwestern University in Chicago and the University of
Pittsburgh.

   Dr. Robert C. Bast Jr., head of the Division of Medicine at M.D. Anderson, is
the principal investigator for the SPORE grant. Dr. David M. Gershenson,
chairman ad interim of the department of gynecologic oncology, is co-principal
investigator.

   In addition to the SPORE grant, M.D. Anderson's Ovarian Cancer Research
Program also received a four-year, $ 1.2 million grant from the U.S. Department
of Defense for research focusing on the prevention of ovarian cancer.


LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1999


                             1251 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 22, 1999 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 765 words

HEADLINE: Licensing deal helps Datron Systems' earnings rise;
Document Sciences posts 3 profitable quarters in row

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Datron Systems Inc. of Vista reported higher net income for its second
quarter, in part because of a recent deal in which Datron licensed to another
company the manufacturing rights of Datron's tail-mounted DBS television antenna
for business jets. Datron earned $655,000 for the quarter, or 22 cents a share,
compared to $379,000, or 14 cents a share, for the same quarter last year.

   License fees for DBS antenna, which totaled more than $1 million, helped
offset higher research and development spending. Net sales for the first six
month of Datron's fiscal year fell 5 percent to $27.65 million.

   The company said the decrease occurred because of lower sales of radio
products. In other local earnings news: Document Sciences reported its third
consecutive profitable quarter as a result of decreased operating costs.

   The Carlsbad company reported third-quarter net income of $461,000, or 4
cents a share.

   Revenue fell 3 percent to $5.5 million.

   A year earlier, the company lost $956,000, or 9 cents a share. The Carlsbad
biotech Invitrogen reported a third-quarter loss of $600,000, or 4 cents a
share, including $4.4 million in costs for its acquisition of San Diego-based
Novex.

   Excluding those costs, the company said net income would have more than
doubled to $2.4 million, or 13 cents a share. Invitrogen said revenue grew 21
percent to $17.5 million. Collateral Therapeutics reported a third quarter loss
of $1.6 million, or 14 cents a share.

   The San Diego biotech reported revenue of $1.7 million and said it held $41.1
million in cash as of Sept. 30. San Diego-based Overland Data Inc. reported net
income of $39,000 for the fiscal first quarter ended Sept. 30. The results
included a special charge of $250,000, or slightly more than a penny a share,
required to settle a class action securities lawsuit filed in 1997. Without the
charge, Overland Data would have reported first-quarter net income of $185,000,
or 2 cents per share.

   That compares to net income of almost $1.35 million, or 12 cents a share, for
the same quarter last year. The company, which makes computer data storage
equipment, said first-quarter revenues fell to $22.8 million from $24.4 million.
Advanced Marketing Services Inc. said net income in the second quarter ended
Oct. 2 was $3,016,000, or 34 cents a share, compared to a net income of
$2,310,000, or 26 cents a diluted share, during the same period last year. The
San Diego-based company said net sales in the quarter increased to $145.2
million from $116.1 million.

   Advanced Marketing distributes books and related items to membership
warehouse clubs and other specialty retailers in the United States, Canada,
Mexico and the United Kingdom. American Residential Investment Trust of Del Mar
earned $2.2 million in the third quarter, or 27 cents per diluted share,
compared to $1 million, or 12 cents per diluted share, for the same period in
1998. Total assets grew from $928,000 to $1.3 billion during the year.

   During the third quarter alone, the company engaged in two securitizations
totaling $729 million and purchased $348 million in mortgage assets. IP Equity
Inc., a San-Diego based Internet finance firm, generated $1.5 million in net
earnings in the quarter ended in Sept. 30, compared to $433,095 in the quarter
ended June 30 -- the company's first fiscal quarter.

   Because the company was launched last summer, exact comparisons between its
second-quarter periods are not available. Collateral Therapeutics, a San Diego
developer of non-invasive gene therapy products for cardiovascular diseases,
reported a net loss of $1.6 million or 14 cents per share for the third quarter
of 1999. For the year to date the company reported losses of $5.5 million or 50
cents per share.

   During the third quarter of 1998, the company lost $1.1 million, 11 cents per
share.

   For the first three quarters of 1998, Collateral lost $3.5 million or 49
cents per share. In other earnings news: McDonald's Corp. reported its
third-quarter earnings rose 12 percent $540.9 million, or 39 cents a share, up
from $482.2 million, or 34 cents a share, in the year-earlier period. The
company cited strong sales at its U.S. restaurants and continued growth abroad.
Mattel Inc. earnings plummeted 42 percent in the third quarter, undermined by a
$105 million loss at its troubled software subsidiary and weak sales in
international markets. Mattel earned $135.3 million, or 32 cents per share, on
sales of $1.83 billion.

   During last year's third quarter Mattel earned $233.8 million, or 54 cents
per share on sales of $1.88 billion, before after-tax charges totaling $65.1
million.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1252 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1999 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    October 22, 1999, Friday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1023 words

HEADLINE: 'U' fund drive sets bar high;
The goal _ $1.3 billion over seven years _ is the most ambitious a U.S. public
university has set.

BYLINE: Mary Jane Smetanka; Staff Writer

BODY:

   Amid fireworks and a blast of maroon-and-gold confetti, the University of
Minnesota on Thursday kicked off a campaign to raise $1.3 billion by 2003, the
most ambitious fund-raising drive ever for an American public university.

        "We have an unprecedented opportunity to be a greater-than-ever resource
for the state of Minnesota . . . and one of the premier research universities of
the world," university President Mark Yudof told a crowd in front of Coffman
Memorial Union.

        As fireworks sparked from Coffman's roof, a three-story-long gold banner
unfurled from a cherry picker and displayed a goal with a long line of zeroes:
$1,300,000,000. Half of that, about $628 million, already has been raised in the
"quiet phase" of the campaign, which started in 1996.

        The only public school to have raised more than the university's goal
within seven years is the University of Michigan, which collected $1.4 billion
in a billion-dollar campaign that ended in 1997. No public school has set a
seven-year goal as high as the university's.

         Yudof is optimistic.

        "We have good momentum in the community . . . and everyone understands
the stakes," he said. "I think we have a great story to tell."

        People are the focus of "Campaign Minnesota," which would raise money
both for the university endowment and to support programs in more than 25
schools and campuses in the university system.

        Goals include $275 million to recruit and retain faculty members, $225
million to attract and keep promising students, $350 million for high-tech and
academic priorities, $345 million for service and outreach and $65 million to
improve libraries.

        A major focus will be to boost the number of endowed faculty positions.
The university has 260 such positions. They include chairs endowed for $1
million each and professorships endowed for $500,000. The endowments give
faculty members prestige as well as support to hire research assistants and
conduct costly research.

        "The theme of the 21st century is brainpower and intellectual property,"
Yudof said. "It's people who synthesize new drugs for cancer treatments and
things of that sort. . . . Once you have the faculty in place, it all becomes
possible.

        "Look around the country . . . brainpower attracts new businesses, and
frankly it's the brainpower that starts companies that later become the
Medtronics of the world."

        In 1998-99, salaries for full professors on the Twin Cities campus
ranked 25th among the top 30 public and private research schools, up from 28th
two years ago.

        Yudof remains concerned about hiring and retention of the best
professors. One example he has talked about recently is the University of
Chicago's courting this fall of a researcher in the university Medical School.

        Yudof and medical school officials desperately wanted to keep Catherine
Verfaillie, a faculty member who built her career at the university over the
past decade. Working with gene therapy, Verfaillie and her colleagues hope to
convert stem cells from bone marrow into muscles and organs, work that Yudof
said could lead to a way to grow replacement organs. They begin clinical trials
in January.

        The university kept Verfaillie by matching Chicago's offer and
scrambling to offer more support for her research. (Yudof said he also sent her
a dozen roses as a thank-you for staying.)

        Increased discretionary money would allow the university to deal
flexibly and quickly with such cases, Yudof said. The capital campaign includes
a $40 million "strategic opportunity" fund that would allow speedy investment in
people, programs or buildings that needed it.

        Individual college goals include $160 million for the Institute of
Technology, $75 million for the College of Liberal Arts, $100 million for the
Carlson School of Management and $400 million for medical programs.

        Yudof said he is counting on legislators to maintain, not reduce, basic
support for the university. "There is always that risk," he said. "But I visited
with legislative leadership, and I think they understand it. The stakes are very
high. If you begin to cut back funding, a state of 5 million people is not going
to be able to [maintain a university that] remains competitive nationally."

        The university is usually ranks in the top three in the Big Ten each
year for annual gifts, which last year totaled $134.8 million. However, about 2
percent of donors give 80 to 90 percent of the money. Officials said that they
expect 200 to 300 major donors to give most of the money in this campaign, but
that they want to expand the pool of contributors.

        The school also will try to increase alumni giving, which
proportionately is among the lowest in the Big Ten. Only about 37,000 of the
university's approximately 600,000 alumni contribute to the school each year.
Partly because of the university's location in the midst of the Twin Cities,
non-alumni giving is high.

   .

   .

   Campaign Minnesota: a $1.3 billion fund drive

   .

   By 2003, the University of Minnesota aims to raise $1.3 billion for
endowments and to supplement operating funds. Specific goals include:

   .

       - Faculty: a $275 million endowment to recruit, develop and retain top
faculty members.

       - Students: a $225 million endowment to attract and keep promising
students.

       - Unrestricted strategic funding: $40 million for special investment in
faculty, programs or facilities that administrators deem critical.

       - Research: $350 million for priorities such as molecular and cellular
biology, medicine, agricultural research, new media and digital technology and
for transferring ideas from the lab into the marketplace.

       - Service and outreach: $345 million for outreach programs ranging from
the Minnesota Landscape Arboretum to the Weisman Art Museum to public-use
veterinary and dental clinics.

       - Libraries and new facilities: $65 million to support improvements.

   .

   Source: University of Minnesota


GRAPHIC: CHART; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1999


                             1253 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           October 21, 1999, Thursday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT, Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 246 words

HEADLINE: GRATEFUL GIVERS COMMUNITY STEPS UP FOR CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL

BODY:


   Charitable fund-raising campaigns abound in this community, many of which
serve worthwhile causes. But it is the rare mission that translates directly
into lives saved, hurts healed and significant improvements in children's
health.

   Children's Hospital has such a mission. Seeing the hospital exceed its
five-year fund- raising goal is moving and gratifying.

   The For Our Children campaign, which ends in December, sought to raise $ 85
million for patient care, research and educational programs.

   Central Ohio residents already have pledged more than $ 102 million.

   Hospital officials say the money will help provide state-of-the-art care to
every child, regardless of a family's ability to pay.

   This translates into:

   * Attracting top scientists to join the 15 new ones recruited to Children's
in the past three years.

   * Expanding the hospital's bone-marrow-transplant program to unrelated
donors.

   * New intensive-care units that enable families to stay overnight.

   * Pediatric services for children in underserved neighborhoods, through seven
Close to Home Physician Care Centers.

   * A comprehensive pediatric-autism program.

   * Gene-therapy research through the Children's Research Institute.

   This community can be proud of the contributions it has made to this most
deserving fund-raiser.

   The 108-year-old hospital has been a needed and trusted presence in central
Ohio; now, the grateful region it serves has had a chance to say thanks.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1999


                             1254 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    October 21, 1999, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
 SCIENCE IN BRIEF;
 EXPERIMENTAL GENE THERAPY VACCINE GETS RESPONSE IN SOME PROSTATE CANCER CASES

BODY:


   Maryland researchers who have been working on a gene therapy vaccine against
cancer said that they had provoked a surprisingly strong immune response against
prostate cancer, producing tumor regression in eight out of 11 patients. They
said their "personalized" vaccine, made using cancer cells from each individual
patient, activated the entire immune system to fight the cancer--although it did
not cure any of their patients.

   Writing in today's Cancer Research, a team from Johns Hopkins University said
it took cancer cells from the patients' own prostate tumors, inserted the gene
for a protein called GM-CSF, and grew them in a laboratory dish. GM-CSF
activates the immune system to recognize tumors. Then the cells were zapped with
X-rays to make sure the cells did not cause more cancer, and injected into the
patients' thighs.

   Within four weeks of vaccination, the researchers found immune cells known as
B-cells circulating and producing antibodies against prostate cancer cells.
Another kind of immune cell, T-cells, were directly attacking the tumors.


   *

   Compiled by Times medical writer Thomas H. Maugh II

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1999


                             1255 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                           October 21, 1999, Thursday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 012

LENGTH: 339 words

HEADLINE: VACCINE MAY HELP BODY BATTLE PROSTATE CANCER

BYLINE: Rita Delfiner

BODY:

   Researchers have developed an experimental vaccine that spurs the body's
immune system to fight prostate cancer.

   "This same concept could be applied to breast cancer or other cancers," said
Dr. Jonathan Simons, who led a study done at the Johns Hopkins Oncology Center.

   "This is not a cure, but this is a whole new door to walk through to get to
curing prostate cancer using the immune system," he said yesterday.

   The researchers said the "personalized" gene-therapy vaccine - using prostate
cancer cells from each individual patient - triggered the immune system to spot
the tumors as foreign invaders and battle them, although none of the patients
was cured.

   Trying to stimulate the immune system against cancer has often failed before
because it doesn't distinguish between cancer cells and normal tissue - but the
researchers said they made a breakthrough this time.

   "We were astounded to find that every part of the immune system was alerted
and turned on," Simons said.

   "Using gene therapy, we re-educated the immune system to recognize prostate
cancer cells as a potential infection and attack."

   Members of the medical team, in a study published in the Cancer Research
journal, said they took cells from prostate cancer patients' own tumors, grew
them in a lab dish and then inserted the gene for a protein that activates the
immune system to recognize tumors.

   After eight men were vaccinated - researchers could not culture a vaccine
from the cells of three others - their immune systems seemed to be attacking the
cancer although the response was not strong enough to shrink the tumors or cause
remission, the study found.

   "They have taken a first exciting step and shown they have turned on the
immune system against prostate cancer," said Dr. John Mcdonald, medical director
for St. Vincents Medical Center's Comprehensive Cancer Center in Manhattan.

   "The next question is: 'Will that help patients?' They have not demonstrated
that it makes the cancer shrink or that it cures anyone's cancer."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1999


                             1256 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   October 21, 1999, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 457 words

HEADLINE: LEADERS IN GENETICS;
PUBLIC HAS MUCH TO LEARN ABOUT 21ST CENTURY'S NEW MEDICINE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   The leader of U.S. efforts to map the human genetic code yesterday predicted
that a new world of gene-based medicine will provide people with report cards of
their unique risk for specific diseases and will foster individualized
prevention strategies and treatments.

   With such innovation around the corner, the public must gain know-ledge about
basic genetics because it will be "integrated with many of the decisions of
daily life," said Dr. Francis Collins, director of the Human Genome Project for
the National Institutes of Health.

   He and other panelists discussed the value of teaching genetics to college
undergraduates not majoring in science at the American Society of Human Genetics
meeting in San Francisco.

   Imagine a 21-year-old young man in 2010 who has found out his cholesterol is
elevated, Collins said. His father was not yet 50 when he died of a heart
attack. The young man's doctor might offer him genetic tests to check his risk
of developing coronary artery disease and, if he wishes, several other diseases
including prostate cancer and lung cancer.

   The young man's report card might show that his genetic makeup puts him at
twice the risk for heart disease and four times the risk of developing lung
cancer as other people, which could help him decide to quit smoking and change
his diet. Perhaps the report also says that he has a very low chance of getting
prostate cancer and Alzheimer's disease.

   To take full advantage of such testing and to make good choices, patients
need an understanding of genetics and risk measurement, Collins explained.
Medical advancements regularly make front pages and magazine covers, indicating
a high level of public interest and the importance of distributing accurate
information.

   He predicted that 10 years from now, primary care physicians will order
readily available and accurate genetic tests for about 25 conditions, that gene
therapy will successfully treat a few diseases and that inequity in access to
such innovations will exist, with the developing world at a marked disadvantage.

   By 2020, drugs will be tailored to an individual's metabolism and to the
unique genetic fingerprint of a person's cancer. A decade more and the world
might see genes treated to extend the life span - and antitechnology groups
growing more vocal. Forty years from now, society might be having heated debates
about humans "taking charge of their own evolution."

   Genetics could have very important effects outside of medicine, such as
demonstrating that biologically people are very much the same.

   "Separation of human populations into precisely defined racial categories is
scientifically unjustifiable," said Collins, who said geneticists must spread
that message.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1999


                             1257 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 21, 1999 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-8

LENGTH: 869 words

HEADLINE: Alzheimer's study at UCSD plans to try new gene therapy

BYLINE: David E. Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A UCSD neuroscientist has received federal regulatory approval to use a gene
therapy procedure as an experimental treatment for people suffering cognitive
debilitation caused by Alzheimer's disease. The trial, a novel use of gene
therapy for Alzheimer's, will involve delivering to the patient's brain a gene
that produces a growth factor shown in animal tests to improve the functioning
of cells of the type typically ravaged by the disease. Dr. Mark Tuszynski
received the permission from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, a principal
regulatory body for experimental medicines. There are not interventions now that
prevent Alzheimer's disease, researchers say.

   Treatments generally try to increase the function and ease the consequences
that include disorientation, a lack of attention, forgetfulness and dementia.

   Alzheimer's affects an estimated 4 million Americans, and that number is
expected to double in the next 25 years with the aging of the population. "This
approach helps prevent cell loss in the first place," Tuszynski said of the gene
therapy. With the delivery of the gene for human nerve growth factor, Tuszynski
hopes to keep alive and even improve the condition of the cholinergic system --
cells that regulate reasoning, memory and attention centers of the brain and a
region damaged by Alzheimer's. "I'm pleased and encouraged we've received FDA
approval," Tuszynski said Tuesday.

   "However, there's one more regulatory step we're engaged in." Before
Tuszynski begins his trial, he also wants approval for the procedure from the
National Institute of Health's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, originally
established to review gene therapy protocols.

   Even though that committee's recommendation now is not binding, Tuszynski
said he thinks it would add credibility to the bid for testing humans.

   That review could come in December. "We will not begin clinical trials until
we hear from the RAC in December this year," Tuszynski said, adding that he
expects to begin by spring. In experiments with rhesus monkeys, the approach
preserved and even restored cell function, he said.

   The cells show improved use of neurotransmitters, the chemical messages that
move between cells and that are crucial for the cells to communicate with one
another. The trial will include eight people who are in the earlier stages of
the disease.

   That is important, Tuszynski said, so that they are cognizant enough to give
informed consent for the experimental procedure. The gene, placed inside skin
cells, will be injected through a needle into the brain to ensure that the
transplant reaches the precise spot necessary for benefit.

   Tuszynski chose that approach because many drugs in the bloodstream do not
reach the brain easily, The trial will be conducted both at UCSD and the
Veterans Affairs Medical Center in La Jolla with the surgical insertion overseen
by Dr. Hoi-Sang U, chief of neurosurgery at the VA. The trial is designed
primarily to test for the safety of the procedure, although Tuszynski is hoping
for some therapeutic benefit as well. Given that Alzheimer's is so difficult to
treat, David Schubert, who studies the disease at the Salk Institute, welcomed
the new approach. "There is essentially no treatment," Schubert said.

   "Anything that has some potential for working should be tried. "What you want
to do is find Alzheimer's early and prevent the (cell) death." Schubert has
studied the role of vitamin E in possibly slowing the death of brain cells
associated with the disease.

   Other drugs being explored attempt to enhance the function of remaining cells
to ease the practical consequences of the disease. But the field is in need of a
powerful intervention to prevent cell death, Schubert said. Tuszynski will
follow the patients over the course of months, or even years, for signs
indicating whether the people maintain or even improve their mental functioning.
If it goes well, other tests of the therapy likely would follow, Tuszynski said.
Genes delivered to rhesus monkeys have proved effective in keeping cells in
damaged regions of the animal's brain alive for as long as eight months, he
said.

   In those experiments, scientists damaged the animals' cholinergic areas in a
way that mimicked the deterioration caused by Alzheimer's in the human
hippocampus, a region important for learning and memory. Schubert offered the
caveat that the therapy may not be as beneficial in people as it appears in
monkeys.

   For example, he said, it is unclear whether the immune system might reject
the implanted cells, and it is not known whether the gene producing the nerve
growth factor will continue robustly over a long time. A UCSD panel that reviews
use of experimental treatments on people has given its approval. Once Tuszynski
decides to proceed with the trial, it would then take time to genetically modify
the patients' cells and prepare them for insertion into their brains.

   That makes spring a likely target date for the therapy to start, he said. If
the gene therapy provides some benefit, Tuszynski said, it would begin to
deliver on the long promise of the gene therapy approach to medicine -- to use
genes to address the causes of disease, not just the symptoms arising from
disease.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1258 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       October 21, 1999 Thursday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E5

LENGTH: 704 words

HEADLINE: FRAGILE X SYNDROME CAUSE OF GENETIC RETARDATION

BYLINE: By Dr. Mitchell Hecht Knight Ridder/Tribune News Service

BODY:

   Q. What can you tell me about Fragile X syndrome? I have a relative who I'm
told might have it.

   Name withheld by request, Dublin, Ga.

   A. Fragile X syndrome may be the most common cause of genetically inherited
mental retardation you've never heard of. (Note: Down syndrome is the most
common cause of mental retardation overall, but it's not inherited).

   One in every 2000 males and one in every 4000 females are born with Fragile X
syndrome. A surprisingly large 1 in 259 women in the general population carry
the Fragile X gene.

   It's a bit tricky, because there are some who have the genetic defect and are
normal by all appearances and IQ tests -- and then there are those at the other
end of the spectrum with severe mental retardation; specific physical
appearances (long face, large ears, mitral valve prolapse, double-jointed
fingers and men with large testicles); and behavioral problems such as autism or
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.

   Those with Fragile X syndrome may have signs and symptoms that fall anywhere
in this spectrum.

   Keep in mind that this is a genetically inherited disorder, and not everyone
with large ears or hyperactivity or slow learning has Fragile X syndrome.

   What goes wrong in Fragile X syndrome?

   Before I answer that, let's go over a few concepts of genetics. A gene is a
basic unit of heredity that results in a certain trait -- like your hair or eye
color.

   Genes, collectively, make up the blueprint for your body. There are an
estimated 100,000 genes located on a total of 23 pairs of neatly wound
threadlike structures called chromosomes.

   The genetic material that makes up genes is known as DNA. Every personality
trait, physical characteristic and genetic defect (such as a risk for breast or
colon cancer) is within these genes.

   Suppose we could identify every gene we have or are supposed to have. We
could then find existing genetic problems, or potential problems -- and repair
them. Sounds far-fetched? Well, the Human Genome Project, begun in 1990 and due
to be completed by 2003, is currently working on mapping every human gene.

   Thanks to the Human Genome Project, we now know what goes wrong in Fragile X.

   Every gene is made up of many units of DNA sequences. In Fragile X, there
seems to be a stuttering-like repeat of the same DNA sequence.

   Normally, there's supposed to be some repeating of this DNA sequence --
approximately 6-45 copies. But in Fragile X, there are 200 or more copies of
this DNA sequence. This appears to be the genetic defect in Fragile X. It seems
to result in shutting off a certain protein we've named FMR-1.

   There are some who have less than 200 copies, but more than the normal
amount. These folks are either mildly affected, or are normal in appearance but
able to pass on their defect to their children. (They're carriers of the gene).

   Fragile X is carried on the X chromosome. However, since a woman is
genetically "XX", and only one of her chromosomes carries the Fragile X gene,
she has a 50-50 chance of passing on the gene.

   If she passes on the gene to her son (genetically, males are "XY"), he'll
likely be affected significantly.

   On the other hand, if she passes on the gene to her daughter, she'll still
have one normal X chromosome, and she'll either be mildly affected or she'll be
a mere carrier of the gene.

   Is there any cure for Fragile X syndrome? No. Efforts at the present time are
directed toward learning through special educational instruction; speech
therapy; physical and occupational therapy; and medical treatment to deal with
attention-deficit disorder, hyperactivity, aggression and depression.

   Future treatments may involve gene therapy in which the sequential repetition
of DNA that seems to shut down FMR-1 production and bring about Fragile X
syndrome is repaired.

   For more information, contact the FRAXA Research Foundation (508-462-1990) or
www.FRAXA.org/ or the National Fragile X Foundation (800-688-8765) or
www.NFXF.org/

   * * * * * * *

   Dr. Mitchell Hecht is a physician specializing in internal medicine. Send
questions to him at: "Ask Dr. H," P.O. Box 767787, Atlanta, Ga. 30076. Due to
the large volume of mail received, personal replies are not possible.

COLUMN: ASK DR. H

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1999


                             1259 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 20, 1999 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 869 words

HEADLINE: Alzheimer's study at UCSD will test new gene therapy

BYLINE: David E. Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A UCSD neuroscientist has received federal regulatory approval to use a gene
therapy procedure as an experimental treatment for people suffering cognitive
debilitation caused by Alzheimer's disease. The trial, a novel use of gene
therapy for Alzheimer's, will involve delivering to the patient's brain a gene
that produces a growth factor shown in animal tests to improve the functioning
of cells of the type typically ravaged by the disease. Dr. Mark Tuszynski
received the permission from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, a principal
regulatory body for experimental medicines. There are not interventions now that
prevent Alzheimer's disease, researchers say.

   Treatments generally try to increase the function and ease the consequences
that include disorientation, a lack of attention, forgetfulness and dementia.

   Alzheimer's affects an estimated 4 million Americans, and that number is
expected to double in the next 25 years with the aging of the population. "This
approach helps prevent cell loss in the first place," Tuszynski said of the gene
therapy. With the delivery of the gene for human nerve growth factor, Tuszynski
hopes to keep alive and even improve the condition of the cholinergic system --
cells that regulate reasoning, memory and attention centers of the brain and a
region damaged by Alzheimer's. "I'm pleased and encouraged we've received FDA
approval," Tuszynski said yesterday.

   "However, there's one more regulatory step we're engaged in." Before
Tuszynski begins his trial, he also wants approval for the procedure from the
National Institute of Health's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, originally
established to review gene therapy protocols.

   Even though that committee's recommendation now is not binding, Tuszynski
said he thinks it would add credibility to the bid for testing humans.

   That review could come in December. "We will not begin clinical trials until
we hear from the RAC in December this year," Tuszynski said, adding that he
expects to begin by spring. In experiments with rhesus monkeys, the approach
preserved and even restored cell function, he said.

   The cells show improved use of neurotransmitters, the chemical messages that
move between cells and that are crucial for the cells to communicate with one
another. The trial will include eight people who are in the earlier stages of
the disease.

   That is important, Tuszynski said, so that they are cognizant enough to give
informed consent for the experimental procedure. The gene, placed inside skin
cells, will be injected through a needle into the brain to ensure that the
transplant reaches the precise spot necessary for benefit.

   Tuszynski chose that approach because many drugs in the bloodstream do not
reach the brain easily, The trial will be conducted both at UCSD and the
Veterans Affairs Medical Center in La Jolla with the surgical insertion overseen
by Dr. Hoi-Sang U, chief of neurosurgery at the VA. The trial is designed
primarily to test for the safety of the procedure, although Tuszynski is hoping
for some therapeutic benefit as well. Given that Alzheimer's is so difficult to
treat, David Schubert, who studies the disease at the Salk Institute, welcomed
the new approach. "There is essentially no treatment," Schubert said.

   "Anything that has some potential for working should be tried. "What you want
to do is find Alzheimer's early and prevent the (cell) death." Schubert has
studied the role of vitamin E in possibly slowing the death of brain cells
associated with the disease.

   Other drugs being explored attempt to enhance the function of remaining cells
to ease the practical consequences of the disease. But the field is in need of a
powerful intervention to prevent cell death, Schubert said. Tuszynski will
follow the patients over the course of months, or even years, for signs
indicating whether the people maintain or even improve their mental functioning.
If it goes well, other tests of the therapy likely would follow, Tuszynski said.
Genes delivered to rhesus monkeys have proved effective in keeping cells in
damaged regions of the animal's brain alive for as long as eight months, he
said.

   In those experiments, scientists damaged the animals' cholinergic areas in a
way that mimicked the deterioration caused by Alzheimer's in the human
hippocampus, a region important for learning and memory. Schubert offered the
caveat that the therapy may not be as beneficial in people as it appears in
monkeys.

   For example, he said, it is unclear whether the immune system might reject
the implanted cells, and it is not known whether the gene producing the nerve
growth factor will continue robustly over a long time. A UCSD panel that reviews
use of experimental treatments on people has given its approval. Once Tuszynski
decides to proceed with the trial, it would then take time to genetically modify
the patients' cells and prepare them for insertion into their brains.

   That makes spring a likely target date for the therapy to start, he said. If
the gene therapy provides some benefit, Tuszynski said, it would begin to
deliver on the long promise of the gene therapy approach to medicine -- to use
genes to address the causes of disease, not just the symptoms arising from
disease.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1260 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                        October 19, 1999, Tuesday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,1A

LENGTH: 2287 words

HEADLINE: Expanding fight against brain cancer; Clinical trials: Scientific
advances, experimetal therapies and the chance to survive spurs a Mount Airy
woman to volunteer as a guinea pig.

BYLINE: Diana K. Sugg

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Deep into the night, even in her sleep, Melanie Perone was haunted, fearing
that the most aggressive and deadly of brain tumors might be growing back. Day
after day, she would run down the stairs to her basement, to the computer, to
search for a way to save her life.

    A few years ago, when brain tumors were the poor cousin of cancer research,
the Mount Airy woman's prospects would essentially have been no different than
the dismal options of the 1960s.

    But an explosion of findings in molecular biology has transformed the study
and treatment of brain cancer.

    Suddenly, this stubborn, lethal cancer that few wanted to study because it
is so rare, so complicated and so hard to reach, is now attracting top
researchers.

    The number of clinical trials has multiplied. And patients like Perone can
choose from scores of experimental therapies.

    "I thought if I found the perfect trial, it would save my life," she said.

    The first hint of her brain tumor came in late March, while she was waiting
in line at the library. She felt a tingling on the lower right side of her
mouth.

    "It was enough for me to go, 'Huh, what was that?' " she said.

    Within a few weeks, she got her answer: a mass on her brain. But Perone, 36,
an optimist with a big smile, wasn't worried. She felt confident her age would
protect her, even after the operation on Good Friday when surgeons removed her
walnut-sized tumor.

    But then doctors told her the biopsy results. A nurse closed the door.
Perone's husband, Jim, stood at her side. Two physicians looked at her from the
foot of the bed. One of them used the word "malignant."

    Perone screamed, not in fear, she said, but in grief. It was the wail of a
woman who had just lost her baby. Doctors gave her six months to two years to
live.

    Unlike so many before her, though, she received the diagnosis at a pivotal
period. For the first time in a generation, doctors can offer novel therapies,
therapies that give Perone a chance to survive.

    "We're kind of lucky now," said Perone, who finds herself reeling between
despair and hope. "There's more magic bullets to look at. Maybe they'll find a
cure tomorrow."

    The turnaround in this largely neglected field started in 1994, when
frustrated federal health officials decided to rethink their approach to brain
tumors.

    For years, researchers were mostly testing variations on radiation and
chemotherapy by enrolling hundreds of patients in costly trials that often took
years to complete. They also produced little new knowledge -- and saved few
people.

    So the National Cancer Institute decided to try lots of different strategies
in much smaller studies, to get quicker results and find promising therapies.

    Now, researchers can learn in a year to 18 months whether a treatment is
safe and might work. Research dollars dedicated to brain tumors multiplied,
growing from $12.6 million in 1982 to an estimated $59.6 million in 2000,
according to NCI figures.

    At the same time, discoveries in molecular biology -- such as deciphering
some of the key genetic changes in brain tumors -- gave physicians fresh targets
to pursue.

    Tumors rare but varied

    Brain tumors make up only 1 percent of all cancers, but there are more than
100 types of them. They behave unlike any other cancers. They don't spread to
other parts of the body, and they have a gnarled network of leaky blood vessels.

    Scientists discovered that those distinctive features make them perfect
models for two of the most promising cancer treatments today -- gene therapy and
a strategy that starves tumors by shrinking their blood supply.

    Suddenly, dozens of scientists with no previous interest in brain tumors
have been drawn into the field.

    "We used to have these tiny little meetings in which we were kind of voices
in the wilderness," said Dr. Richard S. Kaplan, program director for brain tumor
research at the National Cancer Institute. " Now there's just a tremendous
outburst of interest."

    By April, when Perone got her diagnosis, more than 150 clinical trials were
under way.

    She immediately went to Montgomery Ward, bought equipment that gave her
access to the Internet from her TV, and printed out a bewildering ream of data.
A house cleaner who earned her GED and took some community college courses, she
didn't know how to type and had never used a computer.

    But soon, she was sorting information on dozens of studies in stacks in her
basement. Hours passed without her realizing it. So did the days.

    Obsessed with data

    "I was obsessed," said Perone, who often worked until midnight and finally
had to install a clock to make sure she went to bed. "I mean, how many rats
died, how many lived?"

    Perone knew from her research that a minority of the approximately 34,000
Americans in whom primary brain tumors are diagnosed every year -- meaning the
tumors arise in the brain rather than spread from somewhere else -- can be
successfully treated.

    Despite major advances in many other cancers, malignant brain tumors have
proved difficult to defeat. The brain is protected by a barrier that filters out
toxins, including the chemicals that might kill tumors; drugs powerful enough to
cross that barrier could hurt precious healthy tissue.

    In nearly every case, tumors come back. About 17,000 people a year die.

    Scientists can't tell patients such as Perone why they developed this kind
of cancer, but many researchers believe the causes are environmental, with
heredity accounting for a small portion.

    Over the past several years, the numbers of brain tumors reported nationwide
has steadily increased, and scientists disagree about what this means. Kaplan
said new research shows there is no increased incidence of the disease, but that
technology like magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has allowed doctors to diagnose
cases they might have missed before.

    Like many patients, Perone decided to enroll in a trial even though she was
worried about being in an experiment.

    "Once in a while, you think about it, that we're just lab rats," she said.
"I can see those doctors coming home from work, saying, 'Good, we got our
group.' But they don't cry. They're going to be waking up for the next 60
years."

    She refused to enroll in any study in which she might be randomly picked to
receive either a placebo -- a "dummy" treatment that has no therapeutic effect
-- or a standard therapy with limited benefit. These randomized studies, which
directly compare two treatments, are considered the gold standard for research,
but patients, fearing they'll get the placebo, are reluctant to enter them.

    This makes it difficult to answer pressing questions, such as whether bone
marrow transplants help breast cancer patients. Perone understands the
scientific dilemma. But she believes anyone facing a death sentence should
always be able to get a potentially lifesaving therapy.

    "It's one thing when you're looking at a headache medicine, and it's another
thing when people could die," she said.

    Figuring out which trial to gamble on was wrenching for Perone. Because of
the aggressiveness of brain tumors, patients must decide what to do quickly.

    Perone's tumor type, glioblastoma multiforme, can double its size every 10
to 11 days. Adding to her anguish was the discovery that once she selected a
trial, it would automatically bar her from many others.

    "It's very confusing for patients and families," said Dr. Stuart Grossman,
who is directing the trial Perone eventually joined. "They wonder why every
center is doing something different, but that's the way it should be."

    Grossman, director of neuro-oncology at the Johns Hopkins Oncology Center,
also runs the New Approaches to Brain Tumor Therapy Consortium, one of two lead
groups in the United States created by NCI to direct trials.

    Variety of approaches

    The Hopkins center is running 30 experiments, including tests of gene
therapy, implanting a disc filled with chemotherapy material at the tumor site,
and increasing chemotherapy doses (seizure drugs that brain tumor patients take
can lower chemo levels).

    "We don't know the best way to treat these patients," Grossman noted. "One
of us is going to hit pay dirt."

    Researchers acknowledge, though, that it may take a while.

    "We are very early on in testing these ideas ," said Dr. Lawrence Chin,
assistant professor of neurosurgery at University of Maryland School of
Medicine. "We are just at the edge."

    Ultimately, Perone picked a trial that taps the strategy of starving a tumor
of its blood supply, a concept called anti-angiogenesis. In that trial,
researchers are studying copper, an essential factor in the development of blood
vessels. Drop the amount of copper in a person's system, doctors theorize, and
it might inhibit the growth of blood vessels that feed the tumor.

    That's what it did in rabbits and rats. Perone is the first patient enrolled
nationwide.

    "I'm Human No. 1," she says, laughing.

    Pills and seizures

    Every day, she swallows four horse-sized pills that deplete her body of
copper, and she banishes foods high in copper such as tomatoes, chocolate and
shellfish from her diet. She also must account for everything -- even mustard or
salt -- that she puts in her mouth.

    But over time, she's learned shortcuts, sizing up how much sprinkled cheese
she can have without using her postal scale. More troubling to her are the
seizures that have left her unable to drive, and the medicine that has swollen
her fingers so badly that she can't wear her wedding ring. She wears her
husband's instead.

    All the while, her anxiety builds, waiting for the MRI she gets every other
month to see whether the tumor has grown back. Even though most of it was
removed, her tumor infiltrated her brain with unseen fingers, intimately mixing
with healthy tissue. Even the best neurosurgeons in the world can't remove all
of a malignant brain tumor.

    Such cancers couldn't even be studied well until 10 or 15 years ago, when
imaging techniques such as MRIs were developed. Since then, advances mostly have
been confined to new imaging technology that guides surgeons during operations
and precisely focuses radiation in the brain, allowing for higher doses.

    "People 20, 30 years ago, without the benefit of new technology or imaging,
were doing nearly as well as we are now, " said Dr. Donald M. O'Rourke, an
assistant professor of neurosurgery and pathology at the University of
Pennsylvania Medical Center.

    A surgeon, he spends much of his time in the lab now, working on defining
the molecular mechanisms of brain tumors. "Surgery will always be palliative for
this disease," O'Rourke said.

    Patients realize that the standard treatments only buy them time. On some
days, Perone sees the sugar maples she planted in front of her house and bursts
out crying.

    "They're going to be real big someday," she muses.

    She and Jim Perone had meant to retire in this cozy house on the corner.
They had planned to sit in the covered wooden swing in the back yard and watch
their grandchildren play on the grass. Many days, though, she fights off those
feelings.

    "If I make myself crazy about controlling life," she said, "then I ruin the
life I have left."

    It could be worse

    She knows she's escaped the worst. She has friends in a support group who
have lost their memories, their sense of who they are. Sometimes, their
personalities are changed.

    Brain tumor patients can quickly lose the ability to walk and talk, and they
may find themselves stigmatized by those who assume they've lost cognitive
abilities. Humiliated, many will hide the diagnosis as long as possible.

    Perone mows her lawn, walks her dogs, scours the Internet for the latest
cancer news. But in the past few months, she finds herself struggling with
glitches in speech and memory.

    She says power surge instead of storm surge. She walks into the kitchen many
times a day and doesn't remember why. Just having a conversation with someone is
taxing.

    Any of these symptoms might mean the tumor is growing back. But the brain
surgery and radiation have created trauma in her head that can reverberate for
months, and her body is being depleted of copper. Nobody knows what that can do.

    One July night, Perone felt a stabbing pain in her left side. She couldn't
move without screaming. At the emergency room, morphine did nothing. For five
days, the stabbing sensation continued, landing her in the hospital again.

    "I don't think I've ever been in that much pain before," she said to
Grossman at an appointment a few weeks later. "I'd rather have more brain tumors
removed."

    She wanted to know whether the non-copper diet caused the pain.

    Peering intently at her, in a gentle voice, Grossman told her, "I have to be
honest with you. When you're the first one down the pipeline, we don't know."

    In one week, she will have her next MRI.

    Once again, she will joke with the technician about the brunet wig she
finally got because too many people stared at the scarred and naked side of her
head.

    And she will climb on the long, skinny platform in the chilly room, where
they'll pull a plastic helmet device over her head.

    Then, as she lies still as a corpse, her body will slide into the huge white
machine.

    Inside, as the buzzing and hammering noises start, she will whisper, "God,
God, God. Jesus, Jesus, Jesus," and she will dream that she is safe.

    Resources

    The University of Maryland Medical Center's Brain Tumor Support Group:
410-328- 8875

    The American Brain Tumor Association: 1-800-886-2282, or www.abta. org

    The Brain Tumor Society: 1-800-770-8287, or www.tbts.org

    National Cancer Institute: 1-800-4-CANCER, or cancertrials.nci.nih.gov


GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / ILLUSTRATION(S) 1. Examination: Brain cancer patient Melanie
Perone makes a visit to the Johns Hopkins Oncology Clinic for a neurological
exam with nurse practitioner Michel Zeltzman.
 2. Melanie Perone, a brain cancer patient whose MRI image (left) shows a
walnut-sized tumor at top right.
 3.  A look inside: Melanie Perone prepares for magnetic resonance imaging at
Johns Hopkins Hospital to see if treatment has held back her cancer.
 4. Exposed: Melanie Perone and her husband, Jim (left), await information after
her MRI. She has lost much of her hair to the treatments and usually wears a
wig.
 5. Blood vessels: key to tumor growth

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1999


                             1261 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 19, 1999, Tuesday ,City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme to make $350m acquisition;
Will buy Cell Genesys of Calif. in stock deal

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Looking to strengthen its gene-therapy program and gain a West Coast
presence, Genzyme Corp. yesterday said it will acquire Cell Genesys Inc. for
about $350 million in a tax-free, stock-for-stock exchange.

    Cell Genesys, based in Foster City, Calif., provides Cambridge-based Genzyme
with a strong patent portfolio in gene activation, access to gene-therapy
technology - particularly for getting specific genes into certain diseased
tissue - and a West Coast presence. Genzyme says Cell Genesys has more than 200
issued or granted patents and more than 330 patent applications pending.

    Under the agreement, Cell Genesys shareholders will receive Genzyme common
stock worth about $10 a share, a premium over yesterday's closing price of $8.37
for Cell Genesys common shares. The transaction has a total value of about $350
million, based on about 35 million fully diluted Cell Genesys shares. The
precise value of the deal could change as the agreement links the number of
shares to be exchanged to Genzyme's stock price when the acquisition closes.

    Genzyme also said the Cell Genesys purchase would require taking a onetime
charge against earnings in the first quarter of next year. Henri Termeer,
Genzyme chief executive, said the charge will be "somewhat dilutive," which
prompted Genzyme shares to fall 3 1/16 points to close at 36 5/16.

    Wall Street analysts following both companies were quick to praise the deal,
citing how both would benefit.

    "Short term there is a dilution to earnings, but longer term Genzyme gets
some strategic assets that makes it more competitive," said Elise T. Wang,
biotechnology analyst at PaineWebber. "The portfolio of intellectual property
Cell Genesys provides Genzyme from this deal is very valuable."

    In turn, Cell Genesys will be able to get some of its proposed gene-therapy
drugs, which are still in early stages of development and testing, to market
more efficiently with Genzyme's financial help.

    Yesterday's proposed acquisition, which must still be approved by Cell
Genesys shareholders, could pose legal problems to a Genzyme rival,
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., of Cambridge. It is racing against Genzyme to
develop a replacement enzyme, called alpha-galactosidase, to treat Fabry
disease, which primarily affects 2,000 to 5,000 men worldwide. Without this
enzyme, fatty deposits build up in blood vessel walls, causing intense pain in
the hands and feet. Untreated it can lead to kidney failure and, in some cases,
heart attacks.

    Genzyme is producing its drug using a recombinant protein process, while TKT
is developing its version using gene-activation technology and has applied for
patent protection. With Cell Genesys, Genzyme would have gene-activation patents
that could potentially block TKT.

    "We don't believe that we are infringing on any Cell Genesys patents," said
Dan Geffken, TKT chief financial officer, acknowledging the "possibility" of a
legal skirmish with Genzyme/Cell Genesys over gene-activation patents. Wang of
PaineWebber says Genzyme may have a slight edge because it is further along in
testing its drug than TKT, and Cell Genesys's extensive patent portfolio has
older gene-activation patents.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1999


                             1262 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 19, 1999 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 029

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme buy adds West Coast outpost

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Genzyme General Corp. will boost its drug pipeline and establish a West Coast
beachhead by buying a California company for about $ 350 million in stock, its
officers said yesterday.

   The Camridge-based biotechnology firm plans to buy Cell Genesys Inc. in a
tax-free stock-for-stock exchange that's expected to close in the first quarter
of next year, if approved by regulators and shareholders.

   The smaller company's cancer research programs, with products worth about $
20 million, will be transferred to a Genzyme subsidiary, Genzyme Molecular
Oncology. Genzyme also will provide $ 60 million to its subsidiary. In exchange,
Genzyme will get about 12.5 million Genzyme Molecular shares.

   Genzyme will gain access to Cell Genesys' gene therapy technology, which will
boost the larger company's research on treatments for Gaucher and Fabry
diseases, among others.

   "This acquisition solidifies our scientific and technology base in a very
powerful way that will dramatically expand the capabilities of the company and
position us for substantial growth over the next decade," said Genzyme General's
chief executive, Henri A. Termeer, in a prepared statement.

   Cell Genesys has 200 patents for various aspects of gene therapy, such as
gene delivery mechanisms, specific cell types, and therapeutic genes. It has
applied for an additional 330.

   Genzyme's stock dropped nearly 7.8 percent or $ 3.06 a share yesterday,
ending at $ 36.31. Genzyme Molecular was up by 10 percent, an increase of 47
cents to $ 5.03.

   The cash from Genzyme will support Genzyme Molecular for two years, said
President Gail Maderis.

   Genzyme Molecular, with two products in clinical trials, will continue Cell
Genesys' two clinical trials for prostate and lung cancer vaccines.

   In addition, both companies are working on antiangiogenesis therapies -
promising treatments designed to "starve" cancer tumors by cutting off their
blood supply.

   Genzyme will retain Cell Genesys' 115 California employees.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1999


                             1263 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  OCTOBER 19, 1999 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & MIND; Pg. 8F

LENGTH: 1869 words

HEADLINE: WHO ARE WE? SCIENCE NEARS AN ANSWER THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT COULD
SOLVE OUR MEDICAL PROBLEMS, BUT THE MORAL CHOICES ARE DAUNTING

BYLINE: USHA LEE McFARLING and ROBERT S. BOYD FREE PRESS WASHINGTON, STAFF; JUDY
TREIBLE, Knight Ridder

BODY:

   An international army of biologists is preparing to announce one of the most
remarkable feats in the history of science -- one likely to change the nature of
human life in coming decades.
Researchers are racing to complete a working draft of the genetic code that
makes us human beings by early next year -- years ahead of schedule. The rest of
the 3-billion-component human genome, the sum of all our genes, could be ready
as soon as 2001.

   That achievement would usher in a new age of biogenetics, one expected to
lead to true understanding of the causes of incurable diseases, then to
effective new cures and, ultimately, to the capacity to alter the DNA coils that
define who we are.

   Entrepreneurs already are gambling they will earn billions by using genetic
tricks to customize human reproduction, boost agriculture and mine other
as-yet-unimagined genetic industries.

   An avalanche of genetic information -- coded in a jumble of A's, C's, G's and
T's -- tumbles from laboratories around the world each day. In just the last few
weeks, geneticists have announced the discoveries of genes involved in hair
growth, intelligence and even monogamy. Others have rushed forward to read the
genomes of entire organisms, from lowly bacteria, yeast and worms to the one we
care most about -- ourselves.

   One of the first such human research centers in the country was established
at the University of Michigan Medical School in 1990 under Dr. Francis Collins
(see related story at right). From the beginning, U-M scientists have focused on
the medical and life science applications of human genome research, rather than
large-scale gene sequencing.

   Collins and others at U-M identified the gene for cystic fibrosis in 1989,
the gene for neurofibromatosis in 1990. Since then, U-M scientists have located
more than 20 genes involved in other human diseases including epilepsy,
congenital deafness and blood clotting disorders. By revealing the blueprint for
a human being -- about 100,000 genes -- the project marks a turning point in
science and medicine. "It will be hard to imagine a before," says Eric Lander,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology geneticist responsible for much of our
ability to make sense of the enigmatic human code.

   A decade ago, even pinning a gene to a disease was impossible. Scientists
struggled for years to find the elusive patches of flawed DNA that lead to
muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis, Huntington's disease, breast cancer and
other maladies. Now such discoveries are far more common.

   "The Human Genome Project will open a window into virtually every disease,"
says Collins, who codirects the project. "I have no doubt that this will
transform the practice of medicine."

   Geneticists say they'll be able to predict, years in advance, when and why a
person will fall ill. They hope to alter genes to cure diseases such as cancer,
schizophrenia and Alzheimer's. They talk enthusiastically of producing
individually tailored medicines with few side effects, growing artificial
organs, even extending life beyond 100 years.

   This is not science fiction. Massive changes -- inspiring and alarming -- are
already under way.

   An ethical dilemma

   In Fairfax, Va., couples can use genetic techniques to select the gender of
their children. There are reports that Middle East governments are developing
genetic weapons to target people of one ethnicity. The government of Iceland has
granted access to the entire population's genetic code to one company, Decode,
which hopes to profit by unraveling genetic diseases.

   The world's agricultural giants are producing -- to the concern of many --
enormous quantities of foods that have been genetically altered to resist pests
and boost nutritional content. And patents have already been claimed on most
human genes -- even those yet to be discovered.

   "People don't realize how genetics is going to invade every aspect of their
lives," says Mark A. Rothstein, an expert on genetics and the law at the
University of Houston. "It's happening and we're just not ready."

   Collins says the genome project will dwarf most scientific collaborations,
even placing a man on the moon. A better analogy may be the atom bomb. Like
nuclear science, genetic technology holds the power to change society
irrevocably -- for good or ill.

   For the stunning technical achievement that will soon be upon us carries a
worrisome fallout all its own: the specter of eugenics, the ability to design
children and tailor our species in ways that might spawn unpredictable
consequences.

   "A species deciding what to do about its own heredity will present the most
profound intellectual and ethical choices humanity has ever faced," the eminent
evolutionary biologist E.O. Wilson of Harvard University wrote in his recent
"Consilience" (Random House, $26 hardback, $14 paperback).

   For instance, parents might abort fetuses carrying killer flaws or even mild
genetic defects. Others might order babies with designer genes to give them an
advantage in life.

   Even as more genetic tests become available, a wide gap remains between
diagnosis and therapy. For example, should women who find they carry a gene for
familial breast cancer have their healthy breasts removed as a preventive
measure? Some have.

   More broadly, the tidal wave of genetic information could lead to
discrimination on the job or in insurance. People with genetic defects could be
deemed uninsurable.

   Scientists caution it will be some time before the full impact of this
revolution will be realized. Before the genetic code can be translated into
curing disease or improving the human race, researchers have to figure out
exactly what genes do and how they do it.

   After the code is known

   "Even if we have the whole genome in a computer, to turn that into cures will
take a lot of work," says Dr. Ute Francke, president of the American Society of
Human Genetics and a professor at the Stanford University School of Medicine.

   Hundreds of machines are already churning out so much genetic information
that it is overwhelming scientists, even those equipped with the most powerful
supercomputers.

   A new specialty -- bioinformatics, a marriage of biology and computing -- has
risen to meet the challenge. Computer programs find patterns buried within the
code. The so-called DNA chip, a new technology that allows scientists to observe
thousands of genes in action at a time, helps sort how they work together in the
body.

   As scientists sift through this grand display of our biological heritage, the
most powerful legacy may be how it redefines the way we see ourselves.

   Working out our genetic machinery, some fear, might produce a society that
downplays the importance of free will and personal responsibility, reducing
human nature to a simple genetic equation.

   Genetics also could put the lie to racist notions. It is clear from our DNA
that we are all -- Bantu tribesman, Dakota farmer, Taiwanese software engineer
-- much more alike than we are different.

   But there's a slight twist. Because we are all subtle variations on a theme
-- each of our genomes slightly different -- none among us can be considered
perfect. And none can be considered flawed. The new lens of genetics teaches
that we are, at once, all different and all the same.
WHAT DNA RESEARCHERS HAVE ALREADY DONE

   1866: Gregor Johann Mendel, an Austrian botanist and monk, outlines the
basics of heredity by breeding pea plants. His discoveries go mostly unnoticed
until 1900.

   1910: Working with fruit flies, Thomas Hunt Morgan finds that genes lie along
chromosomes. 30 years later, scientists propose that genes are made of DNA.

   1953: James Watson and Francis Crick discover the double helix of DNA,
earning the Nobel Prize.

   1973: Stanley Cohen and Herbert Brown invent genetic engineering by
transplanting a gene from one bacterium into another. Other scientists soon move
genes between species.

   1987: The first human disease gene -- for muscular dystrophy -- is found.
Other genes are found later.

   1990: The Human Genome Project is launched. The same year, a 4-year-old Ohio
girl, Ashanti DeSilva, who has a severe immune deficiency, is the first patient
to be treated with gene therapy. Though her health improves, she is not cured.

   1995: J. Craig Venter completes the first full sequence of a living organism
-- the bacterium H. influenzae, which causes meningitis. Shortly thereafter,
scientists sequence yeast, bacteria and a worm. The human genome is expected to
be largely complete in March 2000.

   WHERE DNA RESEARCHERS THINK THEIR WORK MAY LEAD

   2010: Genetic tests will predict risk for 25 diseases; ways to reduce risk
will be available for most of them. Gene therapy will be successful in treating
hemophilia. Laws will protect genetic privacy and prevent discrimination.

   2020: Cancer therapy will be precisely targeted at each form of the disease.
Gene-based drugs will treat complex diseases such as diabetes and hypertension.
Biological treatments for mental illness will be available.

   2030: Genes responsible for aging will be identified. Ways to prolong human
life will be tested. People will be able to get printouts of their complete
personal DNA sequence for $1,000.

   2040: Personalized, gene-based medicine will be standard for most diseases.
The average human lifespan will top 90 years. Many crops will be genetically
engineered.

   AN EXPLANATION OF DNA, TO THE LETTER
The first goal of the Human Genome Project is to identify all 3 billion
components in the human genetic code. The components -- designated by A, C, T
and G -- are chemical units called bases, which are the active parts of DNA,
deoxyribonucleic acid, the blueprint for all living organisms. Researchers hope
to have a draft of 90 percent of the code in hand by March 2000, and a complete
version, 99.99-percent accurate, by 2003.
The code is stored in each cell of the human body, in 23 pairs of tiny,
cigar-shaped packages called chromosomes. Each chromosome consists of a twisted
strand of DNA -- the double helix -- on which the bases are arranged like rungs
on a ladder. Making up parts of the ladder are the genes, segments of DNA that
contain the instructions for constructing and operating a cell.

   There are about 100,000 genes in human DNA, but they make up only about 3
percent of the genome. The rest is partly junk and partly important regulatory
switches that turn genes on and off at critical times.

   Once a gene has been identified, the problem is to discover what it does.
Basically, genes direct cells to produce proteins -- the basic building blocks
of all living things. If genes are the blueprints, proteins are the bricks and
mortar. Each gene provides instructions for a different protein. The precise
order of bases in the gene determines which protein it makes.

   Proteins are made up of long strings of chemical compounds called amino
acids. The proteins fold in complex, usually compact, shapes. The 20 amino acids
combine in trillions of ways. The study of proteins is even more daunting than
that of genes.

   Source: Knight Ridder/Tribune Information Services.
WHAT IS THE HUMAN GENOME?
(SEE DIAGRAM IN MICROFILM)

NOTES: SEE RELATED STORY PAGE 8F; SEE DIAGRAM IN MICROFILM; SIDEBAR ATTACHED

GRAPHIC: Photo CHUCK KENNEDY, Knight Ridder Tribune; Illustration LEE
HULTENG, Knight Ridder Tribune; Diagram Knight Ridder Tribune, Detroit Free
Press;
Above, Dr. Anne Kallioniemi of the National Institutes of Health studies breast
cancer tissue.Left, a DNA microarray chip helps scientists test the effects of
thousands of genes in one step.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002


                             1264 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 102 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
GENZYME TO BUY CELL GENESYS FOR $350 MILLION IN STOCK

BYLINE: Reuters

BODY:

   The Genzyme General Corporation said yesterday that it would buy Cell Genesys
Inc. for about $350 million in a tax-free exchange of stock, furthering its
research base in gene therapy. Cell Genesys develops gene therapies to treat
major life-threatening diseases including cancer and cardiovascular diseases.
Under the terms of the agreement, shareholders of Cell Genesys, based in Foster
City, Calif., will receive a fraction of a share of Genzyme common stock for
each share of Cell Genesys they own. Shares of Genzyme General were down $3.625
each, to $36.3125, and Cell Genesys rose $1.375 each, to $8.375.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1999


                             1265 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section F;Page 7;Column 1;Health & Fitness

LENGTH: 1293 words

HEADLINE: PERSONAL HEALTH;
Brain Tumors: Elusive, Varied and Not Always Deadly

BYLINE: By JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   Ruth had undergone a mysterious personality change that defied psychiatric
explanation. Charles awoke each morning with a severe headache that eased as the
day progressed. Kathleen experienced partial facial paralysis, slurred her words
and drooled. Marlys suffered a grand mal seizure that rendered her unconscious
for about 15 minutes.

   All four had different kinds of brain tumors. Ruth's was benign and grew
slowly, but it was not detected for years, too late for treatment that could
have saved her.

    Charles's tumor was malignant, and despite the best therapy available at the
time, he succumbed to primary brain cancer within two years.

   Kathleen's tumor was also malignant, but it had not started in the brain.
Rather, it turned out to be the spread of a lung cancer that ultimately took her
life.

   Marlys was the lucky one. Her benign tumor was detected by modern imaging
while it was small and in an area that permitted surgical removal without any
harm.

   For reasons yet to be determined, brain tumors are becoming more common,
especially in older people. The latest well-known victim is John Cardinal
O'Connor, Archbishop of New York, whose small tumor was surgically removed this
month at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Although the nature of the
tumor has not been revealed, Cardinal O'Connor, 79, will be undergoing several
weeks of radiation therapy, which is typically used to prevent the spread of
cancer from cells that may have escaped the surgeon's scalpel.

   Since the mid-1980's, the yearly total of Americans given diagnoses of brain
tumors has doubled, and it is expected to exceed 100,000 this year. More than
half the increase has occurred in people over 65.

   Survival rates, too, have been inching up, thanks to improved diagnostic
techniques and more precise and inventive treatments, like stereotactic
radiosurgery (a pinpoint form of radiation) and laser surgery with a gamma
knife. More progress is expected to result from some still experimental
treatments, including immunotherapy, gene therapy and implanted wafers of
chemotherapeutic agents.

   Only about 20 percent of brain tumors are primary -- that is, tumors that
start in brain tissue. Half of these are brain cancers, and half are benign
tumors that can nonetheless become life threatening because they grow inside a
skull that cannot expand. As they do, they can press on vital tissues, which may
sometimes preclude their removal.

   The remaining 80 percent of brain tumors are secondary, originating from
cancers elsewhere in the body -- although, as in Kathleen's case, the primary
cancer is sometimes not detected until after the metastatic brain tumor has been
found. Lung, breast and colon cancers, as well as melanomas, often spread to the
brain.

   There has been much speculation about the possible causes of brain cancers,
and especially their apparent increase. About 5 percent are hereditary. Among
suggested environmental factors are low-energy electromagnetic fields from
objects like cellular phones, power lines and household appliances, although
considerable research into the matter has yet to yield any definitive evidence
of such a risk. To be sure, high-dose radiation delivered to the head, including
therapy for brain tumors, can increase the risk of brain cancer. There is no
link, however, to low-dose radiation delivered through diagnostic X-rays or
workplace exposure to ionizing radiation.

   But industrial chemicals may be a problem. Workers regularly exposed to
substances like acrylonitrite, vinyl chloride, formaldehyde, lubricating oils,
N-nitroso compounds, phenols, pesticides, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and
organic solvents develop brain tumors with greater than average frequency.
Pregnant women and parents of infants should be especially careful to avoid such
chemicals because animal studies indicate that exposure in utero and in infancy
incurs the greatest risk.

   Also, pregnant women would be wise to take supplements containing vitamins C,
A, E and folate through their pregnancies. A three-continent study indicated
that the children of women who took such vitamins were half as likely as the
children of nontakers to develop brain tumors before age 5.

   Benign brain tumors can often be treated successfully, although there may be
lasting effects, depending on size and location. But because the most common
type of brain cancer, glioblastoma multiforme, is fast-growing and highly
invasive, and because early symptoms of brain tumors often mimic other problems,
delaying diagnosis, brain cancer is associated with a five-year survival rate of
only 30 percent. This rate is half that for cancers over all, but still much
better than the survival rates for cancers of the lung, pancreas and esophagus.

   The problem with brain tumors is their ability to grow silently for years
and, when they finally do produce symptoms, become confused with other problems
like migraine headaches, inner ear problems, epilepsy or stroke. For example,
Kathleen, who had speech problems and drooling, thought at first she might have
had a stroke.

   If everyone with symptoms like headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, memory
loss, personality or behavioral change, hearing problems, difficulty walking,
decreased sensation, seizures or blurred or double vision underwent a thorough
workup for a brain tumor, it could easily overwhelm the health care system. But
if such symptoms persist or keep recurring, patients should insist on being
examined for possible brain tumors.

   A proper diagnostic workup should include a complete neurological exam,
including abstract thinking and memory tests and a scan of the brain.

   The treatment of choice depends on the patient's age (children under 3 are
generally not given radiation therapy), the size and location of the tumor, the
sensitivity of the tumor to radiation and chemotherapy, and the general health
of the patient. The three common cancer treatments -- surgery, radiation therapy
and chemotherapy -- are most often used for brain tumors as well. But there are
now highly sophisticated ways of "operating" on the brain, including the use of
pinpoint radiation and laser beams that can destroy the tumor without damaging
normal surrounding tissue.

   A large number of clinical trials are also under way, exploring the potential
of new chemotherapeutic techniques and immunotherapy. In fact, patients are
often encouraged to enroll in a trial. More than 200 such trials are listed in
the National Cancer Institute's Physician Data Query database. It is available
by phone, (800) 422-6237, or via either of these Internet sites: cancertrials
.nci.nih.gov or cancernet.nci.nih.gov.

Where to Turn for More Information

   The North American Brain Tumor Coalition, a patient advocacy group, has four
member organizations, which provide free publications and information about
support groups and referrals:

   *The American Brain Tumor Association, at 2720 River Road, Des Plaines, Ill.
60018-4110. Phone (847) 827-9910 or (800) 886-2282. The association has
published a comprehensive reference manual for patients and families, "A Primer
of Brain Tumors." It can be obtained free from the group by calling or on line
at www.abta.org. (Click on brain tumor information; the first choice is the
primer.)

   *The National Brain Tumor Foundation at 414 13th Street, Suite 700, Oakland,
Calif., 94612-2603. Phone (510) 839-9777 or (800) 934-2873. The agency is a good
resource for finding support groups for brain tumor patients and their families.

   *The Children's Brain Tumor Foundation at 274 Madison Avenue, Suite 1301, New
York, N.Y. 10016. Phone (212) 448-9494.

   *The Brain Tumor Society at 124 Watertown Street, Suite 3-H, Watertown,
Mass., 02472. Phone (800) 770-8287.

   http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: October 20, 1999, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

   The Personal Health column in Science Times yesterday, about types of brain
tumors, included outdated references to John Cardinal O'Connor's condition. The
Cardinal had a small tumor removed from his brain nearly two months ago, not
this month. He has been receiving radiation treatment; the therapy is not in the
future.


LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1999


                             1266 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    OCTOBER 19, 1999, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 473 words

HEADLINE: Cell Genesys OKs Buyout in Latest Biotech Merger

BYLINE: Tom Abate, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:
Cell Genesys of Foster City said yesterday that it had accepted a $350 million
buyout offer from Genzyme Corp. of Massachusetts, becoming the latest local
biotech firm to surrender to an industry merger trend.

    The stock-swap transaction, which is subject to regulatory and shareholder
approval, valued Cell Genesys at $10 a share, although the value of the merger
could dip if Genzyme's stock price falls below $31.50.

    Genzyme lost 8 percent, or $3.06 yesterday, to close at $35.31, as Genzyme
revealed that the proposed acquisition would dilute its earnings by 10 percent
in 2000. Cell Genesys, which ended Friday at $7 per share, gained $1.38 to close
at $8.38 yesterday.

    Cell Genesys is joining a string of local biotech firms, including Alza
Corp., Sugen Inc. and Genentech, to be acquired by larger companies from outside
the Bay Area.

    In a brief telephone interview, Genzyme Executive Vice President Peter Wirth
said Genzyme would keep Cell Genesys' 115-person staff and use its new
acquisition as a West Coast headquarters.

    "Biotechnology is definitely a bicoastal industry, with distinct academic
communities with different strengths," Wirth said. "We have strong links to the
East Coast community, and we think this acquisition will help us gain entree to
the biotech talent on the West Coast."

    Wirth predicted investors would warm up to the deal, which would give
Genzyme access to Cell Genesys' 200-plus patents in the broad field of gene
therapy.

    In addition to its patent portfolio, Cell Genesys brings about $60 million
in cash to the deal, along with a $130 million stake in Abgenix, another Bay
Area biotech firm. Cell Genesys spun off Abgenix in 1996 and kept a 22 percent
ownership in its offspring.

    Analyst Jim McCamant, with the Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley,
called the deal "a coup" for Genzyme, which picked up a powerful portfolio for a
net cost of $160 million -- once Cell Genesys' liquid assets are subtracted from
the sales price. He professed surprise that Cell Genesys was willing to be
acquired for such a modest premium.

    "What this goes to show is that biotech execs are just tired of getting out
there and raising money," he said. "There's not the ego and resistance to a good
offer like there used to be."

    Cell Genesys CEO Stephen Sherwin said his company's cash position would have
enabled it to remain independent but said the huge cost of bringing drugs to
market made it more sensible to accept a merger offer. Cell Genesys has
consistently lost money, whereas Genzyme had net income of $101 million on sales
of $673 million in 1998.

    "We will have access to capital that we simply wouldn't have as a small
biotech company," Sherwin said. "Ultimately, this will be a good deal for our
shareholders."



LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1999


                             1267 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       October 19, 1999 Tuesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. F5

HEADLINE: BOOST FOR BYPASS: CAN THERAPY CUT FAILURE RATE?

BYLINE: By Cristine Russell Special to The Washington Post

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Think Arnold Schwarzenegger. That is the image that surprisingly comes to
mind when Harvard researcher Victor J. Dzau describes an experimental gene
therapy technique designed to help improve the long-term outcome of the heart
bypass operation.

   The goal is to genetically enhance bypass grafts to produce stronger blood
vessels that are less likely to become clogged after surgery. "It is what I call
the Schwarzenegger effect," said Dzau, comparing the more-robust vessels to the
bodybuilder and actor.

   Preliminary results from the first human tests suggest that this gene therapy
appears to be a promising, safe way to help reduce the failure rate of the more
than 750,000 bypass surgeries carried out in the United States each year. "It
could make a big difference to patient well-being and cut down the costs of
repeat surgeries and interventions," said Dzau, a Harvard Medical School
professor and chief of medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

   Most bypass surgery is conducted on patients with atherosclerosis, a
condition in which the major coronary arteries are clogged with fatty plaque
deposits that cut off blood supply to the heart. About 10 to 30 percent of
bypass surgeries fail within the year after surgery, said Dzau. The risk
continues, so within a decade after conventional bypass surgery, many patients
need further treatment, he said.

   A bypass usually involves removing a piece of vein from the patient's leg and
sewing it onto the artery to reroute blood flow around the blocked portion. The
problem is that the transplanted vein is not as tough as an artery: Its walls
are thinner and more vulnerable to the increased blood pressure that arteries
must endure. As a result, the cells lining the grafted vein are stimulated to
divide rapidly and fill in the vessel cavity, creating thicker walls. In many
cases the bypass graft becomes sufficiently blocked to again put the patient in
danger.

   The new procedure presents a "unique opportunity," Dzau said, to re-engineer
the genetic makeup of the vein so that its walls will be less prone to clog up.
The vein can be genetically treated in the operating room within 10 minutes
after it is removed from the leg.

   To do this, the researchers stick the vein snippet in a small plastic tube
with a solution containing genetically engineered DNA intended to help block
cell growth. The tube is sealed and pressurized to help push the DNA into the
vein's walls. For several weeks after it is put into the body, the modified DNA
acts as a decoy to attract a gene product known as E2F and keep it from
promoting cell division. The result is a more-muscular graft that acts "more
like an artery," said Dzau at a science forum organized by Harvard Medical
School.

   Working with colleague Michael Mann, Dzau has been developing the new gene
therapy approach for about five years, starting with rat and human tissue in the
laboratory and then testing it on more than 400 rabbits before moving to a small
group of patients.

   The initial study, conducted at Brigham and Women's Hospital with a team
headed by vascular surgeon Anthony Whittemore, involved 17 high-risk patients
who underwent the new procedure and were compared to a similar number who
underwent conventional bypass surgery.

   The study was "blinded" so that neither the doctors nor patients knew who was
getting the new procedure. Dzau said that one year after surgery, nearly 70
percent of the patients with conventional therapy suffered from clogged bypass
grafts or needed repeat surgery. In contrast, in the experimental gene therapy
group, about 30 percent suffered relapses. In this study, the patients were
being treated for peripheral artery disease in their legs, which causes pain and
problems walking. The peripheral bypass procedure that was used is similar to
the one employed for a coronary artery bypass, and the approach should be
applicable to this procedure as well, said Dzau.

   Most important, said Dzau, the study demonstrated that this gene therapy
technique appears to be "absolutely safe." While it seems to show a significant
benefit in the small group studied, he stressed that far more research is needed
and studies are planned.


LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1999


                             1268 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 19, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z08

LENGTH: 1199 words

HEADLINE: More Than the Usual Aches and Pains; Blocked Blood Flow in the Legs
Can Be Debilitating

BYLINE: Kathleen Phalen, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:


   Kate Simms wasn't one to let age slow her down. At 85, this Orange County,
Va., resident was still making an occasional 50-mile-round trip to cook and
clean for her older sister and enjoying the land east of the Blue Ridge that she
calls her garden spot of the Earth. A hip replacement a few years back didn't
stop her. Nor did angioplasty to clear a heart artery in 1993. But in March of
last year, the pain in her legs did.

   "It was a terrible hurt," said Simms, that kept her from all the things she
loves to do. "It felt like it was snapping my legs in two from the knee joint to
the ankle." She was no longer able to climb steps or walk in her lush flower
gardens.

   Simms was suffering from peripheral arterial disease (PAD), an often
overlooked condition that blocks blood flow in the arteries of the legs. PAD
affects nearly 8 million Americans, with symptoms of pain or swelling,
difficulty in walking, numbness, skin discoloration and leg or foot ulcers that
don't heal. It also can cause gangrene and loss of limb.

   "Public awareness is very low," said Fritz Angle, an interventional
radiologist at the University of Virginia Health Sciences Center in
Charlottesville. "Often, as people grow older, they take for granted aches and
pains as part of aging, and because the disease has a gradual onset it goes
undetected."

   Perhaps that's what happened to Simms, whose disease was advanced when
diagnosed. In the earlier stages, patients experience intermittent dull aches or
cramping on exertion--called claudication--because there is not enough blood
flow in the legs. A few minutes rest usually eases the discomfort.

   "They'll walk maybe 10 blocks and then the pain might start in the calf,"
said Siobhan Dumbleton, an interventional radiologist at the Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. "Often they will stop, rest and then
continue walking, perhaps for eight more blocks before it starts again."

   While doctors aren't sure what causes PAD, they do know that it can develop
as a result of sclerosis, a group of disorders that cause thickening and loss of
elasticity in the artery walls. Atherosclerosis, in which fat and cholesterol
build up inside the arteries, is the most common type. PAD usually occurs after
age 50, Dumbleton said, and risk factors such as smoking, high blood pressure,
diabetes, excess weight, heart disease and inactivity can contribute to its
onset.

   In some cases, lifestyle changes can halt the disease's progression. If the
patient has high blood pressure, for example, "we try to control their diet or
get them to stop smoking," she said.

   Exercise programs can build up what doctors call collateral flow, in which
the blood system looks for ways around the blockage and develops collaterals, or
small branches off the main artery. Swimming is very good for PAD patients,
Dumbleton said, and some can manage their disease for many years with exercise
and other lifestyle changes.

   That's why Angle and Dumbleton recommend that individuals with leg pain
request a simple screening procedure known as an Ankle Brachial Index, in which
blood pressure is measured in both arms and legs and a medical history is taken
in a search for symptoms. More advanced diagnostic screenings can include
ultrasound or magnetic resonance angiography, which produce moving images of the
internal organs and vessels, Dumbleton said.

   Neither Simms nor Flossie Clements, a 65-year-old Scottsville, Va., resident,
knew anything was wrong until the severe pain of PAD hit them.

   "My leg and foot were hurting so bad, I couldn't stand it," Clements said.
Both women, diagnosed with advanced PAD, had angioplasty performed last year to
open the arteries in their legs. The procedure--very similar to the procedure
well known for treating blockages in the coronary arteries--is guided by a
technique known as digital fluoroscopy or occasionally ultrasound--two ways to
display the body's interior vessels and organs. In the angioplasty procedure, a
small tube is placed through an incision and into the artery. A balloon is then
advanced to the site of the blockage and inflated to compress the buildup
against the artery wall, remolding the vessel's shape and creating an adequate
pathway, Angle said.

   If the artery does not retain its new shape, a miniature wire mesh
scaffolding called a stent may be inserted at the blockage site to keep the
vessel open. Other treatments can include clot-busting drugs or a bypass graft
that creates a detour around the blockage.

   There is no guaranteed cure, Angle said, but arresting PAD's progression is
critical.

   Another approach is gene therapy, which is in the investigational stage in
studies by Jeffrey Isner, professor of medicine and pathology at Tufts
University School of Medicine and chief of cardiovascular research at St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center, both in Boston.

   Isner described his first patient in which gene therapy helped create new
blood vessels in the August 1996 issue of the Lancet. In that case, DNA was
injected into muscles in the patient's legs, where it instructed existing blood
vessel cells to generate new vessels.

   Isner presented his preliminary findings at the American Heart Association's
Scientific Sessions in Orlando in November 1997, where he told the story of a
39-year-old woman who joined the study with severe atherosclerosis in both legs.
"The front half of one foot was already black due to onset of gangrene," Isner
said. "When she came to us, she was facing two lower limb amputations."

   Gene therapy was used in both legs, halting the progression of PAD in one.
The other limb was too far gone. "Without this therapy, she would have been a
double amputee," he said. There also were patients in the study who did not
respond to the treatment, Isner said. He hopes that more answers will be
available as a second study continues.

   Robert Vogelzang, chief of vascular and interventional radiology at
Northwestern University Medical School in Chicago, said his institution will
begin similar studies using Isner's findings. "This is the missing piece to the
puzzle," he said. "It unequivocally offers great promise."

   As for Simms and Clements, they're just glad to get their legs moving and
their hands back into the soil.

   "Honey, I raked up seven wheelbarrows of acorns the day after I came home,"
Clements said of the September angioplasty that got the blood flowing in her
legs again. "I just rested my leg the next day."

   Balloon Angioplasty

   Peripheral artereal disease usually starts with the formation of fatty plaque
on the artery walls.  It's treated by guiding a balloon catheter into the artery
and then inflating the balloon to open the artery.

   1. A hollow needle is inserted into the femoral artery. Using X-ray imaging,
a guide wire is pushed through the needle toward the constricted blood vessel.

   2. A balloon-tipped catheter is then threaded over the guide wire to the
blocked area. The balloon is inflated and deflated a few times to widen the
area, then withdrawn.

   SOURCE: The Merck Manual of Medical Information Home Edition and the American
Medical Association Encyclopedia of Medicine; Random House


GRAPHIC: Illustration, JOHN ANDERSON

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1999


                             1269 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 18, 1999, Monday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: D; Pg. 7 Medicine

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHOUGHS;
DNA research offers hope for treating the mentally ill

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ERIC BERGER

BODY:

   A leading mental-health researcher believes the DNA revolution that bears
promises of genetic therapies and cures for a host of medical problems will also
help psychiatrists find better treatments for mental patients.

   Most current medicines for mental illnesses are blunt, often ineffective
instruments - the same drug may be given to patients suffering from different
problems, said Dr. Daniel R. Weinberger, a chief researcher at the National
Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md.

   But that could change within the next decade.

   "The greatest change in medicine since penicillin has been the deciphering of
the human genome," Weinberger said. "We will be able to identify variations in
the genetic code that account for mental illnesses."

   Weinberger was recently in town to speak at the University of Texas-Houston
Health Science Center about the cell-level causes of schizophrenia. He said
fully decoding human DNA, the molecule that carries genetic information from one
generation to the next, would allow psychiatrists to identify people who are at
risk for various mental-health problems.

   Genes, of course, aren't fully responsible for a person's becoming mentally
ill. Lifestyle, family and surroundings also can play a role. But most current
studies show about 60 percent of the risk is genetically based.

   The understanding of genes and their impact on mental health will open up new
avenues for therapy, Weinberger said. Researchers, for example, will use the
genetic information to find new targets for new drugs, he said.

   Moreover, by finding the genetic root of mental problems, psychiatrists will
be able to create therapies that address the source of the problem, possibly
before they occur, Weinberger said. Now therapies can only treat the problems
after they surface.

   Counseling and other non-pharmaceutical treatments will benefit from better
drugs, too, Weinberger said.

   The widespread use of drugs such as Prozac in recent years has made
counseling a viable option for patients who would not have been responsive to
therapy a decade ago, he said.

   Along with an increased understanding of the importance of genetics in mental
disorders, Weinberger said two other advancements in the field of psychiatry are
proving to be significant.

   First, the use of brain-imaging scans such as PET, positron emission
tomography, have allowed psychiatrists to literally see how the brain functions,
giving them an understanding of just how adaptive the brain is. "It's not a
fixed, immovable organ," he noted.

   Second, scientists have developed a greater understanding of how chemicals in
medications can directly affect mental problems. This has allowed them to
develop better drugs with fewer side effects.

   All of this, Weinberger concluded, provides hope to patients and their
families.

   "The more that we understand the science behind mental illness, the more we
think people will believe that it's not a shameful thing," Weinberger said.



GRAPHIC: Mug: Daniel R.Weinberger

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1999


                             1270 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       OCTOBER 18, 1999 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 879 words

HEADLINE: PUTTING CHROMOSOME MAP TO WORK

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Within the vast stretch of genetic material that defines a human being,
chromosome 22 is tiny - only about 45 million steps on a twisted ladder of DNA
that has three billion steps.

   But the chromosome, which has been extensively studied by Philadelphia-area
scientists, is rich with genes that govern everything from fetal development to
the functioning of the human immune system.

   When things go awry with chromosome 22, the results can be devastating:
certain types of cancer, life-threatening heart problems, mental retardation,
schizophrenia and a host of other illnesses.

   "It's a jam-packed little chromosome," said Beverly S. Emanuel, a geneticist
at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, who led a five-year, $10 million effort
to develop a detailed physical map of the chromosome.

   That map, completed in 1995, has now led scientists to a landmark
achievement: Within a few months, chromosome 22 will become the first human
chromosome to be sequenced as part of the federally financed Human Genome
Project.

   "It feels pretty good to think that we contributed in such a major way," said
Emanuel, 58, chief of Children's division of human genetics and molecular
biology.

   While federal officials expect to release the first draft of the entire
genome in March, chromosome 22 is slated to make its debut in a scientific
journal by year's end. Gene maps, the first step in the Human Genome Project,
show the location of genes in relation to one another along a chromosome.

   Scientists then use these maps to "sequence" the genes - that is, to describe
the sequence of four chemical units, known as base pairs, that make up the
genes.

   These units are known as A (adenine), T (thymine), G (guanine) and C
(cytosine). All life comes down to these four bases - and the order in which
they are arranged.

   "I am just so excited," said Bruce Roe, a University of Oklahoma biochemist
who used the physical maps and DNA clones provided by Emanuel and others to
sequence a portion of chromosome 22.

   Other parts of the chromosome - the second-smallest among the 23 pairs of
chromosomes in human cells - were sequenced by scientists at the Sangre Center
in Cambridge, England, and by researchers at Keio University in Tokyo.

   Emanuel's group also supplied maps to Sangre, one of the world's top
sequencing laboratories.

   "This is what science is supposed to be," said Roe, who described himself as
"a kid in a candy store" as he watched pieces of the chromosome 22 puzzle come
together. "This has truly been an international collaboration."

   The work in Emanuel's lab - conducted in collaboration with scientists at the
University of Pennsylvania, Fox Chase Cancer Center, and the Whitehead Institute
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology - wasn't the first on chromosome 22
by scientists in the Philadelphia area.

   In 1960, Peter Nowell at Penn and David Hungerford at Fox Chase discovered an
alteration on chromosome 22 that leads to a type of cancer known as chronic
myelogenous leukemia.

   The disease occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 finds its way to chromosome
22. The abnormality - the first genetic defect to be linked to cancer - came to
be known as the "Philadelphia chromosome."

   For the average person, the sequencing of chromosome 22 will seem like so
much gibberish - millions of letters, all As, Cs, Ts and Gs, in what looks like
a random sequence.

   But for scientists, the order of those letters are like gold.

   Within every stretch of 100,000 or so letters along the chromosome, there
are, on average, two genes. Each gene consists of base pairs in a particular
order that instruct the cell to make proteins, the building blocks of life.

   By knowing the sequence of the base pairs on chromosome 22, scientists can
identify the sequences within genes and more readily pinpoint the genetic
alterations that lead to disease.

   While gene therapy to "fix" defective genes has yet to pan out in human
trials, scientists are already using molecular genetics to diagnose and better
treat some diseases that are carried on chromosome 22.

   At Children's Hospital, for instance, Emanuel's team is working with 325
children - including a boy from Ukraine - who have one of a related set of
disorders caused by a deletion of base pairs in one region of the chromosome.

   The deletions, which occur in one of every 4,000 live births, can cause a
wide variety of problems, including heart malformations, cleft palate, a missing
thymus gland, and learning disabilities.

   Although scientists have now sequenced about 700 of the 1,000 or so genes on
chromosome 22, they know the function of fewer than half. To Emanuel, that means
there's a lot more work ahead.

   "There are those who think the job is done," she said. "But the job is really
not done."

   She said scientists need to press ahead with efforts to determine the actual
role played by various genes - and the consequences to human health when they
are altered.

   And in the meantime, Emanuel said, the information being churned out by the
Human Genome Project must be used to help patients.

   "Having all this scientific information doesn't immediately translate into
curing disease, but it does translate into better diagnosis, better treatment
and better outcomes," she said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Beverly S. Emanuel works in her lab at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. The
geneticist led a five-year effort to develop a physical map of chromosome 22.
The map has helped scientists produce another landmark achievement. (ELENA
BOUVIER)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1271 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            October 17, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: CAMPAIGN FOR CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL TOPS $ 102 MILLION

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   From schoolchildren to business leaders, central Ohio residents have pledged
more than $ 102 million to Children's Hospital, helping it exceed a five-year
fund-raising goal.

   "We had a lot of help and a lot of luck,'' said Jeff Kaplan, president and
chief executive officer of the Children's Hospital Foundation, which coordinated
the "For Our Children'' drive.

   The campaign, which will end in December, sought to raise $ 85 million for
patient care, research and educational programs.

   "We are truly appreciative of the community support,'' Kaplan said. "This is
one of the largest independent children's hospital campaigns in the country.''

   Hospital officials announced the fund- raising milestone last night at a gala
at the home of Abigail and Leslie H. Wexner. The party was the first of a number
of events planned to thank donors.

   The money raised, Children's officials said, will help sustain the
108-year-old hospital's mission of providing state-of-the-art patient care to
every child, regardless of ability to pay.

   "We continuously try to fill a need,'' Kaplan said. "We try to respond to the
community and provide the best care.''

   Officials also announced last night that the hospital is naming its education
center in honor of Ann Isaly Wolfe, chairwoman of the For Our Children campaign.

   Wolfe also has served several terms on the hospital's board.

   "When we first started this campaign, people kind of gulped,'' Kaplan said.
"But the hospital board, steering committee and Ann Wolfe said we need to secure
a future for our children.''

   Dr. Thomas N. Hansen, the hospital's chief executive officer, noted
concurrent campaigns by Ohio State University and Ohio's Center of Science and
Industry.

   "We live in a very giving community,'' he said. "That was one of the things
that attracted me here.''

   The campaign's success, Hansen said, means the hospital can continue to
perform cutting-edge research and attract the world's best scientists.

   "We recruited about 15 new scientists over the last three years,'' he said.
"Most people don't realize that we have 125,000 square feet full of
scientists.''

   The campaign also has helped:

   * Expand the hospital's bone- marrow transplant program to include unrelated
donors.

   * Construct new intensive-care units that will enable families to stay
overnight.

   * Support the seven Close to Home Physician Care Centers, which provide
pediatric services to children in underserved neighborhoods.

   * Establish the area's first comprehensive pediatric-autism program.

   * Conduct gene-therapy research through the Children's Research Institute.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1999


                             1272 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                      October 13, 1999 Wednesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 187 words

HEADLINE: FDA SUSPENDS GENE THERAPY TESTS

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The government has ordered a temporary halt to two gene therapy studies by
Schering-Plough Corp. because they are similar to a Pennsylvania experiment in
which a teen-ager died last month.

   No one yet knows what killed Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz. Just four
days before his death, University of Pennsylvania scientists had placed healthy
genes in his liver to combat a rare metabolic disease.

   Penn's study has been halted while scientists there, along with federal
regulators, try to determine what went wrong.

   The Food and Drug Administration decision halts two separate experiments by
Schering-Plough to try gene therapy as a treatment for liver cancer and for
colorectal cancer that spreads to the liver.

   Those studies have one similarity to the Penn experiment that worried
regulators: They use relatively high doses of a type of cold virus called
adenovirus to slip new genes directly into the liver.

   No deaths or unexpected side effects have been seen in the Schering trials,
but the studies' suspension is a precaution to let the FDA scrutinize patient
data for any early signs of problems.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1999


                             1273 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                           October 12, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: News; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: NOBEL PRIZE FOR CITY PROF  RESEARCH ON GENES, REPAIRING AILING CELLS

BYLINE: By LESLIE CASIMIR DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   A popular Rockefeller University scientist won the 1999 Nobel Prize for
Medicine yesterday for research that laid the foundation of future cell and gene
therapy.

   The Nobel selection committee announced that Dr. Gunter Blobel, 63, won for
cellular research that could lead to treatment for cells afflicted by cystic
fibrosis, AIDS and Alzheimer's disease.

   "It is a bit awesome," said a bubbly Blobel, an upper East Side resident, as
he paced around a podium in the university auditorium yesterday. "I hope I will
get adjusted to it."

   Speaking to a cheering crowd of students and colleagues, Blobel, who sported
a tie-dyed tie with his blue suit, said he got the news from Nobel committee
officials at 5 a.m.

   "I thought maybe it was a crank [call] from my collaborators," said Blobel,
an architecture and opera buff.

   He made the cell discovery in the early 1970s but lost hope that he would
ever receive the Nobel Prize for it.

   "Years passed by, and I didn't get the phone call. I didn't believe it
anymore," the silver-haired professor said.

   Blobel discovered that the millions of protein molecules in cells carry an
"address tag," a pattern of chemical compounds that allows the molecules to
identify and route themselves to their proper location.

   His research has been cited as a breakthrough in modern biology that may make
it possible for scientists to come up with ways to correct defective cells in
humans.

   Blobel, a German native, said he will donate most of the $ 970,000 prize
money to his other passion: the rebuilding of Frauenkirche church and a
synagogue in Dresden, Germany. Both structures were destroyed during World War
II.

   He is the founder of Friends of Dresden, a group that raises money for the
restoration of that city's landmarks.

   Although Blobel's work is highly technical, his students say he is a
down-to-earth guy who loves his wife, Laura Maioglio, opera (his favorite is "Le
Nozze di Figaro," by Mozart), and his three English setters.

   The dogs usually accompany him to work, but yesterday he left them at home.

   "We thought it would be difficult to bring the dogs to this event today,"
said Maioglio, owner of Barbetta, an Italian restaurant in the Theater District.

   The couple has homes here and in Piemonte, Italy.

   "I'm no scientist, but I think it must be very rewarding to pursue one's
passion and get recognized for it," she said.

   Blobel also surrounds himself with good art and good food, added nephew Carl
Blobel, 39, who also is a scientist.


GRAPHIC: Caption not available electronically

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1274 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      October 12, 1999 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-03

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: U.S. scientist wins Nobel for Medicine

BYLINE:  By Curt Suplee, By The Washington Post,

BODY:

   An American scientist has won the 1999 Nobel Prize in  Physiology or Medicine
for his discovery that proteins have  distinctive chemical markings that allow
them to be shuttled  around to the correct locations inside and outside living
cells.

   Guenter Blobel, 63, a German-born biologist at New York's  Rock-efeller
University, won the $ 960,000 prize for answering one  of the most puzzling
questions in molecular biology: About a  million protein molecules are in each
cell; how do they all end up  at the right location?   As early as 1971, Blobel
proposed that  each protein carries an 'address tag,' written in a pattern of
amino acids, that allows the cellular machinery to identify and  route each kind
of protein to its correct destination.     Blobel's  discovery explains the
onset of some inherited diseases. If a  protein lacks the correct address tag,
it could end up in the  wrong part of the cell, perhaps causing health problems.
That is  the case in a disease that causes early kidney stones, and in some
kinds of genetically transferred high blood cholesterol  conditions. Cystic
fibrosis involves a related problem.    The  Nobel selection committee noted
that Blobel's research helps make  it possible 'to construct new drugs that are
targeted to a  particular (cell section) to correct a specific defect. The
ability to reprogram cells in a specific way will also be  important for future
cell and gene therapy.'

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Associated Press/Stuart Ramson Nobel Prize winner Dr. Guenter
Blobel talks to the media in his laboratory at the Rockefeller University in New
York on Monday.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1275 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    October 12, 1999, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 150 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA;
 BRIEFLY / PHARMACEUTICALS;
 SCHERING-PLOUGH HALTS ENROLLMENT IN 2 TESTS

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:


   Schering-Plough Corp. said that it has stopped enrollment in two gene therapy
studies at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, after a patient in
an unrelated test died. The Madison, N.J.-based drug maker halted enrollment in
tests in which researchers administer gene therapy by injection into the main
artery to the liver. A patient died in a University of Pennsylvania study that
used the same method of administration, Schering-Plough said. The Madison,
N.J.-based company's research involves the p53 gene. The subject of much
research, the p53 gene may help keep cell growth in check. Cancer occurs when
cells lose this ability. The Pennsylvania trial didn't involve the p53 gene or
cancer treatment, Schering-Plough said. The company said it would continue to
provide treatment to patients enrolled in the study. Schering-Plough rose 31
cents to close at $ 50.13 on the NYSE.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1276 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 12, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 116 words

HEADLINE: National News Briefs;
Patient's Death Stops Gene Therapy Studies

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11

BODY:

   The Government has ordered the Schering-Plough Corporation to temporarily
halt two gene therapy studies because the research is similar to an experiment
in which an Arizona teen-ager died last month.

   No one yet knows what killed Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson. Just four days
before his death, University of Pennsylvania scientists had placed healthy genes
in his liver to combat a rare metabolic disease.

    Penn's study has been stopped while the university and regulators try to
determine what went wrong.

   The Food and Drug Administration on Friday halted experiments by
Schering-Plough to use gene therapy to treat liver cancer and colorectal cancer
that spreads to the liver.


   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1277 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      OCTOBER 12, 1999 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 396 words

HEADLINE: FDA HALTS GENE STUDIES AFTER DEATH AT PENN THE TRIALS ARE SIMILAR TO
THAT AT THE UNIVERSITY, WHERE PARTICIPANT JESSE GELSINGER, 18, DIED LAST MONTH.

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Following the death of an 18-year-old in a gene therapy trial at the
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, the Food and Drug Administration has
halted two trials using similar methods by a drug company.

   The Schering-Plough Corp. of Madison, N.J., was told by the FDA on Friday not
to accept any more patients for its trials testing gene therapy against liver
and colorectal cancers.

   Sixty patients have already been given the gene drugs in escalating doses in
the yearlong trial and none has died from the therapy, a company spokesman said.
He said there were some side effects from the drugs, but he would not specify
because it is an ongoing trial and the information is proprietary.

   The University of Pennsylvania was testing a gene drug against an inherited
liver disease in which victims lack a gene used to rid the body of ammonia. The
18th patient in the trial, Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17, five
days after being treated with the gene therapy, using a disabled cold virus -
adenovirus.

   As far as is known, Gelsinger is the first person to die during a
gene-therapy treatment.

   Both the Penn and Schering-Plough experiments used adenoviruses delivered
directly into the liver's hepatic artery through a catheter.

   Penn was using the adenovirus to deliver the ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
gene. The gene is needed to make an enzyme that converts ammonia into urea for
disposal as urine.

   Schering-Plough was delivering P53, a gene that suppresses cancers.

   More than 50 centers using adenoviruses to deliver genes have been asked by
the FDA to review their safety data but not halt their programs. Because its
trials are so similar to Penn's, Schering-Plough was asked to halt its until the
cause of Gelsinger's death has been determined.

   In some ways the Schering-Plough trial is more demanding than the Penn trial.
In the Penn trial, the drug was given only once. Schering-Plough's drug is
administered daily for five days and then the five-day series is repeated
monthly for up to five months.

   Patients who had started the Schering-Plough trial will complete the series
though new patients won't be started.

   It's not known if the genes, adenovirus or method of delivery had anything to
do with Gelsinger's death. Penn has launched an investigation of the young man's
death and hopes to have a report by December.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1278 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                               October 12, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     October 12, 1999 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: AMERICAN;
RESEARCHER;
WINS NOBEL;
FOR MEDICINE

BYLINE: By CURT SUPLEE; WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   An American scientist has won the 1999 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
for his discovery that proteins have distinctive chemical markings that allow
them to be shuttled around to the correct locations inside and outside living
cells.

   Guenter Blobel, 63, a German-born cell biologist at Rockefeller University in
New York, was awarded the $960,000 prize for answering one of the most puzzling
questions in molecular biology: There are about a million protein molecules in
each cell; how do they all end up at the right location?

   As early as 1971, Blobel proposed that each protein carries an "address tag"
- written in a pattern of chemical compounds called amino acids - that allows
the cellular machinery to identify and route each kind of protein to its correct
destination. Eventually, this address system was shown to be universal across
plant, animal and fungus cells.

   Blobel's discovery explains the onset of several kinds of inherited diseases.
If for some reason a protein lacks the correct address tag, it could end up in
the wrong part of the cell, potentially causing health problems. That is the
case in a disease that causes early kidney stones, and in some kinds of
genetically transferred high blood cholesterol conditions. Cystic fibrosis
involves a related problem, in which proteins do not arrive at the correct
address.

   The Nobel selection committee noted that Blobel's research helps make it
possible "to construct new drugs that are targeted to a particular [cell
section] to correct a specific defect. The ability to reprogram cells in a
specific way will also be important for future cell and gene therapy."

   Blobel will give his prize money to help the restoration of the Dresden
Cathedral in Germany.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: ASSOCIATED PRESS; Dr. Guenter Blobel listens to a question at
Rockefeller University in New York yesterday. Blobel won the Nobel Prize for
medicine yesterday for protein research that shed new light on diseases
including cystic fibrosis.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1999


                             1279 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               October 12, 1999, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. C7

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: MORNING BRIEFING

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News, Reuters And Associated Press Reports.

BODY:


Arch Coal won't sell two mines

   Arch Coal Inc., the second-largest U.S. coal producer, said it won't sell two
Central Appalachian mines because it didn't receive satisfactory offers.

   The Creve Coeur, Mo.-based company said in March it planned to sell the Lone
Mountain and Pardee mines, located on the Kentucky/Virginia border, to help
reduce the company's debt and because they are small compared to Arch's other
mines.

   Those mines, and another in Kentucky the company is still considering
selling, together are worth about $ 120 million, said Peter Ward, a Lehman
Brothers analyst.

   Bids for the mines were low in part because coal prices have fallen in
eastern markets because utilities have large stockpiles after a mild winter,
Arch spokesman Deck Sloan said.

Nasdaq launches system for anonymous trading

   The Nasdaq, the No. 1 U.S. electronic stock market, on Monday launched
Optimark, a so-called "black box" system that allows traders to anonymously
carry out large stock orders typically placed by institutional investors.

   The system, run by Jersey City, N.J.-based Optimark Technologies Inc.,
started trading 10 stocks, including Dell Computer and Starbucks Corp. .

   Ten stocks are slated to trade on the Optimark system during a two-week trial
period before expanding to include all the stocks in the Nasdaq 100 index. By
the end of the year, the system is scheduled to trade in 250 of the most active
Nasdaq-listed securities.

Schering-Plough stops enrollment in gene studies

   Schering-Plough Corp. said that it had stopped enrollment in two gene-therapy
studies at the request of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, after a patient
in an unrelated test died.

   Schering-Plough, the maker of the world's best-selling allergy drug,
Claritin, halted enrollment in tests in which researchers administer gene
therapy by injection into the main artery into the liver. A patient died in a
University of Pennsylvania study that used the same method of administration,
Schering-Plough said.

   Schering-Plough said it would continue to provide treatment to patients
enrolled in the study.

Ameritech chief Notebaert retires days after merger

   Ameritech's top executive announced his retirement Monday, just days after
his company merged with larger SBC Communications to create the nation's biggest
local phone company.

   Richard C. Notebaert, 52, has been president, chairman and chief executive
officer of Chicago-based Ameritech since 1994. He said his retirement will take
effect Dec. 30 after 31 years with the company.

   Notebaert praised Ameritech's management team and employees in a brief
statement, which did not elaborate on his reason for the move. Ameritech
referred inquiries for further information to SBC officials.

Taco Bell dog will play smaller role in campaign

   The little dog's days as the central character in Taco Bell commercials are
dwindling, but its feisty Chihuahua is staying on in a supporting role.

   The fast-food restaurant chain plans to introduce a new advertising tagline
later this year and emphasize the food and its price, spokeswoman Laurie Gannon
said Monday. But she said "the dog is staying in the advertising" although its
role will change.

   "We'll use the dog in a different sense to draw attention to the food," she
said, declining to be more specific.

   The tagline debuting in commercials airing in late December will be "Grande
Taste. Loco Price. Only at Taco Bell." Taco Bell ads have not been using any
single theme in recent years, Ms. Gannon said.

iBooks, iMacs ordered by CompUSA fall short

   CompUSA Inc., the largest U.S. retailer of personal computers, said Monday it
didn't receive as many of Apple Computer Inc.'s new iBook notebook computers or
low-cost iMac personal computers as it had hoped.

   CompUSA received enough iBooks to cover advance orders with a few left over
for its stores, said Suzanne Shelton, CompUSA director of public relations. The
chain didn't get any of the new $ 999 iMacs, though it did take delivery of two
new higher-priced iMacs.

   Apple Computer warned analysts last month that the earthquake in Taiwan
disrupted production of iBook and its PowerBook notebook computers.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1280 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       October 12, 1999 Tuesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 290 words

HEADLINE: U.S. RESEARCHER WINS MEDICAL NOBEL;
DISCOVERY SHOWS HOW PROTEINS ARE ROUTED

BYLINE: By The Washington Post

BODY:

   An American scientist has won the 1999 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
for his discovery that proteins have distinctive chemical markings that let them
be shuttled around to the correct locations inside and outside living cells.

   Guenter Blobel, 63, a German-born cell biologist at Rockefeller University in
New York, was awarded the $960,000 prize for answering one of the most puzzling
questions in molecular biology: There are about a million protein molecules in
each cell; how do they all end up at the right location?

   As early at 1971, Blobel proposed that each protein carries an "address tag"
-- written in a pattern of chemical compounds called amino acids -- that lets
the cellular machinery identify and route each kind of protein to its correct
destination. Eventually, this address system was shown to be universal across
plant, animal and fungus cells.

   Blobel's discovery explains the onset of several kinds of inherited diseases.
If for some reason a protein lacks the correct address tag, it could end up in
the wrong part of the cell, potentially causing health problems. That is the
case in a disease that causes early kidney stones, and in some kinds of
genetically transferred high blood cholesterol conditions. Cystic fibrosis
involves a related problem, in which proteins do not arrive at the correct
address.

   The Nobel selection committee noted that Blobel's research helps make it
possible "to construct new drugs that are targeted to a particular (cell
section) to correct a specific defect. The ability to reprogram cells in a
specific way will also be important for future cell and gene therapy."

   Blobel will donate his prize money to help in the restoration of Dresden
Cathedral in Germany.


GRAPHIC: Guenter Blobel: His work explains the onset of some inherited diseases

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1281 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 12, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z13

LENGTH: 704 words

HEADLINE: A Boost for Bypass; Therapy Aims to Improve Survival

BYLINE: Cristine Russell, Special to The Washington Post

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:



   Think Arnold Schwarzenegger. That is the image that surprisingly comes to
mind when Harvard researcher Victor J. Dzau describes an experimental gene
therapy technique designed to help improve the long-term outcome of the heart
bypass operation.

   The goal is to genetically enhance bypass grafts to produce stronger blood
vessels that are less likely to become clogged after surgery. "It is what I call
the Schwarzenegger effect," said Dzau, comparing the more robust vessels to the
bodybuilder and actor.

   Preliminary results from the first human tests suggest that this gene therapy
appears to be a promising, safe way to help reduce the failure rate of the more
than 750,000 bypass surgeries carried out in the United States each year. "It
could make a big difference to patient well-being and cut down the costs of
repeat surgeries and interventions," said Dzau, a Harvard Medical School
professor and chief of medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

   Most bypass surgery is conducted on patients with atherosclerosis, a
condition in which the major coronary arteries are clogged with fatty plaque
deposits that cut off blood supply to the heart. About 10 to 30 percent of
bypass surgeries fail within the year after surgery, said Dzau. The risk
continues, so within a decade after conventional bypass surgery, many patients
need further treatment, he said.

   A bypass usually involves removing a piece of vein from the patient's leg and
sewing it onto the artery to reroute blood flow around the blocked portion. The
problem is that the transplanted vein is not as tough as an artery: Its walls
are thinner and more vulnerable to the increased blood pressure that arteries
must endure. As a result, the cells lining the grafted vein are stimulated to
divide rapidly and fill in the vessel cavity, creating thicker walls. In many
cases the bypass graft becomes sufficiently blocked to again put the patient in
danger.

   The new procedure presents a "unique opportunity," Dzau said, to re-engineer
the genetic makeup of the vein so that its walls will be less prone to clog up.
The vein can be genetically treated in the operating room within 10 minutes
after it is removed from the leg.

   To do this, the researchers stick the vein snippet in a small plastic tube
with a solution containing genetically engineered DNA intended to help block
cell growth. The tube is sealed and pressurized to help push the DNA into the
vein's walls. For several weeks after it is put into the body, the modified DNA
acts as a decoy to attract a gene product known as E2F and keep it from
promoting cell division. The result is a more muscular graft that acts "more
like an artery," said Dzau at a science forum organized by Harvard Medical
School.

   Working with colleague Michael Mann, Dzau has been developing the new gene
therapy approach for about five years, starting with rat and human tissue in the
laboratory and then testing it on more than 400 rabbits before moving to a small
group of patients.

   The initial study, conducted at Brigham and Women's Hospital with a team
headed by vascular surgeon Anthony Whittemore, involved 17 high-risk patients
who underwent the new procedure and were compared to a similar number who
underwent conventional bypass surgery. The study was "blinded" so that neither
the doctors nor patients knew who was getting the new procedure. Dzau said that
one year after surgery, nearly 70 percent of the patients with conventional
therapy suffered from clogged bypass grafts or needed repeat surgery. In
contrast, in the experimental gene therapy group, about 30 percent suffered
relapses. In this study, the patients were being treated for peripheral artery
disease in their legs, which causes pain and problems walking. The peripheral
bypass procedure that was used is similar to the one employed for a coronary
artery bypass, and the approach should be applicable to this procedure as well,
said Dzau.

   Most important, said Dzau, the study demonstrated that this gene therapy
technique appears to be "absolutely safe." While it seems to show a significant
benefit in the small group studied, he stressed that far more research is needed
and studies are planned.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1282 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 12, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 976 words

HEADLINE: Researcher Of Proteins Wins Nobel; His Findings Have Many Biotech Uses

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Guenter Blobel, a cell biologist at Rockefeller University in New York, was
awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine yesterday for discovering how
proteins get shipped to their proper destinations within the body after being
manufactured by tiny molecular factories inside cells.

   Blobel, 63, showed in the 1970s that each of the thousands of proteins made
inside the body's trillions of cells bears a distinctive sequence, very much
like a Zip code or the three-letter destination codes that appear on airline
baggage tags.

   In a series of intricate and elegant experiments conducted with molecular
tools that were blunt and cumbersome by contemporary standards, Blobel
identified and deciphered those destination sequences. He also discovered how
various helper molecules inside cells "read" the codes and deliver the proteins
to their proper addresses.

   "It was a big challenge, and sometimes we were tempted to do something else,
but we stuck with it," Blobel said. "There were peaks of excitement that kept us
going."

   Blobel's research laid important groundwork for the burgeoning biotechnology
industry, which today makes routine use of his discoveries to manufacture
medicines inside living cells instead of in laboratory flasks.

   Other researchers have built on Blobel's findings to create gene therapies
for rare diseases caused by defects in the body's protein-addressing system. In
those diseases, proteins get delivered to inappropriate compartments within
cells, or even to entirely wrong parts of the body.

   "I can't think of anyone more deserving than Guenter," said Ira Mellman, a
cell biologist at Yale University School of Medicine who has known and worked
with Blobel for many years. "There is this unbelievable substance to his
scientific work, which can be measured not only in terms of what he has done but
by the number of young scientists who have passed through his lab and become
important scientists in their own right. In scientific culture, that's what
immortality is."

   Awarded by the Nobel Assembly at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, the
prize is worth $ 960,000 this year. Blobel, who a few years ago founded a global
charity dedicated to restoring the Frauenkirche, the beautiful Baroque cathedral
that was shattered in the bombing of Dresden in 1945, told news services he will
donate some of his winnings toward that $ 150 million restoration, scheduled for
completion in 2006, the 800th anniversary of the founding of Dresden. He said he
will donate the rest of the prize money to help reconstruct the Dresden
Synagogue and another destroyed landmark building in the Italian village of
Fubine.

   Blobel is a tall and imposing man with brilliant white hair, well known for
being more nattily dressed than most scientists. Colleagues yesterday described
him variously as "opinionated," "tempestuous," "intimidating," and someone who
has "rubbed a lot of people the wrong way," but also as "a scholar," "a great
scientist" and "a Renaissance man."

   "If you worked at MGM Studios and you wanted a model scientist from Central
Casting, it would be him," Mellman said.

   Ten years ago, after a tiff with the National Institutes of Health over the
bureaucratic hassles of its grant review process, Blobel simply stopped dealing
with the agency -- which had backed his early work with more than $ 4.5 million
in grants -- and never asked for another penny. His work has been supported for
the past 13 years by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, based in Chevy Chase,
known for its generous support of top scientists.

   Blobel, now an American citizen, came to the United States as a PhD student
in the early 1960s. A decade later he began to tackle the vexing question of how
proteins get to their destinations in cells.

   Proteins, including hormones, enzymes and other key molecules of life, are
long strands of amino acids that resemble the beaded pull chains that hang from
overhead light fixtures. They are assembled one amino acid at a time in tiny
production facilities called ribosomes, which work from blueprints called genes.
The proteins fold themselves into convoluted bundles and then go to their job
sites.

   In some cases those destinations are particular compartments, or "organelles"
(such as the mitochondria or the nucleus), inside the same cell in which the
protein was made. In other cases the destination might be an entirely different
part of the body, in which case the protein must enter a canal and be secreted
by the cell for long-distance delivery to a different tissue or organ.

   Blobel attached radioactive tracers to newly made proteins, then tracked
their movements inside test tubes filled with various organelles. He found that
new proteins bear a few extra amino acids, apparently tacked on by the ribosome
according to specifications in the protein's genetic code. Those amino acids act
as destination tags, which can be "read" by roaming molecules called signal
recognition particles, which in turn deliver the proteins to key transport
channels or other destinations bearing matching codes.

   Blobel also showed that this mechanism operates virtually identically in
plants, animals and fungi -- a discovery that now allows scientists to use
bacteria and yeast as factories that secrete human drugs and other useful
proteins. About 350 of the approximately 1,000 new drugs now being tested in
patients are products of biotechnology, according to the Pharmaceutical Research
and Manufacturers of America.

   "He's the granddaddy of this field," said Arthur Horwich, a Yale University
cell biologist and geneticist who studies protein traffic. "His Zip code concept
was a major idea that inaugurated a whole field of investigation with some real
practical spinoffs. He anticipated what was going on years before the rest of us
tuned in completely."



LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1283 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 12, 1999, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Firm Ordered to Stop Gene Therapy Studies

BODY:



   The federal government has ordered Schering-Plough Corp. to temporarily halt
two gene therapy studies because the research design is similar to a
Pennsylvania experiment in which a teenager died last month.

   No one yet knows what killed Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson. Just four days
before his death, University of Pennsylvania scientists had placed healthy genes
in his liver to combat a rare metabolic disease. Penn's study has been halted
while scientists there, along with federal regulators, try to determine what
went wrong.

   The Food and Drug Administration decision late Friday halts two separate
experiments by Schering-Plough to try gene therapy as a treatment for liver
cancer and for colorectal cancer that spreads to the liver.

   Those studies have one similarity to the Penn experiment that worried
regulators: They use relatively high doses of a type of cold virus called
adenovirus to slip new genes directly into the liver.

   No deaths or unexpected side effects have been reported in the Schering
trials, but the studies' suspension is a precaution to let the FDA scrutinize
patient data for any early signs of problems, FDA gene therapy chief Philip
Noguchi said yesterday. The FDA wants to see "if there's any pattern we might be
able to understand, to give us some insight into the Penn study," he said.

   The FDA suspension means Schering cannot enroll any new patients, but
patients already given their first gene dose can receive the rest of their
scheduled treatment, said company spokesman Robert Consalvo.

   The FDA decision does not affect dozens of other gene therapy experiments
that use lower doses of adenoviruses or that inject them into some organ other
than the liver.


LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1284 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                    October 11, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL MARKETS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: Protein research wins Nobel

BYLINE: BY CURT SUPLEE

BODY:


   An American scientist won the 1999 Nobel Prize in medicine today for his
discovery that proteins have distinctive chemical markings that allow them to be
shuttled around to the correct locations inside and outside living cells.

   Guenter Blobel, 63, a German-born cell biologist at Rockefeller University in
New York, was awarded the $ 960,000 prize for answering one of the most puzzling
questions in molecular biology: There are about a million protein molecules in
each cell; how do they all end up at the right location?

   As early at 1971, Blobel proposed that each protein carries an "address tag"
-- written in a pattern of chemical compounds called amino acids -- that allows
the cellular machinery to identify and route each kind of protein to its correct
destination. Eventually, this address system was shown to be universal across
plant, animal and fungus cells.

   Blobel's discovery explains the onset of several kinds of inherited diseases.
If for some reason a protein lacks the correct address tag, it could end up in
the wrong part of the cell, potentially causing health problems. That is the
case in a disease that causes early kidney stones, and in some kinds of
genetically transferred high blood cholesterol conditions. Cystic fibrosis
involves a related problem, in which proteins do not arrive at the correct
address.

   The Nobel selection committee noted that Blobel's research helps make it
possible "to construct new drugs that are targeted to a particular (cell
section) to correct a specific defect. The ability to reprogram cells in a
specific way will also be important for future cell and gene therapy."

GRAPHIC: WASHINGTON POST

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1999


                             1285 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 11, 1999, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: C; Pg. 6 Medicine

LENGTH: 656 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell study could lead to muscular dystrophy treatment

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

   Researchers employing a technique developed by a Houston doctor have found
they can turn bone marrow cells into muscle, offering hope for gene therapy for
muscular dystrophy.

   In a study in the journal Nature, biologists from Boston's Children's
Hospital reported that 12 weeks after infusing dystrophic mice with bone marrow
transplants from normal mice, about 10 percent of the muscle fibers in the
diseased animals were making the correct form of dystrophin, the protein that is
genetically defective in a lethal form of muscular dystrophy.

   "We knew that bone marrow stem cells could reconstitute bone marrow, but it
was a real surprise that they could also contribute to the reconstitution of
muscle," said Dr. Louis Kunkel, one of the authors of the research. "This work
really opens a whole field of expanding stem-cell biology as a potential
treatment for genetic disorders, specifically for muscular dystrophies."

   The treated mice were not physically any stronger because 10 percent
improvement is not considered therapeutically significant. But Kunkel says the
research gave his team optimism that they can the increase the number of
positive fibers and develop treatment possibilities.

   The discovery is the latest breakthrough involving stem cells, the
long-hidden source of the body's ability to renew and repair its tissues. Unlike
mature cells, which cannot change their destiny, stem cells can renew themselves
and create new cells of whatever tissue they belong to.

   The researchers used a technique discovered by Dr. Margaret Goodell, now a
professor at Baylor College of Medicine and researcher at Texas Children's
Cancer Center.

   Five years ago, as a doctoral candidate at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, she learned how to isolate a special subpopulation of the bone
marrow stem cells that form the blood system, cells that are thought to be
ancestral to normal bone marrow stem cells and thus possess greater versatility.

   It is these bone marrow stem cells that the researchers used to treat mice
whose dystrophin gene had been removed to mimic humans with Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, or DMD. The cells migrated from the bloodstream and integrated
missing genetic information into the muscle.

   "We imagined our discovery might lead to something like this, but it
obviously took a long time and a lot of work to show it could," says Goodell.
"Even though we're somewhat in competition, I was pleased to see this work. It's
very exciting." Goodell will be publishing related research in the next two
months.

   In a related, reverse experiment, the Children's Hospital researchers in
Boston also used Goodell's technique to isolate ancestral-type stem cells from
muscle, then showed that they could generate bone marrow cells as well as adult
muscle cells.

   Nevertheless, the mechanism by which the regeneration takes place is still
unclear. Researchers suspect that these biological transformations are made in
response to signals from the body, perhaps calling out for help in repairing
tissues.

   Muscular dystrophy is a set of diseases that affects some 250,000 Americans.
In 1986, Kunkel identified the gene causing DMD, which affects mainly boys and
is fatal.

   The gene discovery prompted a series of unsuccessful efforts to restore DMD
patients' muscles. One has been to transplant donor muscle cells, called
myoblasts, into patients' muscles, which takes hundreds or thousands of separate
injections and has not been proven to increase strength.

   Another has been to use viruses to carry the dystrophin gene into patients'
muscle, but the patients' immune system destroys the foreign virus and gene.

   Against that background, the new experiments are encouraging because the stem
cells are the patients' own and are carried throughout the muscles via blood
vessels. Leaders of the Muscular Dystrophy Association said the experiments
promise the greatest hope they've had for treatment.


LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1999


                             1286 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                     October 11, 1999, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1210 words

HEADLINE: THE CUTTING EDGE: FOCUS ON TECHNOLOGY;
 SPECIAL REPORT: CAN SOUTHLAND BIOTECH COMPETE?;
 ENTREPRENEURIAL BREAKTHROUGH WAS A START;
 UROGENESYS, FOUNDED BY UCLA PROFESSORS AND FUNDED BY INVESTORS WITH UNIVERSITY
TIES, SEEKS A TREATMENT FOR PROSTATE CANCER.

BYLINE: PAUL JACOBS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   UroGenesys, a start-up biotechnology company in Santa Monica, is aggressively
searching for new ways to treat and diagnose prostate cancer, now the
second-leading cause of male cancer deaths after lung cancer.

   By focusing on prostate and other urological cancers--tumors of the kidney,
bladder and testes--the firm is unique among biotech companies, says UroGenesys
President and Chief Executive Donald B. Rice.

   But there are a number of other ways that UroGenesys has set itself apart.

   Other biotech start-ups work hard to scrape together an initial $ 250,000 in
seed money. UroGenesys raised $ 8 million within months of its founding in late
1996--most of it from a small number of individual investors.

   Without a product on the market or even one ready for testing in patients, it
just completed a second round of funding, this time for $ 11 million.

   UroGenesys is one example of how biotech companies in Los Angeles and Orange
counties are overcoming obstacles to doing business in the Southland, such as a
scarcity of venture capital and difficulties in finding suitable laboratory
space.

   The company was founded by a group of professors from UCLA, a school that
only in recent years has begun encouraging entrepreneurial efforts by its
medical faculty.

   Rice himself is an unusual biotech executive. A chemical engineer and
economist by training, he's been secretary of the Air Force, president of RAND
Corp., and president and chief operating officer at Teledyne Inc., a company
known for rocketry, not clinical oncology.

   "We had our hesitation about a chemical engineer," said Dr. Arie Belldegrun,
the company's founder and chairman. "At the end of the day, whatever Teledyne is
doing, we are doing, building guided missiles. But we send them to attack cancer
cells."

   In fact, it was UCLA's close connections to several of Southern California's
leading businessmen and philanthropists that helped bring UroGenesys into the
world.

   Belldegrun, a surgeon and chief of urological oncology at the Westwood
campus, was one of seven UCLA professors who founded the company after weeks of
brainstorming. The idea was to build on discoveries they had made in their
university laboratories and develop new tools for treating cancer
patients--taking ideas, Belldegrun said, "from the lab bench to the bedside."

   They assembled a prestigious panel of scientific advisors, including one
Nobel laureate. And like the parents of a lot of embryonic companies, they
approached venture capitalists only to find that they were interested "in owning
you, in controlling how you do business," Belldegrun said.

   They turned instead to a small group of successful businessmen with ties to
UCLA. Among these patrons were the late Henry Singleton of Teledyne and Simon
Ramo, the "R" in TRW.

   Ramo said in a recent interview that he encouraged the UCLA scientists to
form their own company, helped them find investors and, with Singleton,
recruited Rice, whom he'd known for years. Ramo said he was particularly
impressed with Belldegrun's business acumen: "If I didn't know he was a
physician, a surgeon and a leading one, I'd think he was an MBA who had been in
the start-up company business for a long time."

   Initially, the company is focusing on prostate cancer, a disease that
afflicts 1,000,000 American men, with 179,000 new cases expected this year. The
company estimates the annual market for new treatments and diagnostic tools to
deal with this potentially lethal form of cancer at $ 3 billion.

   The key to the firm's research is a system licensed from UCLA for growing
tumor specimens taken from surgical patients and implanted in a special strain
of mice.

   Not only do the tumors thrive in the mice, but they go through stages just as
they would in patients.

   At UroGenesys, scientists are zeroing in on the differences between healthy
prostate tissue and tumors at various stages--looking for genetic differences in
the affected cells. Using sophisticated tools for comparing the cells, the
scientists have already discovered more than 30 promising targets for drug
therapy or diagnosis. Other potential targets have been licensed from UCLA.

   UroGenesys is "developing a large portfolio of patents as we go along," said
Aya Jakobovits, the company's director of research. The firm is producing
antibodies to attack cancer cells and vaccines to stimulate the patient's immune
system, and other therapies that destroy tumors, she said.

   Company officials consider Jakobovits a scientific catch because of her long
experience in the biotech industry. At Abgenix, she headed the team that
developed the XenoMouse, a commercially successful strain of mice engineered to
produce human antibodies.

   Most of the company's 21 employees are scientists, including seven
PhDs--several trained at UCLA.

   It was important to the UCLA founders that the company be located nearby,
Belldegrun said. "There's a need to talk, and scientific interaction is very
important. We didn't want to move far away."

   The company found 10,000 square feet of lab and office space in Santa Monica
that it is leasing from Xoma, a Berkeley-based biotech company.

   Like a growing number of young biotech businesses, UroGenesys is contracting
out chunks of its research and development efforts. For example, it sends genes
it has isolated to a company that specializes in deciphering the genetic code.

   The firm pays UCLA for the board and care of its experimental mice, which are
housed in spare laboratory space on campus.

   Under its business plan, UroGenesys will test promising therapies in animals,
but it is seeking partners to take the products to market.

   "We are currently having discussions with a number of large companies, either
major pharmaceutical or biotech companies, for licensing or research and
development collaborations," Rice said.

   Rice acknowledges that competition is fierce to develop new treatments for
advanced prostate cancer.

   At least 47 new biotech drugs for prostate cancer are being tested in
patients, according to an industry survey by the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America.

   And one competitor foresees a potential patent fight on the horizon over
rights to genetic instructions found in prostate tissue, on-off switches called
promoters and enhancers.

   Daniel R. Henderson, the chief executive officer of Calydon in Sunnyvale,
says his firm and UroGenesys appear to be looking at similar approaches to using
these switches in gene therapy. Calydon has spliced one of these gene fragments
to a common-cold virus, so that it will work only in prostate cells and kill
them. Johns Hopkins University researchers are testing the genetically
engineered virus in patients.

   A patent fight will develop, Henderson said, but only if the approach can be
made to work.

   Jakobovits won't comment on Henderson's claim, except to point out that
UroGenesys recently won a broad U.S. patent covering the gene sequences it
licensed from UCLA, which were discovered by Belldegrun and others.

   "There are plenty of companies doing things in prostate cancer," she said,
"but to the best of my knowledge, UroGenesys is the only one that is focused on
gene discovery and validation using multiple approaches."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: UroGenesys recruited Donald B. Rice as chief executive and Aya
Jakobovits as research director. The firm is producing antibodies to attack
cancer cells and vaccines to stimulate the patient's immune system.
PHOTOGRAPHER: LUIS SINCO / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1999


                             1287 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    OCTOBER 11, 1999, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 495 words

HEADLINE: Schizophrenic Biotech Stocks Soar on Hope and Swoon on Science;

Top firms outpaced other major markets by a large margin

BYLINE: TOM ABATE

BODY:
While most of the stock market was in a summer swoon, biotech stocks staged a
strong rally in the third quarter, according to two new studies.

    An index of 100 biotech stocks compiled by BioCentury newsletter in San
Carlos rose 17 percent in the three months ending September 30.

    That compares to a 6.6 percent decline in the Standard & Poor's 500 index, a
5.8 percent drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average and a meager 2.2 percent
gain for the Nasdaq composite.

    It was no surprise that the 12 biggest biotech companies, which have been
sizzling all year, posted a 15.4 percent gain for the latest quarter, according
to San Francisco merchant bank Burrill & Co.

    What's more surprising is that midsize biotech stocks -- 20 firms with
market values ranging from $300 million to $1 billion -- gained a robust 34.5
percent, according to Burrill's calculations

    Even tiny biotech firms, with market capitalizations below $100 million,
gained an impressive 18 percent in BioCentury's quarterly analysis. Even with
that comeback, however, they were still off 5 percent for the year.

    "We'd all like to think biotech's hot again," Burrill said, "but the story
really is that the top tier and the next tier are doing better, while the small
companies keep struggling."

    A slight cooling in Wall Street's dot.com fever partly explains biotech's
rebound. Solid earnings by the top-tier firms, plus a large number of
prospective drugs pending Food Administration approval, helped buoy investor
confidence.

    But with the vast majority of biotech firms still losing money, and crawling
through the FDA approval process, the industry lives or dies on what we might
kindly call hope.

    For example, shares of Alameda's Avigen nearly doubled in the quarter over
excitement about its continuing trial of a gene therapy for hemophilia. Never
mind that Avigen has only tested its therapy on a handful of patients, and
hasn't said yet whether it improved blood clotting. Investors figured the news
had to be good, otherwise the company would have halted the trial.

    Avigen has promised to report partial results of its study at a scientific
conference in December, and the news had better be good or its stock chart will
look like a bungee cord jump.

    That's what happened to Xoma Ltd. of Berkeley and Coulter Pharmaceuticals of
South San Francisco, which faced scientific setbacks.

    Xoma had an anti-infection agent that didn't work in Phase III trials.
Coulter announced a delay in seeking FDA approval for a cancer drug. Wall Street
whacked their shares nearly in half during the quarter.

    It is such sudden disappointments, arising from scientific factors far
beyond our ken, that makes biotech investing so risky -- especially for those
who are simply chasing the momentum.

   Look for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, abate@sfgate.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or
phone, (415) 777-6213.



LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1999


                             1288 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     October 10, 1999, Sunday ,City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: A new opening on cystic fibrosis;
Chemical imbalance may be key, Beth Israel doctors say

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Researchers at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center announced yesterday that
they have found a reversible chemical imbalance that may be responsible for
cystic fibrosis, a serious inherited disesase. The discovery could lead to a
treatment for the disease with large amounts of a nutritional supplement derived
from fish oil, they said.

    Genzyme Corp., the Cambridge biopharmaceutical company, is collaborating
with Beth Israel to develop an oral drug made from DHA, a fatty acid found in
fish oils. The company said yesterday it will begin testing a DHA-based drug in
15 to 30 cystic fibrosis patients next year.

    "By moving quickly we can exploit this exciting observation," said Robert J.
Beall, president and chief executive of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, which
has supported the research. "This is another drug in the pipeline of medical
treatments . . . and may open a new opportunity for cystic fibrosis therapy.

    Current research on cystic fibrosis treatments is focused on antibiotic
drugs and protein and gene therapies.

    Working with laboratory mice, Dr. Juan Alvarez and Dr. Steven Freedman of
Beth Israel investigated the effects of correcting an imbalance of lipids,
natural compounds such as fats that are insoluble in water but soluble in
organic solvents, in cell walls. They found they could reverse signs of cystic
fibrosis in the animals' pancreas, intestines, and lungs. Their findings were
announced at a Seattle conference.

    The proposed drug, DHA, or docosahexaenoic acid, is found in widely
available over-the-counter nutritional supplements containing fish oils.

    "They [ Alvarez and Freedman] have made some tantalizing observations in an
animal model," said Dr. Peter Durie, director of cystic fibrosis research at The
Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, where the gene for cystic fibrosis was
discovered 10 years ago. "No current therapy for cystic fibrosis deals with the
underlying problem. Potentially, this is something close to the fundamental
problem."

    For Genzyme, a medical formulation of DHA is now its most promising effort
to find a cystic fibrosis therapy after spending more than $100 million on
evaluating and testing eight antibiotic and gene therapy drugs without successs.

    "Realistically, this is more likely to be a preventive and stabilizing
approach to the disease," said Dr. David Meeker, Genzyme's senior vice president
of medical affairs.

    Cystic fibrosis affects 30,000 children and young adults in the United
States, with nearly 1,000 new cases diagnosed every year.

    People who suffer from the genetic disorder must endure a panoply of daily
medications to control their breathing problems, especially the build-up of an
abnormally thick mucus that clogs the lungs, reducing the flow of oxygen to the
blood. The debilitating disease also causes the pancreas to become scarred and
unable to make needed digestive enzymes, which leads to gastrointestinal and
respiratory problems. More than half the patients die by their 32d birthday from
malnutrition or lung infections.

    Yesterday both Beall of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and Meeker of Genzyme
cautioned cystic fibrosis patients against rushing out to buy DHA supplments.

    "To the cystic fibrosis community we say, there are impurities in the
over-the-counter DHA that could be harmful to patients who do not know the
correct dosage and should not try to do this themselves," Beall said. "Give us
the time to do the clinical trial for safety and the dosage formulation."

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1999


                             1289 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 10, 1999, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: Houston Healthwatch

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Cancer seminar: Chief Deputy Karen Moore of the Harris County Constable's
Office will share her journey with breast cancer in "She's a Cop . . .  She Can
Take It" at 10 a.m. Wednesday at Doss Community Center, 2500 Frick Road. To
register, call 281-591-7830.

   Eating disorders therapy group: A new therapy group has recently begun for
women, age 18 and older, with anorexia or bulimia. Meetings are 10-11:30 a.m.
Saturdays, 4200 Montrose, Suite 450. Cost is $ 30 per session. Call
713-522-7014.

   Prostate cancer support group: "Novel Approaches to insitu Gene Therapies" is
the topic for the next meeting at 7 p.m. Monday, St. Luke's United Methodist
Church, 3471 Westheimer, The Rotunda Room. Call 713-840-6363.

   Infertility Network meeting: "Latest Trends in Infertility Treatment:
Highlights from the Annual Meeting of the ASRM" will be the meeting topic 2-4
p.m. Oct. 17, One Fannin Building, 7400 Fannin, First Floor Conference Room.
Cost is $ 2 or $ 3 couple. Call 713-723-2299.

   Parkinson Foundation of Harris County: "The Psychological Effects of
Parkinson's Disease on Patients and Caregivers" is the topic of the next meeting
at 11 a.m. Friday at West University Community Building, 6104 Auden. Call
713-552-0858.

   Headache: The headache support group will meet 7-9 p.m. Thursday at TenetLink
Education Center, 1200 Binz, Suite 140. Call 888-836-3848.

   Bereavement: Houston Hospice will present "Life After Loss" a six-week grief
education/support program, developed by the American Cancer Society, to help
bereaved people better cope. Classes are 2:30-4 p.m. Thursdays, Oct. 14-Nov. 18
at Cypress Creek Christian Church, 6823 Cypresswood Drive. Call 713-468-2441.

   Breast cancer: A program on "Advancements in Diagnosing and Treating Breast
Cancer" will be held 7-8:30 p.m. Oct. 19, Memorial Hermann The Woodlands
Hospital Cancer Center, 920 Medical Plaza Drive, No. 100. Call 800-544-3399 for
reservations.


NOTES: Houston Healthwatch is a weekly column about health and fitness programs,
products and activities in the Houston area. Send notices at least two weeks in
advance to Healthwatch, Houston Chronicle, P.O. Box 4260, Houston, Texas 77210;
or fax them to 713-220-7410.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1999


                             1290 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                     October 10, 1999, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 994 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS REMEDY SHOWS PROMISE IN TESTS ON MICE

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   Boston researchers, in experiments with mice, have developed what they
believe could be the first effective therapy for cystic fibrosis, a devastating
genetic disease marked by life-threatening accumulations of mucus in the lungs
and pancreas.

   Human trials of the remedy, which involves administration of high levels of a
purified form of a common food supplement, could begin early next year, they
said Saturday at a Cystic Fibrosis Foundation conference in Seattle.

   Using mice with the same genetic defect found in humans with the disease,
researchers from Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center found that cell membranes
in the organs most affected by cystic fibrosis have a deficiency of a fatty acid
called docosahexaenoic acid, or DHA.

   Giving the animals large quantities of DHA dramatically eased disease
symptoms, they reported. Because the mouse is considered such a good model for
the disease, the results should hold in humans as well, the researchers said.

   "This exciting research represents an entirely new strategy to correct and
possibly even prevent some of the ravages of this disease," said Robert J.
Beall, president and CEO of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   Although DHA is present in fish oils and nutritional supplements, the
researchers warned strongly against patients taking such supplements on their
own because other components could be harmful.

   "If we were to leave patients with any message, it is 'Don't do it,' " Beall
said. Cystic fibrosis victims who take high doses of the supplements "could do
themselves irreparable harm" because of impurities in the commercial products,
he added. "Give us the time to do clinical trials properly."

   Genzyme General of Cambridge, Mass., is now developing a suitable form of DHA
for human testing that would eliminate such problems and is working as fast as
possible to make it available, said Dr. David Meeker, Genzyme's vice president
for medical affairs. DHA is isolated from cold-water fish.

   Cystic fibrosis, commonly called CF, is a genetic disease affecting about
30,000 children and adults in the United States, making it the most common fatal
genetic disorder. About 1,000 new cases are diagnosed each year, most in early
childhood.

   CF causes cells lining the lungs and the pancreas to secrete an abnormally
thick, sticky mucus. In the pancreas, the mucus blocks bile ducts used in
secreting enzymes that help the body digest food. The mucus also clogs the
lungs, impairing breathing and leading to a high incidence of life-threatening
infections. About half of CF patients die before the age of 32.

   The gene that causes CF was identified 10 years ago, and that discovery has
led to many new approaches to treatment. Several gene therapy trials are now
underway, for example, but none so far shows signs of great effectiveness.

   At least 11 new treatments for CF are now in clinical trials. But if the new
results reported in mice can be replicated in humans, DHA promises to be the
most effective of all.

   One particular advantage is that DHA would be taken orally to treat the whole
body, while many of the other new treatments are directed only at the lungs or
the pancreas, said Mary Lou McDowell, co-chairwoman of the National Cystic
Fibrosis Awareness Committee.

   Dr. Juan Alvarez and Dr. Steven Freedman of Beth Israel, a Harvard University
teaching hospital, are specialists in studying the metabolism of fatty acids,
the long molecules from which cellular membranes are constructed. Although other
scientists have examined fatty acids in the bloodstream and found nothing
unusual, Alvarez and Freedman decided to look at the tissues most affected by
CF--the lungs, the pancreas and the intestine.

   Using mice with the same genetic defect as humans, they found that those
tissues had an unusually high level of a fatty acid called arachadonic acid, or
AA, and unusually low levels of DHA. DHA, in particular, plays a key role in the
functioning of cellular membranes, regulating the passage of materials into and
out of the cell. Because the two fatty acids are linked in the cell, low levels
of DHA lead to high levels of AA.

   To see if this fatty acid imbalance was related to the disease, they fed a
group of CF mice high levels of DHA for a week. After seven days, the AA/DHA
ratio in the tissues had returned to normal and many of the symptoms were
brought under control, Freedman said.

   Bile ducts in the pancreas, for example, were no longer clogged or blocked.
The intestines absorbed food better. And the lungs were no more susceptible to
pneumonia than those of healthy mice. The researchers observed no side effects
from the treatment, he added, and healthy mice given large doses of DHA showed
no changes.

   Working with researchers from the University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Alvarez and Freedman then studied biopsy tissues from the nose and colon of six
humans with CF and six healthy controls. They found the same fatty acid
imbalance in the human patients, but not in the controls.

   "This lipid abnormality is truly a feature of CF," Freedman said. That
finding strongly suggests that the results in mice can be translated into
humans.

   DHA is a constituent of fish oil that is sold commercially as an aid for
cholesterol control, as well as of some other food supplements. But Freedman
cautioned against patients taking such products in high doses.

   "Not only can we make animals much better with pure DHA, but we can also make
them much sicker by giving them other fatty acids," such as those found in the
commercial products, he said. And eicosapentanoic acid, the primary constituent
of fish oil, not only blocks the activity of DHA, but can suppress the growth of
children who consume large quantities, he noted. The drug being developed by
Genzyme would be pure DHA.

   Information for patients, including a summary of the presentation and a Q&A,
can be found at the foundation's Web site, http://www.cff.org.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1999


                             1291 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words

HEADLINE: The Truth Is Way Out There

BYLINE: By Jerry A. Coyne;  Jerry A. Coyne is a professor of ecology and
evolution at the University of Chicago.

BODY:


   THE REAL SCIENCE
 BEHIND THE X-FILES
 Microbes, Meteorites, and Mutants.
 By Anne Simon.
 318 pp. New York:
 Simon & Schuster. $25.

    Scientists and science fiction don't always mix. All too often, science
fiction provokes the pedant in professional scientists, for whom a beautiful
story can be ruined by a single petty error. A friend of mine, a physicist, gave
up on "Star Wars" when Han Solo used "parsec" -- a unit of astronomical distance
-- as if it were a unit of time. For me, "Jurassic Park" came to grief when the
nefarious Dr. Wu explained how he kept his dinosaurs captive: genetic
engineering made them incapable of synthesizing the essential amino acid lysine,
and thus unable to survive without the park's lysine-enriched dino chow. The
error is easily spotted by biologists: no animal can make lysine -- we all
ultimately derive it from plants, which, of course, grow everywhere, including
Jurassic Park. Amid the general acclaim for the realism of the movie's
velociraptors, I was left wondering why Steven Spielberg could not spare a few
bucks to consult one measly biochemist.

   It is this obsession with accuracy that led Anne Simon, a virologist at the
University of Massachusetts, to sign on as science consultant to "The X-Files,"
which is among the most popular science fiction shows in the history of
television. "The Real Science Behind the X-Files" chronicles her attempts to
lend scientific verisimilitude to otherwise weird and disconcerting tales. In
the show, the F.B.I. gives the name "X-files" to reports of bizarre events,
often involving mysterious deaths and diseases caused by extraterrestrials. A
pair of F.B.I. agents, Fox Mulder and Dana Scully, believe that "the truth is
out there" and are assigned to find it. The premise of the show, however, is
that the truth can involve either preternatural or supernatural causes. Mulder
favors the supernatural: he believes his sister was abducted by aliens, and
expiates his guilt through a lifelong attempt to confirm their existence. The
female agent, Scully, is a physician and a rationalist, always preferring more
earthbound explanations.

   Scully is usually wrong. The X-files incidents are generally caused by aliens
or mutants, but it is hard to get at the facts because events are obscured by a
tangled skein of conspiracies, some involving our Government. The show's
popularity, however, is due more to its carefully cultivated ambience than to
its giddy plots: the crucial ingredients include both the overt intellectual
tension between Scully and Mulder and their less overt (and unconsummated)
sexual tension. Add to this a weekly ration of gruesome deaths and afflictions,
and you have a guaranteed hit.

   Thanks to Chris Carter, the creator of "The X-Files," the show's emphasis is
on the "science" in "science fiction." And there is plenty of science, including
DNA sequencing, cryonics, pheromones and the mysterious prion, the infectious
protein behind mad cow disease. Simon's job is to get the details right, and
"The Real Science Behind the X-Files" expands her role, offering mini-courses on
topics from the show, complete with toothsome and satisfying tidbits on
parasites, gene therapy, cloning and the search for extraterrestrial life. In so
doing, she adds to the growing list of science books piggybacking on popular
shows and movies, including "The Physics of Star Trek," "The Science of Jurassic
Park" and last year's "Science of the X-Files," by Jeanne Cavelos, which bears
an uncanny resemblance to Simon's book.

   "The Real Science Behind the X-Files" uses specific episodes as springboards
for broader discussion. Many of Simon's lessons begin with questions about
plausibility. Can science possibly enable humans to regenerate their heads,
successfully freeze, rethaw and cure the terminally ill or produce
smallpox-containing pollen that when eaten by bees turns them into lethal flying
syringes? Although each question involves forays into several fields of science,
Simon manages to deliver a palatable and surprisingly large dose of information
with each episode.

   Many of her examples, in fact, are more compelling than the series'
convoluted plots. It's scary to imagine aliens inhabiting our bodies, but
consider the authentic tale of a parasitic flatworm mentioned by Simon. The
worm's complex life cycle involves three successive hosts: a snail, an ant and a
sheep. Ants eat the parasites excreted by snails, and the flatworm larvae take
up residence in the ant's stomach. One larva, however, makes a beeline for the
ant's brain. This larva commandeers the brain and changes the ant's behavior,
forcing it to ascend a blade of grass, grasp it firmly with its jaws and lapse
into a coma. And so the worm's machinations promote the move to its final host,
when the dangling ant becomes part of a sheep's mouthful of grass. Humans can
dream up such fantasies, but only evolution can make them real.

   Unfortunately, Simon's book is not free of problems. Although the scientific
lessons are usually models of clarity, they sometimes bog down in detail, and
her breeziness is sometimes irritating. More serious are the scientific mistakes
and confusing discussions that pepper the book. The former include erroneous
descriptions of the theory of punctuated equilibrium and the methods used to
produce a forensic DNA profile, while the latter include some misleading
speculations about evolution and a mischaracterization of the "nature versus
nurture" debate. To be sure, these are minor glitches that will not bother most
readers but are surprising in a book by a professional fact checker. I would
actually recommend Cavelos's earlier book as a more thorough and accurate
account of "X-Files" science.

   I must confess that I am not an avid X-phile. Call me a geek, but for
biologists, marvels like the parasitic flatworm are on tap every day, making the
reveries of Hollywood seem like small beer. I also worry that the show's
preference for the supernatural will feed the public penchant for the occult at
the expense of science. Simon rejects this notion, claiming that "The X-Files"
attracts students to science. Well, maybe, but how many budding Uri Gellers must
we endure for each young Pasteur? The geek within me, however, rejoices that
Carter and Simon insist on filling their shows not just with science but with
realistic modern science. With their white coats and pocket protectors,
scientists are often seen as modern sorcerers, dabbling in incomprehensible
mysteries and speaking in strange tongues. "The X-Files," and especially Simon's
book, have clarified some of these mysteries, and that can only be a good thing.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1999


                             1292 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   October 10, 1999, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. E-4

LENGTH: 849 words

HEADLINE: HOW PENNSYLVANIA SHOULD SPEND ITS TOBACCO MONEY;
HELPING PEOPLE STOP SMOKING - OR PREVENTING THEM FOR STARTING - WILL IMPROVE;
THE HEALTH OF THE COMMONWEALTH, SAYS JEFFREY BARG

BODY:


   America is blessed with extraordinary medical professionals and institutions.
And we in Pennsylvania have some of the best in the nation. As we are assaulted
almost daily with news of problems in our health care system, it is refreshing
to hear some positive medical news of monumental proportions. One such bit of
news was delivered three years ago with the report of a first-ever reduction in
cancer deaths in the nation. The War on Cancer begun during the Nixon
administration, a long costly war with uneven gains, appears to be finally
turning around.

   What was the cause of this tremendous achievement? Some breakthrough in gene
therapy? A new high-tech surgical technique? Less fat in Americans' diet?

   No, actually researchers from the American Cancer Society, the National
Cancer Institute and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention tell us that
the primary cause for the reduction in cancer deaths is a remarkable reduction
in adult male smoking rates over the past 30 years.

   When you consider that tobacco use is not only the No. 1 cause of cancer
deaths, but also one of the major causes of heart disease, the second and first
most deadly diseases in the U.S., you can begin to understand why tobacco use is
the No. 1 cause of preventable death, and the impact of a decline in tobacco
use.

   The cause of the decline in tobacco use is not as simple as you might think.
Yes, 30 years ago we didn't know how deadly tobacco use was, and after we began
to understand that many people quit smoking. But there has been a lot more to it
than that, which has involved major social, political and economic change-all
fought tooth and nail by a multibillion-dollar industry. As important as the
U.S. Surgeon General's first report on smoking and health was, the impact of
aggressive anti-tobacco advertising, of smokefree policies in workplaces, of
increases in tobacco prices generated by increases in tobacco taxes has been
well documented.

   You must remember, as well, that tobacco's active ingredient, nicotine, is an
extremely addictive drug. Advances in behavioral and pharmaceutical aids to
smoking cessation have proven to be the second most cost-effective means of
disease prevention after childhood immunizations.

   Speaking of childhood immunizations, former FDA Commissioner David Kessler
has designated tobacco use to be a pediatric epidemic because smoking rates
among adolescents have increased while rates among adults have decreased or
remained flat. Tobacco companies have shamelessly targeted teens to replace
smokers who have either quit or died prematurely from tobacco-related disease.
If we do not reverse these trends, the progress we have made in reducing cancer
deaths will almost certainly be reversed.

   There is more good news, however. Florida has shown tremendous progress in
reducing teen smoking with a comprehensive tobacco prevention program funded by
tobacco settlement money. The hallmark of the program is an aggressive
advertising campaign revealing the tobacco companies' manipulative strategies. *
* *

   Pennsylvania is now at a crossroads.

   As the time when we will begin to receive tobacco settlement funds rapidly
approaches, will we, like Florida, use a portion of the money to fund an
aggressive and comprehensive tobacco prevention and cessation program, or will
we use the money to fill pot holes? Or will we use the settlement money to shore
up our ailing hospitals and fund cancer research?

   Fortunately, the sum is so great that we can meaningfully do more than one
thing. The nation's pre-eminent public health research organization, the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, has provided guidelines for Pennsylvania on
how this epidemic can be abated based on successful programs implemented in
California and Massachusetts.

   The Coalition for Tobacco Free Pennsylvania has attempted to tailor those
guidelines to Pennsylvania's unique challenges. The proposal calls for a
sustained, comprehensive tobacco use prevention and cessation program, which
will require roughly 25 percent of the settlement funds. That leaves 75 percent
of the money for other important causes such as funding treatment of and
research on tobacco-related diseases.

   But one should not suppose that treatment of and research on tobacco-related
diseases can substitute for prevention and cessation programs. Treatment and
research are already much better funded than prevention and cessation. The
current U.S. surgeon general, David Satcher, has repeatedly made these points.

   And I would also remind you that it is the reduction in adult male smoking
that has more to do with the first-ever reduction in cancer deaths than anything
else. Remembering this will not only help us make a wise decision in allocating
our tobacco settlement funds, but also help us improve our ailing health care
system.

   Jeffrey Barg is chairman of the Tobacco-free Education and Action Coalition
on Health and immediate past president of the Coalition for a Tobacco Free
Pennsylvania. He is editor and publisher of Physician's News Digest in Narberth.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                             1293 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 6, 1999 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 006

LENGTH: 447 words

HEADLINE: Hedgehog therapy may be Sonic boon for the bald

BYLINE: By ED HAYWARD

BODY:

   Research into a gene nicknamed Sonic hedgehog may be the first step toward a
breakthrough baldness treatment that could awaken dormant hair follicles,
scientists have found.

   After all, no one's ever seen a bald hedgehog. All joking aside, researchers
at Weill Medical College at Cornell University in New York City have grown hair
in mice after applying the gene, known by its initials SHH, directly to hair
follicles.

   The research, performed by a team headed by Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, a director
of the Institute of Genetic Medicine at Weill, was published in the latest issue
of The Journal of Clinical Investigations.

   Humans are born with 100,000 hair follicles that are constantly moving
through a four-year cycle alternating between rest and growth, said Crystal, who
worked with colleagues Noboru Sato and Philip L. Leopold.

   Among the bald, hair follicles are not dead, but at rest or providing only
patchy growth, he said. In the embryonic stage, SHH is a "switch" gene that
turns on a variety of vital developments that shape the human body.

   The research on mice showed that slipping Sonic hedgehog into hair follicles,
using a common cold virus as the delivery vehicle, can shift follicles from a
stage of rest to a stage of growth.

   "It initiates a cascade of hundreds of complex biological events that in this
case result in the growth of a hair follicle," said Crystal.

   More research and then human trials will be required before it can be
determined if humans can receive the therapy.

   Crystal envisioned first trying to help cancer victims jump-start hair growth
after chemotherapy sessions.

   "These are mice and this is clinical gene therapy," said Crystal. "Humans are
not just big mice. You have to do human studies to know. But clearly it worked
dramatically on mice. If our dream was to cure baldness in mice, we'd be all
set. But we have more work to do."

   The research showed that Sonic hedgehog worked when it was injected into a
mouse's skin. The mice, which had been dyed blonde, quickly began to grow new,
dark hair, Crystal said. But at least one bald man said he wouldn't use SHH if
it came to market.

   Author and forensic psychologist Dr. Keith Ablow, who peers from his new book
jacket from under his bald pate, said he's immune to baldness treatments. And he
prefers to keep his head clean-shaven.

   "It's never weighed in heavily for me, in terms of self-esteem. But I know it
bothers some people," said Ablow, author of the psycho-thriller "Projection."

   He added, "If someone came up with something to swallow that would painlessly
grow my hair back, it's unlikley I'd go for it. I'd place it lower in priority
than taking Vitamin C."

LOAD-DATE: October 09, 1999


                             1294 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 6, 1999 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 008

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: Two therapies may be key to bypass success

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Researchers in Boston have genetically altered the blood vessels used in
heart bypass surgery and say a small study shows the grafts are not reclogging.

   They also reported developing a synthetic bypass graft made of Gortex and
expect to begin testing it on people in a year or so.

   Dr. Victor Dzau of Brigham and Women's Hospital, who is heading both
experiments, told a seminar at Harvard Medical School that each is a bid to get
around the problem of reclogging, which plagues about 30 percent of bypass
grafts.

   "The idea is to design a bypass graft that won't fail," he said.

   Often, the leg veins used to bypass clogged coronary arteries are too thin,
and aren't used to the pressure coronary arteries must take.

   Cells grow rapidly against the vessel walls, causing a thickening that
defeats the purpose of the operation.

   The technique reported yesterday calls for the leg veins to be bathed in a
DNA solution before being attached to the heart. The DNA deactivates a gene
switch responsible for the rapid cell growth.

   As a result, the graft "is more muscular, what I call the Schwarzenegger
effect," he said. "It looks more like an artery."

   In his study, not yet published, 17 high-risk patients got the genetically
altered graft, and 16 had a traditional graft.

   A year later, more than 60 percent of the regular grafts had reclogged and
some of the recipients needed another bypass. But only 20 percent of those who
got the experimental grafts reported problems.

   And there have been no side effects in those getting the genetically altered
grafts, he said.

   "It's absolutely safe," he said.

   Dzau said work is moving forward on larger studies of the genetically altered
grafts, with a multisite trial involving 2,000 patients in the offing.

   The approach is also seen as a safer alternative to so-called VEGF, a type of
gene therapy in which doctors inject genetically engineered DNA known as
vascular endothelial growth factor into patients' hearts. But results have been
so-so.

   "All current therapies have their limitations," he said.

   The synthetic grafts have been tried only on rabbits so far and it will be at
least a year before they can be tried in humans, Dzau said.

   To make them act more like real arteries, the synthetic grafts are seeded
with epithelial cells - cells that line vessel walls.

   But once installed into animals, the blood flow washed these cells away.

   Dzau said his team is now working on a way to better install the cells in the
grafts and then treat them with cell-signaling chemicals that will make them
grow better.

   They can also insert genes that should stimulate the growth of natural cells.

LOAD-DATE: October 09, 1999


                             1295 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   October 06, 1999, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: Can a Sonic hedgehog be a cure for baldness?;
Study of odd-named gene may renew hair

SOURCE: New York Times

BYLINE: NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Michael Milken, Ted Danson, Marv Albert and all hairpiece wearers; Gov. Jesse
Ventura and the proudly bald, and all those about to become so - listen
carefully, for a ray of hope is playing upon your shining pates.

   The new herald of hirsuteness is no mere cream or chemical but a gene with
the strange and potent name of Sonic hedgehog.

   The gene was discovered by biologists who noticed that fruit-fly embryos
lacking the gene would fail to form proper segments and assume a scrunched-up,
hedgehog-like appearance. Mammalian counterparts of the gene were found, one of
which was named Sonic, after Sonic the Hedgehog, a hero of a video game.

   Known to gene jockeys by its acronym SHH, it is not unworthy of silent awe.
SHH is a master sculptor of the human body. In the growing embryo it divides the
brain into segments.

   After its role in the fetus, Sonic hedgehog plays a sort of retirement role
in the adult body, that of shepherding the hair follicles through their cycles
of growth, regression and rest. In the bald, the 100,000 hair follicles with
which everyone is born are not dead but merely stuck in rest phase or producing
a patchy lawn of much thinner hairs.

   So there is much reason for interest in a feat by gene therapists at the
Weill Medical College of Cornell University in New York, led by Ronald G.
Crystal. In today's issue of The Journal of Clinical Investigation, they report
that they have forced resting hair follicles of mice into their growth phase by
exposing the cells to the activity of the Sonic hedgehog gene.

   Crystal and his colleagues Noboru Sato and Philip L. Leopold used an
adenovirus, one of the viruses that cause the common cold, to insert the Sonic
hedgehog gene into the mouse's follicle cells. Because viruses can penetrate a
cell and force it to make the products of the genes they carry, these infectious
agents are useful vehicles for the genes of interest to gene therapists.

   The virus was injected into young mice whose hair follicles had just entered
their resting phase. To distinguish any unusual hair growth that the gene might
cause, Crystal acquired an unusual scientific reagent, blond hair dye, from a
nearby beauty parlor and bleached the mice blond. A few days later, vigorous
tufts of black hair - the mice's natural color - sprouted around the sites where
the virus had been injected.

   Analysis showed the Sonic hedgehog gene was active in the injected areas of
the skin but not elsewhere.

   But problems remain before any trial on humans can be conducted.


LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1999


                             1296 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   October 06, 1999, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 437 words

HEADLINE: Genetically altered vein used in heart bypass

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   BOSTON - Harvard Medical School researchers have genetically altered the
blood vessel used in heart bypass surgery in a quest to keep it from reclogging,
and they said Tuesday the first few patients treated have shown a significantly
lower incidence of relapse.

   Failure of heart bypass surgery is a big problem: Up to 30 percent of bypass
patients have their heart arteries reclog badly in just a year. Few patients
survive 10 years without needing retreatment, and high-risk patients - such as
those who already have undergone repeat surgery - reclog at even greater rates.

   The question is how to make bypasses last longer.

   To do a bypass, surgeons typically remove a vein from the leg and implant it
around the original clogged heart artery.

   But a vein, which has thinner walls than an artery, is not accustomed to the
intense pressure of blood pounding that an artery is. So the vein reacts in
shock, causing rapid growth of cells against the vessel wall that result in a
dangerous thickening.

   Harvard researcher Dr. Victor Dzau has genetically manipulated this vein to
look and act more like a trim, muscular artery.

   He removes the vein from a patient's leg and bathes it in a solution
containing a short piece of DNA. This DNA binds to, or soaks up, a protein that
otherwise would switch on the gene responsible for driving the cell growth that
reclogs so many bypass patients' vessels.

   The result: The bypass graft is "more muscular, what I call the
Schwarzenegger effect," he told a seminar Tuesday. "It begins to look more like
an artery."

   In his first experiment at Brigham & Women's Hospital in Boston, 17 high-risk
patients had their vein bathed in the DNA solution for about 10 minutes before
continuing bypass surgery. Another 16 patients had regular bypass surgery.

   A year later, more than 60 percent of the high-risk patients who had
traditional bypass operations had failed - they had undergone repeat surgery or
were suffering severe reclogging. Just over 20 percent of patients who received
the genetically altered bypass had failed, Dzau said.

   Dzau could give no further details of the study, which has not yet been
published in a medical journal. Fellow heart experts have not yet seen his
results, which he will present next month at an American Heart Association
meeting.

   But Dzau stressed that while highly promising, the study was too small to be
sure of the technique's effectiveness. "It may be a fluke," he cautioned.

   Still, he has won Food and Drug Administration permission for a 2,000-patient
study. The study will be performed at several hospitals around the country.


LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1999


                             1297 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        October 6, 1999, Wednesday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 11

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: Gene injections show promise against baldness

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: New York

BODY:

   Here's some hopeful news for men concerned about baldness.

   Gene therapists at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University report
that they have used injections of a gene in mice to force resting hair follicles
into a growth phase.

   The lead researcher, Ronald G. Crystal, used a virus to carry a gene
nicknamed Sonic hedgehog, a hereditary factor essential for development, into
young mice whose hair follicles had gone into a normal resting phase.

   The animals' black fur was bleached blond, and a few days after the
injections tufts of new black hair sprouted, apparently after their follicles
were forced back into active phase.

   The research, reported in the latest issue of the Journal of Clinical
Investigation, has not yet been tried on humans. If it were, and it worked,
human hair-seekers presumably would require multiple injections over their bald
scalps.

   Problems remain to be solved. Researchers have found that over-activity of
the Sonic hedgehog gene is a case of basal cell carcinoma, a common but
treatable skin cancer.

   In other medical news:

   Flu pill: An experimental drug that could get government approval this month
would give flu sufferers their first effective pill against both A and B flu
viruses, the two major types that afflict Americans, according to a study
reported in today's Journal of the American Medical Association.

   An inhaled powder that works against both types was approved by the Food and
Drug Administration in July.

   The pill, to be marketed as Tamiflu, helped reduce the duration and severity
of flu symptoms by about half in 80 unvaccinated adults who were voluntarily
infected with the flu virus, researchers reported.

   The prescription drug also helped prevent the flu in unvaccinated adults who
took the drug before being exposed to the virus, said researchers led by
Frederick G. Hayden of the University of Virginia. Only eight of 21 people who
took the drug before exposure got infected (38%), compared with eight of 12 who
did not take the drug (67%).

   The research was funded by the drug's manufacturer, F. Hoffman LaRoche Ltd.,
and the National Institutes of Health.

   Heart procedure: Harvard Medical School researchers have genetically altered
the blood vessel used in heart bypass surgery in a quest to keep it from
clogging again, and they said at a seminar Tuesday in Boston that the first few
patients treated had shown a significantly lower incidence of relapse.

   Failure of heart bypass surgery is a big problem: Up to 30% of bypass
patients have their heart arteries reclog badly in just a year. Few patients
survive 10 years without needing retreatment, and high-risk patients clog again
at even greater rates.

   In an initial experiment at Brigham & Women's Hospital in Boston involving 33
patients, more than 60% of high-risk patients who had traditional bypass
operations had undergone repeat surgery or were suffering severe reclogging,
compared with just over 20% of patients who received the genetically altered
bypass.




LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1999


                             1298 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 OCTOBER 6, 1999 Wednesday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 65

LENGTH: 222 words

HEADLINE: NEW GENE THERAPY FOR BYPASSES

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   New techniques that use gene therapy to make heart bypasses work better are
showing promise in some of the most difficult patients, researchers said
yesterday.

   They said they had found ways to make veins - natural and artificial - last
longer when they are stitched into patients to bypass clogged arteries.

   Dr. Victor Dzau of Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard University, said
the method could mean bypasses will last longer for many people who get them -
good news because many bypasses clog up after a few years.

   "It is absolutely safe," Dzau told a seminar for science reporters sponsored
by Harvard.

   Dzau said about 750,000 Americans undergo heart bypass surgery every year.
But anywhere between 10 percent and 50 percent of them fail, depending on
whether a patient smokes or has complications such as diabetes.

   For most bypasses, doctors remove a vein from the patient's leg and reattach
it around the clogged arteries, usually leading from the heart.

   However, veins are not meant to withstand the high pressures that arteries
are subject to. So in an effort to protect itself, the vein builds a layer of
muscle cells to make itself as thick as an artery.

   "But the biology is not right," Dzau said, and the thickened vein is even
more likely than a normal vein to get clogged by fat blood clots.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1299 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1999 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                   October 6, 1999, Wednesday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 856 words

HEADLINE: Genome project will finish a year early, biologist says;
Gene blueprint expected to transform medicine

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

DATELINE: St. Peter, Minn.

BODY:

   The master blueprint for human genes will be decoded in 2000, at least a year
earlier than expected, biologist J. Craig Venter said Tuesday, the first day of
the 35th annual Nobel Conference at Gustavus Adolphus College.

        Completing the massive mapping project next year, he said, is a "very
aggressive time scale" that will depend on collaboration between the federal
government's Human Genome Project and the company Venter leads, Celera Genetics
Corp. of Maryland.

        Scientists on the government project are on pace to contribute their
part by next spring, said Dr. Leroy Hood, a contributor to the project and
chairman of the molecular biotechnology department at the University of
Washington in Seattle. He will speak today at the conference.

        The key remaining question is how quickly Venter will make his research
public and how much he will reveal, Hood said.

        The fully mapped set of genetic instructions that build and sustain life
is expected to transform medicine, making it possible to individualize
treatments and target drugs to fit the genes of each specific patient.

        The government's $3 billion project wasn't expected to be completed
until 2005. Then Venter shook the scientific world last year by announcing that
he would join forces with a private company and finish the job by the end of
2001. His race with the government raised alarm that the potentially lucrative
findings would be held for private gain rather than made public for research.

        Venter has said that his company intends to release much of its raw data
for free. He said Tuesday that the company, the world leader in high-speed
computer analysis of gene sequences, is following business models that take such
information, which is mostly publicly available, and earn profits by analyzing
or organizing it to make it useful.

        But Venter and other lecturers at the conference, sanctioned by the
Nobel Foundation in Stockholm stressed that the long-awaited unraveling of the
human genome is only a first step toward understanding the genetic instructions
that regulate life.

        "The impact of having these sequences is going to be a new starting
point in biology and medicine, not an ending point," Venter said.

        The very definition of genes is now in question, Hood said.

        In an example of the steep learning curve that genetic discoveries pose,
Venter said researchers reported in 1989 that they had identified the cystic
fibrosis gene. Now scientists know that the same gene plays many roles in
different individuals, influencing asthma, male infertility and other disorders.

        The complexity carries into the genetics of plants and animals, too.

        "Every genome we look at, every chromosome, we find something absolutely
amazing," said Venter, who also has researched the genetic makeup of bacteria,
plants, insects and mice.

        Beyond the question of what genes do are a host of weighty questions
about what science should do with them, said Dean Hamer, chief of the National
Cancer Institute's section on gene structure and regulation. The answers for
specific diseases are relatively clear-cut, he said. New discoveries should be
used to improve health.

        What about behavior, though? There is strong evidence that genes
influence the chances that a person might commit crimes, become addicted or have
mental disorders. Should parents try to alter those predispositions in children,
even though a gene usually is just one factor in determining behavior, not a
guarantee? Should criminals _ say, sex offenders _ be forced to accept gene
therapy?

        There is "great potential for good, but also danger" in traversing
ethical minefields, Hamer said.

        Hunger for more information about genetic research was reflected by the
record attendance at this year's Nobel Conference, whose theme was "Genetics in
the New Millennium." More than 6,500 students and scientists from colleges and
high schools in 11 states attended. Cars filled the grassy fields that flank the
hilltop campus, and nearly half of the attendees had to sit outside the lecture
hall. The session also was available live on the Internet.

        Sweden's ambassador to the United States, Rolf Ekeus, set a tone for the
two-day conference by urging genetic scientists to honor the legacy of Alfred
Nobel, the inventor of dynamite who befriended peace activists and insisted that
his heritage be an incentive for science to better humankind.

        "No one was better than him in understanding that science can do harm,"
Ekeus said.

        Genetics poses "difficult and complex" scientific issues, he said.

        Venter and other speakers also called for caution. Citing the eugenics
movement that lent momentum to the rise of Nazi Germany, Venter said: "It is
easy to look back on science and see the foolishness. It is very difficult to
look forward and see it."

        In particular, he said, he worries about genetic privacy in a future
when a person's IQ or risks of cancer and heart disease could be drawn from a
few drops of blood and stored on a smart card or a computer chip.


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1999


                             1300 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 October 5, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 1; Column 2; Health & Fitness

LENGTH: 1191 words

HEADLINE: Of Mice, Men and a Gene That Jump-Starts Follicles

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Wig makers, tremble! Purveyors of hair restorer, whether F.D.A.-approved or
purest snake-oil, brush up on bankruptcy law! Messrs. Michael Milken, Ted
Danson, Marv Albert and all hairpiece wearers; Governor Ventura and the proudly
bald, and all those about to become so -- listen carefully, for a sudden ray of
hope is playing upon all your shining pates!

   The new herald of hirsuteness is no mere cream or chemical but a gene with
the strange and potent name of Sonic hedgehog. Known to gene jockeys by its
acronym SHH, it is not unworthy of silent awe. SHH is a master sculptor of the
human body. In the growing embryo it divides the brain into segments. Too little
SHH can cause cyclopia, an undivided brain with a single central eye, a
condition named after the terrible cyclops who imprisoned Odysseus and devoured
his men.

    After its demiurgic role in the fetus, Sonic hedgehog plays a sort of
retirement role in the adult body, that of shepherding the hair follicles
through their cycles of growth, regression and rest. In the bald, the 100,000
hair follicles with which everyone is born are not dead but merely stuck in rest
phase or producing a patchy lawn of much thinner hairs.

   So there is much reason for interest in a feat by gene therapists at the
Weill Medical College of Cornell University in New York, led by Dr. Ronald G.
Crystal. In the latest issue of The Journal of Clinical Investigation, they
report that they have forced resting hair follicles of mice into their growth
phase by exposing the cells to the activity of the Sonic hedgehog gene.

   Although no experiments have yet been done in people, there seems a
reasonable chance that Sonic hedgehog, or related genes, might jump-start the
resting human hair follicles on bald pates from their regrettable and
inexplicable torpor.

   "I would say it would be very exciting to try this in humans," said Dr.
Anthony E. Oro, a dermatologist at Stanford University.

   Dr. Ervin Epstein, a dermatologist at the University of California at San
Francisco, said of the Sonic hedgehog treatment, "There is reasonable hope it
would drive hairs that are resting into active phase earlier than otherwise."

   The effect might or might not be cosmetically useful, Dr. Epstein said, but
Sonic hedgehog certainly seems to be one of the factors that trigger hair to
start growing. "So my guess is that maybe someday we will be using Sonic
hedgehog as part of a cocktail of growth factors to make hair grow," Dr. Epstein
said.

   Dr. Crystal and his colleagues Noboru Sato and Philip L. Leopold used an
adenovirus, one of the viruses that cause the common cold, to insert the Sonic
hedgehog gene into the mouse's follicle cells. Because viruses can penetrate a
cell and force it to make the products of the genes they carry, these infectious
agents are useful vehicles for the genes of interest to gene therapists. Dr.
Crystal's team stripped out the genes that allow the virus to replicate and
replaced them with a copy of Sonic hedgehog.

   The virus was injected into young mice whose hair follicles had just entered
their resting phase. To distinguish any unusual hair growth that the gene might
cause, Dr. Crystal acquired an unusual scientific reagent, Clairol blond hair
dye, from a nearby beauty parlor and bleached the mice blond. A few days later,
vigorous tufts of black hair -- the mice's natural color -- started to sprout
around the sites where the virus had been injected.

   Analysis of the follicle cells showed the Sonic hedgehog gene was active in
the injected areas of the skin but not elsewhere.

   Dr. Crystal's experiment seems to show that the cells infected with Sonic
hedgehog were forced into their growth phase ahead of the surrounding follicle
cells, which remained in the resting state.

   If the therapy works in humans too, a person would presumably need to have
multiple injections over the scalp. Sonic hedgehog, and whatever other genes
might be required, would have to induce thick enough hairs to be cosmetically
significant. But the injections would probably not need to be repeated until the
follicles' next cycle.

   Human hair follicles take roughly four years to pass through one turn of the
growth-regression-rest phases, although the cycles shorten with age, which is
why teen-agers can grow very long hair more easily than older people. But unlike
in mice, whose hair follicles cycle all in lockstep, the cycles of human
follicles are unsynchronized, which could in some cases complicate treatment.

   Many problems remain to be solved, however, before any clinical trial could
be contemplated. Dr. Epstein has shown that overactivity of Sonic hedgehog is
the cause of basal cell carcinoma, a common though treatable human skin cancer.
Although Dr. Crystal's treatment gives a very small dose of Sonic hedgehog, and
he saw no sign of basal cell carcinoma, the safety of the technique remains to
be established.

   A question mark, maybe momentary, has also arisen over adenovirus after the
death last month of a patient who received a high dose of the virus in a gene
therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. Other viruses, however, could
easily be developed to insert the Sonic hedgehog gene, Dr. Crystal said.

   It would be strange if gene therapy, a heavy-duty technique being developed
to treat cancer and other difficult diseases, should lead to something as
cosmetic as hair restoration among its first major applications. Dr. Crystal,
himself a gene therapist who works on cystic fibrosis and heart disease, is
diffident about the hair restoration question. He stresses the interest of his
finding for understanding the basic biology of the hair follicle, and says its
possible practical value should first be explored for treating patients who have
lost their hair from chemotherapy.

   Dr. Crystal was trained as a nuclear physicist but developed an interest in
the physiology of the heart and switched into medical school. He is a pioneer of
gene therapy, having worked in the field since 1985.

   He became interested in hair follicle growth as a way of making a virtue out
of necessity. Corrective genes carried into the body by adenovirus enjoy only a
brief spurt of activity before their host cells are zapped by the body's immune
system, which can detect the adenovirus lurking within. Dr. Crystal found he
could insert the correct gene to treat cystic fibrosis, but it was active in
patients for too short a time to be clinically effective.

   So he began looking for therapeutic genes so powerful that clinically useful
doses might be delivered during adenovirus's brief lifetime in the body, a quest
that led him to Sonic hedgehog.

   The gene was first discovered by biologists who noticed that fruit-fly
embryos lacking the gene would fail to form proper segments and assumed a
scrunched-up, hedgehog-like appearance. Mammalian counterparts of the hedgehog
gene were quickly found, one of which was named Sonic, after Sonic the Hedgehog,
a hero of a Sega video game.

   The Sonic hedgehog gene has been patented by others, but Cornell University
has applied for a use patent, covering the gene's possible role in treating hair
loss.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The natural black hair on this blond-dyed mouse comes from hair
follicles made to grow by gene therapy. Researchers hope the therapy can someday
be used in humans. (Dr. Ronald G. Crystal)(pg. F1); Dr. Ronald G. Crystal with a
mouse used to study hair growth. (G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times)(pg. F9)

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1999


                             1301 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        October 5, 1999 Tuesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: 'SONIC HEDGEHOG' MAY SPEED TO RESCUE OF THE BALD;
GENE STIMULATES MICE HAIR FOLLICLES

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wade 1999, The New York Times

BODY:

   Wig makers, tremble! Purveyors of hair restorer, whether FDA-approved or
purest snake-oil, brush up on bankruptcy law! Messrs. Michael Milken, Ted
Danson, Marv Albert and all hairpiece wearers; Gov. Ventura and the proudly
bald, and all those about to become so, listen carefully, for a sudden ray of
hope is playing upon all your shining pates!

   The new herald of hirsuteness is no mere cream or chemical but a gene with
the strange and potent name of Sonic hedgehog. Known to gene jockeys as SHH, it
is not unworthy of silent awe.

   SHH is a master sculptor of the human body. In the growing embryo it divides
the brain into segments. Too little SHH can cause cyclopia, an undivided brain
with a single central eye, a condition named after the terrible cyclops who
imprisoned Odysseus and devoured his men.

   *** Hair follicles in rest phase ***

   After its demiurgic role in the fetus, Sonic hedgehog plays a sort of
retirement role in the adult body, that of shepherding the hair follicles
through their cycles of growth, regression and rest. In the bald, the 100,000
hair follicles with which everyone is born are not dead but merely stuck in rest
phase or producing a patchy lawn of much thinner hairs.

   So there is much reason for interest in a feat by gene therapists at the
Weill Medical College of Cornell University in New York, led by Ronald Crystal.
In the latest issue of The Journal of Clinical Investigation, they report that
they have forced resting hair follicles of mice into their growth phase by
exposing the cells to the activity of the Sonic hedgehog gene.

   Although no experiments have been done on people, there seems a reasonable
chance that Sonic hedgehog, or related genes, might jump-start the resting human
hair follicles on bald pates from their regrettable and inexplicable torpor.

   "I would say it would be very exciting to try this in humans," said Dr.
Anthony Oro, a dermatologist at Stanford University.

   Dr. Ervin Epstein, a dermatologist at the University of California at San
Francisco, said of the Sonic hedgehog treatment, "There is reasonable hope it
would drive hairs that are resting into active phase earlier than otherwise."

    *** Triggers hair to start growing ***

   The effect might or might not be cosmetically useful, Epstein said, but Sonic
hedgehog certainly seems to be one of the factors that trigger hair to start
growing. "So my guess is that maybe someday we will be using Sonic hedgehog as
part of a cocktail of growth factors to make hair grow," Epstein said.

   Crystal and his colleagues Noboru Sato and Philip Leopold used an adenovirus,
one of the viruses that cause the common cold, to insert the Sonic hedgehog gene
into the mouse's follicle cells. Because viruses can penetrate a cell and force
it to make the products of the genes they carry, these infectious agents are
useful vehicles for the genes of interest to gene therapists.

   Crystal's team stripped out the genes that allow the virus to replicate and
replaced them with a copy of Sonic hedgehog.

   The virus was injected into young mice whose hair follicles had just entered
their resting phase. To distinguish any unusual hair growth that the gene might
cause, Crystal used an unusual scientific reagent, Clairol blond hair dye, to
bleach the mice blond. A few days later, vigorous tufts of black hair, the
mice's natural color, started to sprout around the sites where the virus had
been injected.

   Analysis of the follicle cells showed the Sonic hedgehog gene was active in
the injected areas of the skin but not elsewhere.

   Crystal's experiment seems to show that the cells infected with Sonic
hedgehog were forced into their growth phase ahead of the surrounding follicle
cells, which remained in the resting state.

   If the therapy works in humans too, a person would presumably need to have
multiple injections over the scalp. Sonic hedgehog, and whatever other genes
might be required, would have to induce thick enough hairs to be cosmetically
significant. But the injections would probably not need to be repeated until the
follicles' next cycle.


LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1999


                             1302 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                   October 4, 1999 Monday City final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 803 words

HEADLINE: Cancer facility earns status as national center;
National Cancer Institute recognizes Indiana University's record for research,
patient care.

BYLINE: JOE FAHY; STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Hoosiers enjoy quick and convenient access to new cancer

   treatments, and that care will be further enhanced now that the

   Indiana University Cancer Center has been named a clinical cancer

   center by the federal government.

   The center, part of Indiana University School of Medicine in

   Indianapolis, received the honor for its track record of combining

   high quality research with clinical treatment of patients. It joins

   59 institutions nationwide that have been designated cancer centers

   by the National Cancer Institute.

   The national designation, which includes a five-year, $6.3

   million grant, recognizes research that brings "newer treatments to

   the bedside and to the clinic faster than otherwise would happen,"

   said Dr. Stephen Williams, the IU Cancer Center's director.

   Last month, the medical school announced that its efforts to

   develop gene therapies for cancer treatment will be bolstered by

   another $4.7 million federal grant.

   With the grant, IU will become one of three "core centers of

   excellence" in molecular hematology in the nation.

   IU cancer researchers currently hold more than $33 million in

   grants from the National Institutes of Health, the American Cancer

   Society and other groups.

   IU faculty members already operate one of only three NCI-approved

   laboratories in the nation to manufacture viral vectors - viruses

   used by researchers to insert genetic material into cells, with the

   goal of developing gene therapies. Until IU received the NCI

   designation, Purdue University was the only federally designated

   cancer center in Indiana. Purdue and nine other U.S. centers have

   received the designation for their scientific research.

   The IU center, however, becomes the state's first to earn the

   distinction because of not only its research, but also because of

   its treatment of patients.

   IU officials won the designation after they submitted a detailed

   application last year and underwent an on-site review of their

   treatment and research initiatives.

   The award indicates that IU "has a significant base of cancer

   research" and has fostered a collaborative environment that can help

   attract additional talented investigators, said Margaret Holmes,

   chief of the cancer centers branch at the NCI's Office of Centers,

   Training and Resources.

   Williams said the grant accompanying the designation will be used

   for administration, equipment and other research support costs, as

   well as to recruit new investigators and to fund pilot projects.

   Most of the 105 members of the IU Cancer Center are full-time

   faculty members of the IU medical school. They also are drawn from

   the IU School of Nursing, IU's Bloomington campus and the Purdue

   University School of Science at Indiana University-Purdue University

   Indianapolis.

   While the development of a formal cancer center at IU began a

   decade ago, significant cancer research and treatment began much

   earlier.

   In 1973, an adult clinical oncology program was established by Dr.

   Lawrence Einhorn, who has helped to develop highly effective

   treatments for testicular cancer.

   In 1983, IU officials recruited Hal Broxmeyer, an internationally

   known cancer scientist whose research has led to the clinical use

   of umbilical cord cells in bone marrow transplants.

   In 1991, IU recruited Dr. David Williams, internationally known

   for his work in gene therapy. With his recruitment, the IU medical

   school also committed to develop a pediatric cancer research

   program.

   In 1992, the school received an NCI planning grant to develop a

   cancer center, and the center was formally established by the IU

   Board of Trustees.

   IU applied to become an NCI-designated cancer center in 1994, but

   the proposal was not funded.

   After that, medical school officials met to discuss whether

   trying again was an important goal, recalled Dr. Robert Holden, the

   school's dean.

   "We all agreed that it was, because the school was strong in

   cancer research," Holden said. "And since we were so strong, we

   felt we could put ourselves in a better light and be successful."

   IU officials developed an aggressive, five-year plan to expand

   research. They also spent about $55 million in new construction for

   cancer research, education and patient care.

   "One of our objectives has been to build the research capability

   of IU so it would be well-positioned to compete for the NCI grant,"

   said Jim Ruckle, executive vice president of Walther Cancer

   Institute.

   Walther has invested more than $22 million in cancer research at

   IU, along with other benefactors, including the Riley Memorial

   Association and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

   The NCI designation "has a very strong symbolic value nationally,"

   Ruckle said.

   "It's almost like a Good Housekeeping seal of approval in cancer

   research."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2002


                             1303 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)



                     October 4, 1999, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1440 words

HEADLINE: Wasted stem cells;

BODY:


   I would like to thank you for your excellent editorial on the question of
using federal funds  for embryonic stem cell research (Sept. 21). Unfortunately,
the debate is always framed as a need  to balance the use of stem cells to cure
disease vs. the moral obligation to protect human life.

   This is not an either/or situation!

   There is a rich, readily available source of stem cells found in the blood
that remains in the  umbilical cord after the birth of every baby. No pain or
risk is associated with the removal of  these cells, and the process generally
takes only minutes. These cells have been used to treat  malignancies, metabolic
disorders, blood disorders and immunodeficiencies, and they may also be  helpful
in gene therapies.

   I teach labor/childbirth/delivery classes in the Tampa area. Parents are
often eager to donate  cord blood to national collection agencies or wish to
store it for future family use.  Unfortunately, the hospitals in our area do not
participate in such programs. If public cord blood  banking expanded in the
United States with the thousands of births taking place each year, all  ethnic
groups could benefit from this readily available source of stem cells. At
present, we are  throwing away these life-giving umbilical-cord-blood stem
cells!  - MIDGE KOVAC  Temple Terrace  Protect our rights

   The debate over billboard bans can be boiled down to one point: the rights of
the individual vs.  the desires of a very vocal group - not necessarily even the
majority.

   Billboards have many benefits:

   1. Property owners make money by leasing the land.

   2. Advertising companies make money selling space.

   3. Business makes money by increased sales.

   4. Consumers are better informed as to their choices.

   5. Jobs are created by both the billboard companies and the businesses that
use them.

   The only "losers" are the people who consider them a visual blight. While
entitled to their  opinion, they have no right to force them on others. We
cannot outlaw everything we consider ugly.  The role of government is to protect
our rights, not take them away.  - JOSEPH HANCOCK  Dade City  Memorial for
troopers

   Since the creation of the Florida Highway Patrol by the 1939 Legislature, 37
troopers have met  their death in the line of duty for the citizens of Florida.

   Motor vehicular traffic crashes took 14 lives, 17 were shot by criminals,
aircraft crashes took  five and one was killed in an explosion. The first death
occurred Dec. 5, 1941, and the latest  death was May 19, 1998.

   To borrow a slightly modified line from President Reagan, "Some people spend
an entire lifetime  wondering if they made a difference." State troopers don't
have that problem. In a recent statewide  driver-opinion survey, more than 80
percent of the public rates the overall job performance of the  Florida Highway
Patrol as excellent or good. This overwhelmingly positive response is
encouraging.

   In memory of the 37 troopers who lost their lives, a statewide effort has
materialized to ask  the 2000 session of the Florida Legislature to designate
Interstate 75 as the "Florida Highway  Patrol Memorial Highway." This
inexpensive demonstration of support for the troopers by the Florida
Legislature would be a compassionate gesture toward those troopers killed. It
would be of  particular comfort to the surviving families whose moms or dads
left for work one day and never  came home again.

   As for the troopers who made it to retirement, they were extremely lucky.  -
EDWARD R. HAGLER  Orlando

   The writer is a retired major with the Florida Highway Patrol.  Nuccio
deserves credit too

   I agree with your editorial commending Sandy Freedman and Dick Greco for
their efforts in  developing Tampa's waterfront (Sept. 21).

   However, let us not forget that it was through the efforts of Nick C. Nuccio
that the city  acquired the east bank of the Hillsborough River from Kennedy
Boulevard to Cass Street.  - WILLIAM F. GARCIA  Tampa  "Socialized' medicine

   I see that Harry and Louise, the TV people, are at it again. This time the
bogeyman is a  proposal that Medicare pay for prescription drugs. The sweet lady
on the screen says, "Keep those  government bureaucrats out of your medicine
cabinet!"

   This morning, just to be sure, I opened my medicine cabinet. Who should I see
in there rummaging  around but a well-fed corporate-looking bureaucrat.

   "Hi," he said, "I'm from your friendly HMO. I've been checking things out
here and I must say it's  not a pretty sight!" He held up a couple of
prescription bottles. "This is awful pricey stuff, fella.  If you think we're
gonna pay for it, you've got another think coming. And some of these doctors are

 not on our list of approved ... "

   I slammed the door shut. The last thing I heard was a muffled cry: "You can't
do this to me! I'm  the company VP in charge of VPs. I make more money than the
president of the United States."

   Frankly, compared to him, Uncle Sam never looked so good.  - KEN BERNHARDT
Tampa  Raising mpg standards

   Every year, lower miles-per-gallon standards cost sport utility vehicles and
light-truck owners  in Florida more than $ 593 million at the gas pump and cause
them to emit more than 8 million excess  tons of global-warming pollution.

   The Senate recently voted on cutting global warming pollution by allowing the
Department of  Transportation to raise mpg standards for light trucks and sport
utility vehicles, some of the  worst emitters of global warming pollution.
Despite the aggressive campaign by the automotive  industry, 40 senators voted
to allow increases for these standards. This is clearly enough votes to  uphold
a presidential veto of any legislation that would freeze the outdated miles per
gallon  standard.

   Sen. Bob Graham stood up to pressure from the auto industry and voted to
allow the Department of  Transportation to consider raising the standards.
Raising mpg standards will reduce global warming  pollution, reduce foreign oil
consumption and save us money at the gas pump. With Hurricane Floyd  as a
preview of the extreme weather that global warming may bring, the need to reduce
global  warming pollution is greater than ever.

   Floridians should applaud Sen. Graham voting to protect our environment, our
economy and our  pocketbooks.  - JOLINDA BUCHANAN  Tallahassee

   The writer is field director of Florida Public Interest Research Group.  On
student achievement

   The Tribune editorial "Private help for public schools" (Sept. 25) provides
some comfort to those  of us seeking to strengthen public education. When
businesses come to the aid of students,  additional doors of opportunity open
for the children - and the schools.

   Completely missing from the editorial, though, was one key word: "parents."
Local district  officials repeatedly tell us that the difference in achievement
is the parents' role in education.  One day the district may direct businesses'
aid to parents of students rather than schools. Then we  might begin to see
significant increases in individual student achievement.  - JASON D. MIMS
Valrico  More Libertarian support

   Daniel Ruth's response to Rex Curry (Nation/World, Sept. 26) only
demonstrates Ruth's ignorance  of the issue. Ruth fails to address any of the
valid points raised by Curry's piece. Instead, his  response is filled with
ad-hominem attacks and appeals to emotion. Moreover, he either purposefully
took Curry out of context or made such a glaring error in reading that his
credibility must be  questioned.

   Curry did not advocate arresting hoarding. He merely stated that arresting
hoarding makes as  much sense as arresting gouging. Both ideas are just too -
ummm, well, loopy.

   Higher prices, being the result of a shortage, act to attract suppliers and
to encourage  producers to increase output. Also, they discourage hoarding and
unnecessary buying. The higher  price is simply information alerting the
consumer and the supplier of the higher value and shortage  of supply.

   When the government acts to institute price controls, it stops the
transmission of this  information and removes the incentive to react. When no
one reacts to the problem, the shortage  becomes more severe. This is the reason
for massive famines in controlled economies and abundance  in free markets.

   The recent trash in Ruth's column reminds me of the "Jerry Springer Show."
His fellow columnists  at the Tribune must be embarrassed.  - RON STRINGFIELD
Tampa

   The writer is vice chair of the Libertarian Party of Hillsborough County.

NOTES: LETTERS

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1999


                             1304 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            October 3, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES - ACCENT & ARTS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1358 words

HEADLINE: ANDREA'S BRIEF ARC BEFORE DISEASE CLAIMS THEIR BABY, PARENTS CAN ONLY
LOVE HER, PRAY AND EASE HERSUFFERING

BYLINE: Dennis Fiely, Dispatch Accent Reporter

BODY:


   Sleeping in her father's arms, baby Andrea is at peace with the world -- for
now. When she awakens, she will begin again to fuss, scream and cry.

   The clamor often persists throughout the day and into the night. Their energy
exhausted and nerves frayed, Jeff and Tammy Boyd of the West Side endure the
constant tumult. They know that when their 7-month-old daughter stops crying,
she will be gone.

   Irritability is one of the first signs of Krabbe's disease, a genetic brain
disorder that turns cradles into graves.

   Many Americans first heard of Krabbe's in 1997 when National Football League
quarterback Jim Kelly publicized son Hunter's diagnosis to raise awareness and
research money.

   "The Kelly family's story is nearly identical to ours," Mrs. Boyd said.

   Hope for Andrea's survival faded in late August when Dr. Charles Peters of
the University of Minnesota ruled out a bone-marrow transplant. Although Andrea
was just 5 months old at the time, her disease had advanced too far for the
long-shot treatment.

   Cancer, Mrs. Boyd thought, would be better than Krabbe's.

   "At least we'd have some options -- radiation, chemotherapy or surgery."

   The only option now is prayer.

   "Our dreams are shattered," Mr. Boyd said.

   Instead of talking about treatments, doctors assure the Boyds they can keep
Andrea comfortable until she dies.

   "This is a hard thing to face," said Dr. Ann Joseph, a neurologist at
Children's Hospital. "We can make sure that she is happy and support the family
so they can pull through this."

   Physicians diagnose about 40 cases of Krabbe's disease each year in the
United States.

   "This was something that happened to others," Mrs. Boyd said. "It couldn't
happen to us."

   Born eight days ahead of her due date on Feb. 20, Andrea weighed 7 pounds, 2
ounces and appeared to be the healthy outcome of an uncomplicated pregnancy and
15-hour labor.

   Her parents, who work at Nationwide Insurance, dated nine years before they
married in November.

   At age 38, Mrs. Boyd had finally become a mother, much to the happy surprise
of her family.

   "This birth was a big, awaited moment. We never thought Tammy would have a
baby," said Debbie Tuggle, Mrs. Boyd's sister.

   Mr. Boyd videotaped the birth; Tuggle cut the umbilical cord.

   "Andrea probably was going to be my only child," Mrs. Boyd said. "I expected
to be the oldest mother in the PTA."

   More than a half-dozen family members gathered for Andrea's arrival at Mount
Carmel Medical Center, and at least 20 more friends and relatives visited the
hospital to see the newborn.

   Five months later, many of the same loved ones -- including Mrs. Boyd's
parents, Sam and Mary Womeldorf, and Mr. Boyd's mother, Susie Wilson -- somberly
reunited Aug. 2 for Andrea's magnetic resonance-imaging exam, whch revealed
irregular "gray matter" in her brain.

   The results of metabolic blood work 11 days later, on Friday the 13th,
confirmed the Krabbe's diagnosis.

   For many families, Krabbe's "appears to come out of nowhere," Joseph said.
The Boyds were no exception.

   Andrea developed on schedule during her first four months. Everyone presumed
colic was responsible for her crankiness.

   "It's the first thing you think about with an irritable baby," Joseph said.

   Yet, her irritability worsened to the point where "She was virtually crying
all the time," Mrs. Boyd said.

   The Boyds noticed other troubling signs: Andrea struggled to hold up her
head, lost interest in her toys, stopped smiling and cooing and stiffened her
arms and legs.

   The parents treated colic and indigestion until tests revealed the truth.

   "I thought they were going to tell me she had a food allergy, or that she was
not digesting her food properly, or that she had a small brain tumor," Mrs. Boyd
said.

   The Boyds plunged into information about Krabbe's disease. They consulted
medical specialists in big cities and at major universities. They exchanged
e-mail with other parents and rented a tape of Lorenzo's Oil, a movie about a
boy with a disease similar to Krabbe's.

   "My heart and soul were gone after seeing it," Mrs. Boyd said.

   To everyone they talked to, the Boyds repeated the same questions: Where can
we take her? What can we do? The answers never varied: no place to go, no
treatments, no cure.

   "I told them just to do the best they can to keep their daughter
comfortable," Peters said. "That's all anybody can do."

   Andrea is missing an enzyme needed for the growth of myelin, a fatty sheath
of insulation for the nerve fibers necessary for communication between brain and
body.

   Without myelin, the body shuts down. Andrea forgets to swallow and breathe.

   "All of the functions that the brain controls, which is pretty much
everything, become more and more impaired," Joseph said.

   The most horrific and rapidly progressing form of Krabbe's disease occurs in
infancy.

   "Some children don't live beyond their first birthdays, and about all are
dead by the second birthdays," Peters said.

   Deterioration happens so quickly that "You can literally see changes day to
day," Peters added.

   The Boyds learned that Krabbe's disease is one of a group of diseases known
as leukodystrophies, all of which affect the growth of myelin. When Krabbe's
disease is caught soon enough, a bone-marrow transplant can eradicate it and
preserve some function.

   But the disease "is not something a general pediatrician looks for every
day," Joseph said.

   Added Peters: "'By the time you start seeing signs and symptoms, there is
very little you can do about it."

   Mrs. Boyd remembers the last time Andrea smiled. It was five weeks ago, when
Daddy came home from work.

   For Jeff and Tammy Boyd each new day with their "little angel" is precious,
even though it taxes the limits of their care-giving.

   "Most people could not go through what they go through," Tuggle said.

   Mrs. Boyd spends up to five hours some mornings feeding Andrea one bottle of
special formula. Their day always begins with a bath and up to 90 minutes of
physical therapy when Mrs. Boyd manipulates Andrea's arms and legs to try to
preserve muscle tone and flexibility.

   The parents are somewhat relieved to know that their daughter's irritability
is neurological in nature and not the result of pain.

   With pillows and blankets, the family camps on the living-room floor, where
Andrea feels most content. Home from work on the Family Leave Act, Mrs. Boyd
spends most of the day just holding her daughter.

   "I live in this La-Z-Boy," she said. "If we lay her down, it intensifies her
screaming and stiffness."

   Andrea's bedroom, which Mr. Boyd carpeted and painted during his wife's
pregnancy, has been empty since July, save for the menagerie of dolls and
stuffed animals.

   Just like her daughter, Mrs. Boyd greets each new day in tears. She cries
every time she looks out a window and sees children riding their bicycles in the
neighborhood.

   "I assured Andrea there would be bikes in heaven," she said.

   She cries when she realizes she will never be able to keep promises she
recorded in Andrea's baby book about the little girl's future.

   So far, insurance has covered most of the family's medical expenses. Mrs.
Boyd is scheduled to collect her last paycheck from Nationwide at the end of
this month, and financial concerns have added to the stress. They don't know how
far their insurance will carry them, or how they will fare on one income.

   "It's coming," Mr. Boyd said of a financial crisis. "We're thinking about
selling our house."

   Jim Kelly's Hunter's Hope Foundation and the Myelin Project, established by
Augusto and Michalla Odone, the parents who inspired Lorenzo's Oil, have raised
awareness and research money for Krabbe's disease and other leukodystrophies.

   Investigators are focusing on transplants, gene therapy and ways to restore
myelin in the brain.

   The Boyds have joined the fight, establishing two foundations to help with
their expenses and to raise money for research.

   "I promised Andrea that I will devote the rest of my life to finding a cure
for this disease," Mrs. Boyd said.

   It's all she can do, except pray and hold her baby.



GRAPHIC: Phot, James D. DeCamp / Dispatch Tammy and Jeff Boyd watch over their
napping daughter, 7-month-old Andrea. Andrea has Krabbe's disease, a nerve
disorder that is always fatal

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1999


                             1305 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

HEADLINE: Sept. 26-Oct. 2;
Man Dies in Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   An 18-year old patient died four days after receiving a gene therapy
treatment at the University of Pennsylvania. If the therapy proves to be the
cause, it will be apparently the first treatment-related death in a gene therapy
trial.

   Jesse Gelsinger was among 18 patients being treated for a rare metabolic
disease caused by a genetic inability to process ammonia. A high dose of
adenovirus carrying a corrective gene was injected into his liver.

    Although the virus is usually harmless, Mr. Gelsinger seems to have reacted
badly to it. Some 50 other gene therapy trials are now in progress with
adenovirus.   NICHOLAS WADE


   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1999


                             1306 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        OCTOBER 3, 1999 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1394 words

HEADLINE: THE BAFFLING DEATH OF A GENE-TRIAL PATIENT

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake and Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Jesse Gelsinger, a high school graduate from Tucson, Ariz., had a rare
genetic disease in which ammonia built up to dangerous levels in his body,
sometimes sending him into a coma. He didn't like his medicine or the dietary
restrictions. He hoped the gene therapy - in which a genetically engineered
virus delivers a correct copy of a defective gene - would lead to better drugs,
if not a cure.

   The infusion on Sept. 13 went without incident, and Steve Raper, a lead
scientist in the trial and the doctor taking care of Jesse, expected him to do
well, as had the 17 patients who had gone before him in the two-year-old trial.

   But at 5:30 the next morning, Raper was awakened at home by a phone call from
a Penn nurse.

   Jesse had become disoriented.

   Rushing into the hospital, Raper knew this was serious. But he had no idea
how serious.

   Three days later, on Sept. 17, Jesse Gelsinger would become the first person
to die from gene therapy, casting a shadow on a revolutionary approach that
shows tremendous promise for diseases such as cancer, heart disease and
inherited disorders, but so far has failed to provide a useful treatment.

   Last Thursday, federal officials began examining 50 other gene-therapy trials
that use a similar drug.

   * The first time Raper met Jesse was in June when the young man came to
Philadelphia to discuss the possibility of his volunteering for the trial.

   Jesse had ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency - he lacked the genes
needed to clear the body of ammonia, a normal byproduct of protein metabolism.

   Despite his medicines and diet, he had several times been rushed to the
hospital to rid his body of ammonia. Last December, Jesse suffered what his
father, Paul, described as a "near-death experience."

   When his Philadelphia-trained geneticist in Tucson told Jesse of Penn's
efforts to find an effective treatment if not cure for his disease, he was eager
to learn more.

   Jesse, born in Woodbury, had many relatives in the area, so his medical visit
also was a chance for a family reunion.

   After tests found that Jesse was a suitable candidate, Raper spent an hour
going paragraph by paragraph with him and his family through the
informed-consent form required for such trials. They would insert a catheter up
an artery in his leg and into the right lobe of his liver. The experimental drug
would be infused through the tube.

   Raper explained how the drug was actually a cold virus - disabled so it could
no longer cause colds. The virus, known as an adenovirus, had been fitted with
genes that were deficient in patients like Jesse. Once the genes reached the
liver cells, it was hoped they would churn out the chemical that OTC patients
need to get rid of ammonia.

   The catheter could hurt the liver, Raper explained. The drugs might cause
hepatitis. There could be blood clots. He surely would develop a fever for a few
days. But so far, no one treated with an adenovirus had developed serious
complications.

   The family left the meeting in such good spirits that they took off on a tour
of Philadelphia. At the Art Museum, Jesse ran up the "Rocky" steps. Down at the
Spectrum, they took a photograph of Jesse and Rocky holding their arms up in
victory.

   * Jesse was no longer disoriented by the time Raper got to his room in the
hospital, about an hour after getting the early morning call on Sept. 14.

   This was not particularly reassuring. Waxing and waning mental acuity is
common in crisis situations such as this was turning out to be. Jesse was able
to answer the questions Raper put to him.

   His heart was beating rapidly, his blood pressure was low, he had a fever,
and he was throwing up. This often happened after a treatment.

   But the whites of his eyes were yellow, suggesting that something bad was
happening to his liver. Ammonia was building up in his blood, but not to the
point that it should have been affecting his mental acuity.

   Jesse asked Raper to call his father in Tucson. Raper did, explaining to Paul
Gelsinger that his son was having an unusual response to the therapy and that
they would keep him informed.

   By 8 a.m., Jesse was no longer able to answer questions. A little later, he
fell into a coma. A CAT scan of his brain showed no sign of swelling or
bleeding.

   At 3 p.m., Jesse was moved into intensive care.

   Mark L. Batshaw, chairman of pediatrics at George Washington University who
headed the study, arrived from Washington and was brought up to date on Jesse's
rapidly declining condition.

   Batshaw called Jesse's father. "Jesse is in trouble," he said. A few hours
later, Gelsinger was on a plane to Philadelphia.

   * Though more than 300 human gene-therapy trials are under way in the United
States, the OTC trial was unusual.

   Never before had a gene drug been given to a patient directly into the liver,
with all the risks that entailed. And never before had safety trials for a gene
drug been done with relatively healthy or stable patients. Practically all the
other trials had involved patients with little time to live.

   Some scientists on the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which studied the
protocol for the trial before it was approved by the Food and Drug
Administration in 1996, believed that it was wrong to subject patients who were
doing relatively well to such novel drugs with unknown risks.

   Others thought that delivering the drug through the catheter was too risky
because it might injure the liver, and proposed that it be given through a
simple intravenous line. The FDA did not like this plan because it would pass
the gene drug through the circulatory system and risk infecting the germ-cell
line, possibly passing the genes on to future generations.

   The Penn scientists believed that administering the drug directly into the
liver was actually safer because it could target a confined portion of the
liver. They presented data from animal and laboratory studies, which showed that
the likelihood of complications was small.

   The FDA approved the proposed trial, allowing the drug to be delivered
directly to the liver.

   Increasingly larger amounts of the drug would be given to 18 patients. The
highest dose permitted would be 50-fold less than the maximum safe dose for
monkeys. The goal in this early trial was to show that the drug was safe.

   * In the intensive-care unit, Jesse continued to deteriorate.

   His lungs began to fail, and he was put on a ventilator to help him breathe.
His genetic defect, coupled with the stress of his medical crisis, was causing
ammonia to build up in his blood, but his liver didn't seem damaged.

   Raper ordered kidney dialysis, which cleared much of the ammonia but didn't
help his lungs.

   In the early hours of Sept. 16, he was attached to an artificial lung, but
now his kidneys and liver were failing.

   * For three straight days, Raper had been in the hospital day and night,
often by the boy's bedside. In the short time he had known Jesse, Raper had come
to like him a lot.

   The two shared an interest in movies - though Raper wasn't as big a fan of
Sylvester Stallone. Raper liked his enthusiasm and bright disposition.

   Batshaw had been commuting daily from Washington.

   Raper and Batshaw were facing one of the most dreaded fears of clinical
researchers - that their experiment would kill someone who had volunteered to
help them.

   They had no idea why their patient was dying. The patient before Jesse had
gotten the same dose of drug and had done fine.

   With the drug delivered directly to the liver, damage and inflammation to
that organ were understandable. But why should the lungs become inflamed and
shut down?

   * By the morning of Sept. 17, Paul Gelsinger was fearful that his son had
already slipped away when Raper and Batshaw came into the waiting room and
recommended discontinuing support. Neurologists had determined that Jesse had
suffered serious brain damage.

   The family agreed, and the artificial lung was removed. Jesse died a few
minutes later, at 2:30 p.m.

   With more than 30 family members present, the hospital chaplain conducted a
service at the bedside in the intensive-care unit.

   Later, Paul Gelsinger told reporters that his son was a hero. Referring to
Raper, Batshaw and the other scientists, he said:

   "They are wonderful human beings. Their intent is correct. There must be
something wrong with the method."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Jesse Gelsinger lacked the genes needed to clear the body of ammonia

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1307 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             October 3, 1999 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH 2000; Pg. HEALTH-9

LENGTH: 781 words

HEADLINE: Scientists expect gene therapym will be `Mainstay of Medicine'

BYLINE: David E. Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It has been regarded as the medicine of the future, almost since the idea
gained currency decades ago. Give patients a beneficial gene to correct a
genetic deficiency, perhaps a missing protein crucial to immune function, a
growth factor, or even a gene that helps block cancerous cell growth.

   It would correct the underlying cause of the disease, not just treat symptoms
as most medicines do now. And at the arrival of a new millennium, gene therapy,
as such transfers are commonly known, still is considered the medicine of the
future.

   While it has not fulfilled the promise held out for it, medical researchers
say the benefits are on the way. "It still is promising for treatment of human
disease and will be a mainstay of medicine in the future," said Dr. Mark
Tuszynski, a neuroscientist who works in gene therapy at the University of
California San Diego. "We need to go through the initial bumps and get
experience in people." Researchers are encouraged by what they've learned
through basic research since early in this decade, when the first person was
given gene therapy -- a girl who lacked a protein critical to giving her robust
immune protection against common infections.

   Those early tests had mixed results. Since then, other researchers have
tested a number of approaches to diseases, but they have not translated into
reliable therapies.

   From cancer to immune problems to cystic fibrosis and heart disease, ideas
for intervention and tests abound. Early hurdles to successful gene therapy
involved the delivery of the desired gene to a specific place in the body.

   Scientists now have a number of more reliable techniques to help in this
delivery, said Katherine High, a gene therapy researcher at Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia. One typical way to deliver a therapeutic gene is to place it
inside a virus that has been rendered harmless for disease, then have the virus
infect cells, perhaps a group of skin cells, that can then be injected into the
body.

   There the added gene would produce its substance, perhaps a protein, making
that desirable product available for the body. Scientists are now at the
threshold of learning whether the genes provide any benefit. High is conducting
clinical trials that will give nine people a therapeutic gene she hopes will
treat hemophilia B, a blood clotting disorder.

   It works in dogs, and she hopes it will prove a good test model in people
because the disease is uncomplicated -- scientists essentially seek to provide
the missing clotting factor. Salk Institute scientist Inder Verma has studied a
similar approach to treating hemophilia and wants to begin tests of his
potential therapy in people, too. Tuszynski has applied for approval to use a
gene therapy that would attempt to treat Alzheimer's disease by delivering a
growth factor to the brain that would nourish the cells that typically die in
the disease. "The big question is, `Will it be an effective way to treat
disease?' " Tuszynski said. In the new tests starting in people, scientists will
need to sort through the many complex interactions that occur in the blood,
immune system or organs when the new gene is introduced.

   In High's hemophilia tests, for example, she is interested to learn whether
the immune system will consider the transplanted gene as a foreign body and
attack it, neutralizing its effect. Another key to successful gene therapy is
regulating the amount of the product the gene makes, Tuszynski said.

   Scientists are testing ways to regulate promoter regions at the ends of
genes, which instruct genes to turn on and off.

   They want to be able to increase or decrease the amount of product made for
finer control. Another approach to gene therapy that is in early stages involves
using genes not to provide a substance, but to block the activity of a natural
gene instead, Tuszynski said.

   That work mostly is confined to lab tests. One instance where such an
approach might apply is, again, Alzheimer's disease, in which too much of a
protein that harms brain cells is made.

   In this instance, scientists conceive introducing a gene that would bind with
the natural gene that produces the damaging protein, thereby neutralizing the
gene so it could not function. "We want to block processes in the body that are
harmful," Tuszynski said. High acknowledges that the promise of gene therapy is
being fulfilled more slowly than many imagined.

   Tuszynski says it might be 30 years or longer before many therapies are used
widely. "It's been slower than people hoped for, but it's a complicated new
approach," High said. "There is no doubt it will work eventually.

   It's a question of working out the nuts and bolts in a conscientious way, and
that's OK."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Dr. Mark Tuszynski: Gene therapy holds promise.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1308 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             October 3, 1999 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH 2000; Pg. HEALTH-3

LENGTH: 1148 words

HEADLINE: Curing cancer in kids is becoming a can-do

BYLINE: Eilene Zimmerman

BODY:

   In 1975, a child diagnosed with just about any kind of cancer died.
Twenty-five years later, science has changed what was once a death sentence into
a curable illness for many children. Today, doctors can cure -- not just put
into remission -- about 70 percent of all childhood malignancies, said Wayne
Spruce, director of the hematology/oncology division of Children's Hospital. As
in many other areas of medicine, treatments for childhood cancer are entering a
new age. Soon, doctors hope, high-dose chemotherapy and radiation will be
replaced by less toxic treatments, such as gene therapy and immune system
modulation.

   To fight brain cancer, doctors are working on ways to cut off a tumor's blood
supply or force cancer cells to destroy themselves. Researchers are using
recombinant DNA technology to turn biological agents our bodies produce
naturally into genetically engineered cancer drugs.

   The list goes on and on. Today, however, most children with cancer still
undergo some combination of surgery, chemotherapy and radiation.

   Treatments likely to be put to use early in the next century promise to be
far more humane and less toxic. Angiogenesis therapies, for example, which aim
to stop the growth of blood vessels to tumors, are just now entering the
clinical trial phase and could be used to treat brain cancer, the second most
common childhood cancer after leukemia. "There are also certain drugs we can
give today, maturational agents, which make tumors mature and become less
malignant," Spruce said.

   "There is a genetic defect in the tumor cells that makes them malignant, and
these agents correct that.

   One of the drugs is Acutane and, right now, it's used to treat acne.

   But there are other forms of this compound used to treat a specific type of
leukemia, and we've seen dramatic improvement in the survival rate of patients
treated with it." About half the children diagnosed with cancer have some form
of leukemia, a disease of the bone marrow cells responsible for making blood.
Chemotherapy is very effective in treating the most common type of leukemia,
acute lymphoblastic, and doctors say the five-year survival rate is about 80
percent.

   However many children with leukemia undergo grueling bone marrow transplants
-- either using their own marrow or marrow from an outside donor -- which
involves extremely high doses of chemotherapy and radiation. Dr. Ewa Carrier,
assistant professor of medicine and pediatrics at UCSD Medical School, said this
method brings with it the risk of developmental problems later in life. "Plus,
we still see recurrences, so we know sometimes we are not able to kill all the
cancer cells in the body.

   Yet we can't escalate the chemo any higher without harming the child," she
said. The solution may lie in a new transplant approach called the mini-ablative
regimen, where an outside donor's marrow is used. "We give the patient just
enough chemotherapy to create a space in the bone marrow.

   You then come in with the donor cells, which will fill the space in the bone
and coexist with the remaining host cells," she said. Although this method is
still being tested, Carrier said preliminary results are positive and indicate
that, in time, the host's cells are completely converted to the donor cells.
"You use a far-better-tolerated chemotherapy dose, and you have both immune
systems working -- the host's and the donor's. There is tremendous interest in
this approach," said Carrier, who has received a grant for her research from the
National Institutes of Health. Immune therapies Carrier also puts stock in the
future of immune therapies, which use the immune system to protect against and
fight cancer. "Cancer is a state in which certain cells escape control of the
immune system and divide more rapidly.

   It starts much earlier than when we see it," she said. If the immune system
can control or confine renegade cells, they don't evolve into cancer -- but when
the immune system breaks down the body tolerates cancer. "We don't yet know if
it is just the immune system that controls a cell's ability to divide.

   But my guess is that the immune system is a strong player in this." Carrier
is not alone.

   Dr. Richard Kadota, a pediatric oncologist at Children's Hospital, expects
development of therapies related to the immune system to take off in the next
decade. "Immune therapies try to get the immune system to eradicate cancer
cells. Some are utilized in adult cancers but are not yet effective in
children's cancer," he said. There are a variety of therapeutic approaches,
including injecting a gene into a cancerous brain tumor to change its cells so
that they are sensitive to a medication. "One example currently being developed
and tested involves the use of an antibiotic medicine.

   The cells are made more susceptible to the antibiotic. This is the way cancer
is going to be treated in the next decade, more specifically," he said. Mystery
of causes As for what causes cancer, childhood or adult, scientists have a
greater understanding of that than ever before. Dr. Martin Haas, a professor and
researcher at UCSD, says scientists now understand the genetic component of a
cell's life cycle. "When I started 25 years ago, we didn't understand how cancer
occurred," he said.

   "Now, the difference in our knowledge is enormous.

   We know it's either caused by inherited mutations or induced mutations in the
genes of cells.

   That's the story of cancer." Haas said science has learned about specific
genes that regulate a cell's life cycle, controlling cell replication, cell
differentiation and cell death. Healthy cells are mortal and at some point
undergo senescence, where they cease to replicate.

   If cells don't senesce, though, Haas believes they are likely to cause
cancer. "Soon we will determine what goes wrong with cancer cells, why they are
proliferating when they shouldn't be.

   We know how to stop the replication of most cancer cells, but those agents
are also destructive to normal cells.

   Scientists are now looking at sensitizing cancer cells to existing treatments
like chemotherapy and radiation, so that cancer cells -- and not normal cells --
will be affected." Cell mortality is a central area of cancer research right
now, for both childhood and adult cancers.

   Doctors want to learn how to persuade cancer cells to self-destruct, Haas
said. "We know the genes that control senescence and we know what goes wrong in
particular cancers.

   Using this information and gene therapy or chemotherapy, we want to re-induce
the suicide pathway of malignant cells." Using genetics to alter the way a cell
operates sounds closer to science fiction than reality.

   Yet, for children with cancer, it might prove to be a more humane and
effective mode of treatment. "We know a great deal now about the underlying
mechanisms involved with cancer.

   But do we know everything?"

   Haas asked.

   "No, and -- unfortunately -- we probably never will."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Bedside manner: Dr. Ewa Carrier talked to patient
Chris Little of Carlsbad while making her morning rounds at Thornton Hospital.;
PHOTOBY: JOHN GASTALDO / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1309 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             October 3, 1999 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH 2000; Pg. HEALTH-4

LENGTH: 1157 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy, radiation, lifestyle changes play role in treating heart
disease

BYLINE: Eilene Zimmerman

BODY:

   More than 58 million Americans suffer from heart disease.

   One in three men can expect to develop a major cardiovascular disease before
age 60; the odds are one in 10.5 for women.

   In the next century, heart disease -- occurring most often in those over 60
-- will be the biggest cause of death worldwide. "This coming year alone there
will be 750,000 deaths from heart disease," said Dr. Richard Fosburg, medical
director of the Cardiovascular Institute at Scripps Memorial Hospital. Fosburg's
words sound grim, but he quickly points out the strides that have been made.

   Mortality rates for heart attack have gone down substantially in the last
four decades, from 30 percent in the 1960s to a mere 8 percent in 1998. And
major advances in treatment and diagnosis promise to make the disease far less
lethal. Dr. Anthony DeMaria, professor of medicine and chief of cardiology at
UCSD College of Medicine, said his daily practice today has little to do with
what he was taught in medical school 25 years ago. "Things are changing
dramatically.

   I think there will be extraordinary strides in prevention," he said.

   "As we move forward we're going to better understand the exact causes of
coronary artery disease, especially when genetic predispositions exist." DeMaria
believes gene therapy, which would reverse the disease and not just treat
symptoms, is the wave of the future. "With gene therapy, genetic material is
injected directly into the blood or heart.

   The material is conveyed by something else, often a virus.

   Since genes are the basic building blocks of the body, we can fundamentally
change the way the body works," he said. One change might be to enable the body
to grow new blood vessels, which could reverse heart disease. In addition,
looking for genes that predispose people to heart disease and high blood
pressure would allow doctors to perform early diagnostic tests for blocked
arteries.

   Genetic information also could be used to identify those at risk for high
blood pressure; medication could then prevent the condition from occurring.
DeMaria said there is also a great need for better ways of detecting heart
disease. "About 50 percent of those who have these problems are undetected until
they have a major heart attack and collapse.

   We need to do much better than that so we can intervene earlier," he said. At
UCSD, research is under way to develop chemical markers that can be injected
into the blood, seeking out and identifying plaque buildup in blood vessels.
Despite the advances of the last few decades, there is an area of heart disease
on the rise, in terms of morbidity and mortality.

   It is congestive heart failure.

   DeMaria says the increase is due to better treatment for those who might have
died from other forms of heart disease much earlier. Better therapies are on the
way for congestive heart failure. "There is the potential that gene therapy
might be used to augment the amount of heart muscle or change the chemical
compounds within the heart muscles themselves, so they can begin to contract
again," DeMaria said. But gene therapy is still in the research stage. Right
now, many patients with heart disease are treated using minimally invasive
surgery, said Dr. Paul Teirstein, director of interventional cardiology at
Scripps Clinic.

   The surgery is commonly known as an angioplasty, in which a catheter is
inserted into a blood vessel in the leg and is threaded into the heart. "We also
use a variety of tools with that, the newest being the stent.

   It looks like chicken wire and it wraps around a tiny balloon.

   When the balloon is inflated it expands and pops the arteries open.

   When the balloon is deflated, the stent stays in place to prop the artery
open," Teirstein said. The major drawback of angioplasty procedures is
restenosis, a re-narrowing of the blood vessel after treatment, which occurs in
30 percent of cases. Using stents, the chance of restenosis occurring is 20
percent. "The underlying problem with a recurrence isn't plaque filled with
cholesterol and fat.

   It's scar tissue.

   So that after a vessel has been opened, ballooned and stented, a scar forms
in the inner lining of the artery.

   Sometimes it becomes too big," Teirstein said. The newest treatment for
recurrent blood vessel blockage is radiation therapy.

   Surgeons go in with a catheter, open up the blockage in the blood vessel and
slide a radioactive tube inside. Teirstein said Scripps has treated more than
500 patients with this method in the last four years.

   With radiation therapy, the chance of a second recurring blockage is between
10 percent and 20 percent. "It's one of the most effective new treatments in
cardiology," he said. Both Teirstein and Fosburg, however, say future
developments in treating heart disease will be focused on lifestyle changes.

   Teirstein said he tells patients one of the most important things they can do
to ensure they are healthy 10 years from today is to get their LDL cholesterol
levels below 100. "And a lot of us also believe that stress relief is
important," he said. That is why patients are often referred to the Scripps
Center for Integrative Medicine. Integrated -- or complementary -- medicine
bridges the gap between conventional Western medical practices and those often
thought of as "alternative," such as acupuncture, biofeedback, homeopathy,
osteopathy, energy healing and guided imagery. "I'm an interventional
cardiologist who performs procedures to open blocked arteries," said Dr. Mimi
Guarneri, a cardiologist and medical director of the Scripps integrated medicine
center.

   "But if you move out of that high-tech world, you empower people -- by
changing their diet, their stress level -- to prevent heart disease, and if they
already have it, reverse the process.

   Our studies show we can reverse the plaque buildup in blood vessels using
lifestyle changes." Ten years ago, those with heart disease would have been told
after surgery to exercise and watch their diet, which the American Heart
Association said could include up to 30 percent fat, Guarneri said. "Now we know
that fat content is way too high and leads to progression of heart disease.

   Using a lowfat vegetarian diet, exercise, stress management and support
groups, people can reverse the damage." she said. Guarneri said this effort to
teach heart disease patients how to change their lives and halt progression of
their disease was begun at Scripps in 1996 and at first, she wasn't a big
believer.

   "Then I kept seeing our patients coming back for second and third procedures.

   It was like a revolving door." She came to the realization that many of her
patients' problems couldn't be solved with a simple prescription or a surgical
intervention.

   And after four years of using complementary care, she's a believer. "Right
now this program is one of only seven in the world, but without a doubt, it is
the future," Guarneri said.

   "You have to treat the whole person -- body, mind and soul -- you can't just
treat the body."

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Dr. Richard Fosburg: Heart disease care improving.
2. Health watch: Scripps physician Mimi Guarneri checks out Robert Mathews, who
has had two heart attacks. 3. Before surgery: Dr. Paul Teirstein of Scripps
Clinic visited with Betty Moore, who came from Chicago for her surgical
procedure. (HEALTH-7); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3. JOHN GASTALDO / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1310 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        October 3, 1999 Sunday, ORLEANS

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. F2

LENGTH: 1104 words

HEADLINE: FUTURE OF NEW ORLEANS COULD BE MEDICAL;
OFFICIALS CONSIDER HIGH-TECH PLAN

BYLINE: By Stewart Yerton Business writer

DATELINE: ST. PAUL, MINN.

BODY:

   In a long conference room overlooking the upper end of the Mississippi River,
90 business and civic leaders gathered last week to plan the economic future of
New Orleans. If the plan bears fruit, medical technology one day could be as
important to New Orleans as oil and tourism.

   Clustered around easels in the four corners of the room were officials from
Entergy Corp., BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., Hibernia National Bank,
Stewart Enterprises Inc. and the city of New Orleans, to name a few. They had
spent three days in the Twin Cities with the New Orleans Regional Chamber
Commerce. Their purpose: to gather ideas from one of the economic powerhouses of
the upper Midwest.

   To that end, David Waller, senior location executive for IBM in New Orleans,
stood at one easel using a black magic marker to scribble suggested goals for
New Orleans onto a big paper tablet. Item one: "Everyone reads."

   Other proposals included opening New Orleans public schools to students from
outside the parish and establishing a "1 percent club," whose corporate members
would donate 1 percent of their pre-tax profits to local charities.

   But when time came to winnow the list to five items, one of the most popular
plans was also one that could have profound effects on the local economy: a
proposal to promote a high-tech medical industry in New Orleans.

   The plan has support from several camps, including Louisiana State and Tulane
universities, as well as the New Orleans Technology Council, a business
association that promotes the development of high-tech ventures. In addition,
the Legislature has backed a variation of this idea by establishing a panel to
study the feasibility of creating a gene-therapy research center in Louisiana.
In March, the panel issued a 35-page plan for implementing the initiative,
revolving around cooperation between Tulane and LSU, institutions that
traditionally have been fierce competitors.

   Rebecca Conwell, a spokeswoman for Tulane University Medical Center and a
proponent of the initiative, said New Orleans and the region have the tools to
take new drugs from the research stage through clinical trials.

   Gene therapy is an experimental treatment technique in which doctors use live
viruses and other means to transport potentially therapeutic genes into the
body. Proponents say the therapy could revolutionize medicine, but some people
have criticized the therapy for moving too quickly from the laboratory to the
treatment room. Last week, an 18-year-old Arizona man with a rare metabolic
disease died while participating in a gene therapy experiment.

   But gene therapy is just one aspect of medical technology that New Orleans
can nurture, Conwell said. "Gene therapy is part of biotechnology," she said.
"Biotechnology is basically the big wave."

   "This is really a diamond in the rough," said James Hardy, director of
technology development for the Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center. "It truly is an opportunity for the whole community."

   Nurturing a medical industry wasn't the only idea that had a consensus of
support. Many agreed the city should improve public education and make it easier
to condemn and resell blighted properties, for instance. Most also called for a
master plan for regional development.

   But the plan to grow the medical industry was one of the more concrete
proposals, one that has momentum from the gene therapy initiative's victory in
the Legislature.

   Furthermore, New Orleans has schools to train medical workers, from highly
skilled researchers to lower-level lab technicians, said Joe Grace Jr.,
president of the New Orleans Technology Council.

   "The medical industry is one we can support, absolutely," he said.

   New Orleans business leaders studied the medical businesses in Minneapolis
and St. Paul because the region has been successful in producing both strong
research hospitals, such as the University of Minnesota and the Mayo Clinic in
nearby Rochester, and a vibrant medical device industry. Medtronics Inc., which
produces heart pacemakers and cutting-edge treatments for Parkinson's disease,
is based in Minneapolis.

   The good news for New Orleans is that the medical community already produces
world-class medical research. Tulane University, for instance, produced $5.3
million in revenue in 1996 from licenses on bio-tech patents, said Mike Moore,
the director of health technologies for the University of Minnesota's Office of
Patents and Technology Marketing. That was only slightly less than the $6
million the University of Minnesota earned the same year, Moore said.

   The bad news for New Orleans is that much of the license money comes from
out-of-state companies that make the drugs elsewhere. That means money for
Tulane, but not many new jobs for the area. The key, Grace said, is to keep the
technology in New Orleans and use it to create new companies. To do that, Grace
said, it will take four things: venture capital to invest in start-up companies,
a building or buildings that private companies and university researchers can
use as laboratories, support from the Legislature and an educated work force.

   Building a new medical building close to Tulane and LSU medical centers no
doubt would take significant support and cooperation from New Orleans City Hall
and probably state money as well. But attracting venture capital might be an
even harder task. Even in Minneapolis, bio-tech executives are starting to
complain that money is drying up. The long time it takes to develop drugs and
other medical technologies can scare investors away, and the speculative gold
rush of the Internet also isn't helping, Moore said.

   "Everything is dot.com," Moore said, echoing other medical industry
executives who spoke in Minneapolis.

   Still, medical officials in New Orleans said there is reason for optimism.

   Already LSU Medical Center has built companies around medical patents, Hardy
said. A case in point is St. Charles Pharmaceuticals Inc. The company is a joint
venture of the medical school and the Universidad de Alcala in Spain. St.
Charles Pharmaceuticals has been built around the work of Dr. Nicolas Bazan, an
LSU Medical Center researcher who has created a new pain medicine. The company
is preparing for clinical trials of the new drug, Hardy said.

   "It's very much a start-up phase," he said. Hardy said Bazan has several
other new drugs in the hopper.

   The need for venture capital notwithstanding, Grace was optimistic about the
prospects for growing a medical industry.

   "It's not that difficult a process," he said. "We just have to put a stake in
the ground and make it happen."

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1999


                             1311 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 01, 1999, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 29 MetFront

LENGTH: 1253 words

HEADLINE: M.D. Anderson to begin its test of anti-cancer drug;
Terminally ill patients will be enrolled in endostatin trial

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Sometime in the next few weeks, researchers at the University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center will start enrolling terminally ill patients in a drug
study that has generated more hope than any anti-cancer therapy on the horizon.

   The treatment in the spotlight is endostatin, a substance that shrinks tumors
in mice by cutting off the blood supply to tumors.

   Volunteers in Boston, one of three test sites in the country, began signing
up Tuesday for the first study of the drug in humans. By the end of Wednesday,
more than 3,400 cancer victims had called an endostatin hot line set up by
Dana-Farber/Partners Cancer Care, all seeking to be one of the 15 to 30 patients
selected for the trial.

   The oncologists heading the M.D. Anderson study, Dr. Roy Herbst and Dr. James
Abbruzzese, expect a similar blitz, and met Thursday with public relations
specialists at the cancer center to formulate a battle plan. The cancer center
is in the awkward position of wanting to satisfy the public's intense curiosity
about endostatin without appearing to promote an unproven treatment.

   "This is unlike anything else we've ever dealt with," said Jane Brust,
director of communications at M.D. Anderson. "We are trying to manage
expectations."

   M.D. Anderson said Herbst and Abbruzzese will answer questions after patient
eligibility requirements and a start date for the study are finalized. No word
is available on how patients will be selected. Like M.D. Anderson, the
University of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer Center will begin recruiting
volunteers in upcoming weeks.

   The buzz over the cancer therapy began last year after an optimistic article
about endostatin, and its sister protein angiostatin, appeared on the front page
of The New York Times. Scientists familiar with the work of Harvard's Dr. Judah
Folkman, who pioneered the drugs, were quoted as saying the treatment could
become a cure for cancer within two years.

   In the article, Folkman cautioned that it was dangerous to make predictions
about how the drug might work in people because animal studies don't always pan
out in people. All Folkman knew, he said in the article, was "if you have cancer
and you are a mouse, we can take good care of you."

   The endostatin trial is relatively small - fewer than 100 people are expected
to receive the drug at the three locations. Yet, the study has generated more
interest than any of the 500 trials currently taking place at M.D. Anderson,
some involving gene therapy, another hot field in cancer research. For months,
the cancer center has been getting a dozen calls a week about endostatin.
Patients write letters, some enclosing photos of themselves, imploring
researchers to let them take part.

   "It's a combination of being a concept that most people can understand, as
well as a great deal of publicity - some of it quite reasonable, given the
pre-clinical data," Herbst, 36, told the Houston Chronicle earlier this year.
"But there are a number of potential new therapies, hundreds of others, that are
also reasonable."

   The theory behind the treatment is simple. Tumors need a blood supply in
order to grow. The process by which blood vessels form is called angiogenesis.
The tumor cells send signals out to ask blood vessels to come and grow and
nourish them, enabling the tumor to grow in a way that can eventually kill the
patient.

   Anti-angiogenesis drugs halt that process. Without the support of a blood
supply, the tumor starves and disappears.

   Doctors are optimistic about endostatin because angiogenesis seems to be a
part of how all tumors grow. The idea that a new family of drugs can kill tumor
cells in a different way - most chemotherapy agents poison the cancer cells
themselves - holds extraordinary potential.

   At Dana-Farber, researchers are looking for study participants over the age
of 17 with solid tumors who have exhausted other treatment options. Patients
with leukemia, lymphoma, myeloma or primary brain tumors are not eligible for
the study.

   Abbruzzese said patients with renal cell carcinoma (a form of cancer of the
kidney), mesothelioma (a form of lung cancer), breast cancer and melanoma may be
best suited for the trial because of the large number of blood vessels feeding
those types of tumors.

   Participants will receive the drug intravenously every day for 28 days. If a
patient appears to be benefiting, the treatment will continue. Houston patients
must remain in the area during the entire treatment and undergo periodic
biopsies to determine the drug's effect on the tumor.

   Researchers emphasize that the purpose of the study, like other Phase One
studies of drugs, is to determine if endostatin is safe - although investigators
will be watching for a reduction in tumor size. Patients will be started on a
low dose of endostatin with doctors slowly increasing the dose to the level that
benefited lab mice. The treatment will stop if a patient suffers serious side
effects.

   "It may take up to a year before we complete the study, and even then, only
future studies can determine the effectiveness of the drug," said Dr. Donald
Kufe, principal investigator of the study at Dana-Farber.

   Dr. Stephen Sallan, chief of staff at Dana-Farber, puts the time line at two
to five years before scientists know if the drug truly works.

   Experts say it is unlikely that angiogenesis inhibitors alone will prove to
be a cancer cure. More likely, the drugs will be used in conjunction with other
therapies. M.D. Anderson is conducting a clinical trial for advanced breast
cancer using Taxol and an anti-angiogenesis drug called TNP-40. Dana-Farber is
treating brain tumors with radiotherapy and thalidomide, which also stops blood
vessel growth.

   The National Cancer Institute is sponsoring the Houston and Wisconsin trials.
EntreMed Inc., a small, Maryland-based biotech company manufacturing the drug,
is sponsoring the Boston study. Dana-Farber/Partners Cancer Care is a
collaboration of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and several Boston hospitals.

   Endostatin, first isolated in Folkman's laboratory, is a naturally occurring
human protein. It is made using a type of yeast produced in large fermentation
tanks similar to those used to make beer.





   Endostatin trials


   Patients began signing up Tuesday in Boston for the first human trials of
endostatin. The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center will start a
similar study in the next few weeks.

   Endostatin, an angiogenesis inhibitor, has cured cancer in mice. Angiogenesis
is the growth of new blood vessels; it is a factor both in wound healing and in
the growth of pathological tissue such as cancer.

   1. Tumors and other diseased tissue can thrive only when tiny networks of new
blood vessels supply them with nutrients and oxygen.

   2. The tumor encourages the growth of new blood vessels with
angiogenesis-promoting proteins.

   3. With a plentiful blood supply, the tumor grows and spreads in a way that
can be lethal.

   4. Anti-angiogenesis drugs prevent blood vessel growth. The capillaries
wither and the tumor starves. Secondary tumors cannot get a foothold with no
blood supply.





   Clinical trials


   Contact information for the endostatin and other clinical trials for cancer
treatment.

   University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 800-392-1611, select "3"
form the menu.

   Dana-Ferber Cancer Institute, 617-632-5100

   University of Wisconsin, 800-622-8922.


GRAPHIC: Graphs: 1. Endostatin trials (p. 30, TEXT); 2. Clinical trials (p. 30,
TEXT); 1. B.C. Oren / Chronicle, Sources: Dr. Judah Folkman, EntreMed, Chronicle
News Services

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1999


                             1312 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   September 30, 1999, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Features; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 402 words

HEADLINE: NEWS & NOTES: Journal not swayed by laser drill studies;
 Health Watch

BYLINE: From news services

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
Newly approved laser drills that punch 10 to 50 holes in the heart appear to
relieve heart patients' chest pain, but a medical journal critique questions
whether the benefits are an illusion. The technique, called transmyocardial
laser revascularization, became available in large medical centers earlier this
year. The Food and Drug Administration approved heart lasers developed by PLC
Medical Systems of Franklin, Mass., and Eclipse Surgical Technologies of
Sunnyvale, Calif. The approval was based on two studies published in today's New
England Journal of Medicine. The studies suggested that three-quarters of the
patients who underwent the procedures benefited. The journal also carries an
unusually negative editorial about the studies written by two cardiologists. The
editorial raises the possibility that the benefits were imaginary, or a placebo
effect.


   New treatment for abdominal aneurysm: Thousands of Americans with a weak spot
on the body's largest blood vessel like the one that killed actor George C.
Scott last week may choose an easier treatment than surgery, once the only
option. The condition is called an abdominal aortic aneurysm, a weak bulge on
the aorta that, if it breaks, can cause almost instantly fatal internal
bleeding. Until now, patching these aneurysms has required slicing open the
abdomen. The surgery itself kills up to 10 percent of patients, and those who do
well can require months of recuperation. On Tuesday, the FDA approved an
alternative: Two patches that doctors can use to repair aneurysms through a
small incision in the leg. In studies of more than 800 patients, the patches -
-- Guidant Corp.'s Ancure and Medtronic Inc.'s AneuRx --- successfully repaired
aneurysms more than 90 percent of the time. The procedure cut surgical
complications in half. Surgeons involved in the studies say the patches could
revolutionize care.

   Gene therapy experiment linked to death: A gene therapy experiment has been
halted after the death of an 18-year-old Arizona man. Jesse Gelsinger died Sept.
16, several days after researchers began infusing his liver with genetically
engineered viruses designed to counter ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a
rare disease that impairs the body's ability to rid itself of ammonia.
Gelsinger, diagnosed at age 2, had survived with medications and low- protein
foods. Ammonia is produced in the breakdown of protein.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1999


                             1313 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                SEPTEMBER 30, 1999 Thursday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1005 words

HEADLINE: LASERS SHOWN TO HELP ANGINA STUDIES FIND TECHNIQUES CAN RELIEVE CHEST
PAIN IF OTHER METHODS FAIL

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT FREE PRESS MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   A laser technique that pierces the wall of the heart with tiny holes
dramatically reduces angina in people with chest pain not alleviated by other
treatments, according to two studies published today in the New England Journal
of Medicine.

   An estimated 6.2 million Americans have angina -- dull, heavy pain usually in
the center of the chest that can spread to the throat, upper jaw, back and arms.
It often accompanies, or coincides with, diabetes.

   "I'm optimistic we'll really make a breakthrough in treating this very
frustrating problem," said Dr. William O'Neill, chief of the cardiovascular
disease division at Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak. He is the senior author of
one of the studies.

   The technique, called transmyocardial revascularization (TMR), is performed
on a beating heart and requires general anesthesia and a 5-inch chest incision.
It is approved by the federal government.

   A new, less-invasive way of performing the procedure, called percutaneous
transmyocardial revascularization (PTMR), awaits federal approval. There are
waiting lists of people who want to avoid any extra risks and experience greater
recuperation from chest surgery.

   "I'm frustrated that 100 people are waiting," said O'Neill. He expects to
publish results of two PTMR studies by spring, with government approval to
follow later in the year.

   The study he helped conduct and analyze followed 275 people with the most
severe category of angina at 18 medical centers for one year after treatment
with TMR and drugs. It found that after one year, 76 percent of people treated
with TMR and drugs had relief from angina, compared with 32 percent treated with
drugs alone.

   In a second study, of 200 patients at 12 U.S. medical centers, TMR alone, as
well as TMR with drugs, were found to be more beneficial than drugs alone.

   Doctors aren't sure why the procedure works. The laser may induce an
inflammatory, healing response by helping blood vessels form, O'Neill said.

   But the procedure has its critics. In today's issue of the New England
journal, an editorial urges caution.

   "There is little objective evidence" that the laser procedure is better than
drugs alone, wrote Dr. Richard Lange and Dr. L. David Hillis, two physicians at
the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.

   They raise questions about whether the laser techniques are better, safer or
more cost-effective; precise costs were not cited. Benefits may be imaginary --
a well-established placebo effect in many medical studies among patients eager
for a cure, they theorize. They also cite a death rate in the early days of the
study of as much as 10 percent to 20 percent among patients during and after the
treatment.

   O'Neill and others, however, said the Texas physicians' conclusions were
unfair, because they appear to be based on early observations of the procedure.
Cost-savings also will be dramatic, O'Neill said, given the number of people
with the problem and the repeat hospitalizations that many angina patients
require.

   "I've followed a lot of these patients, and I'm convinced, based on
scientific studies and close personal observation, that the benefit they derive
is far beyond what's consistent with a placebo effect," O'Neill said.

   Death rates of patients during and after the procedure dropped from about 8
percent at the beginning of the study to 2 percent, O'Neill said. "The mortality
rate will drop dramatically" as doctors perform the procedure more, he said.

   Small arteries pose problem

   Women outnumber men with the problem, partly because their arteries may be
too small to successfully undergo bypass surgery or angioplasty, a less-invasive
artery-clearing procedure. Men also may not be good candidates for surgery or
angioplasty for similar reasons.

   One of them is Charles Presnell, a retired General Motors wood pattern maker.
These days, he helps his wife with jobs at her B & B Beauty Salon in Hazel Park
and does woodworking jobs such as making Beanie Baby cabinets.

   Presnell, a former Hazel Park planning commissioner, had bypass surgery
around 1985. He was symptom-free for 10 years before chest pain started. He
would swallow three nitroglycerin pills, a common approach, but that didn't
work. Beaumont heart surgeon Dr. Joseph Bassett, who conducted the TMR
procedures with O'Neill for the study, told Presnell his arteries were too
clogged and small to undergo another bypass.

   Now, two years after his laser treatment, Presnell, 72, has only occasional
chest pain, and it's less intense, he said. "If I decide to rush and do
something, sometimes I have a problem with it hurting me," he said.

   O'Neill said laser techniques may be used alongside other techniques,
including an approach that uses a sleeve on the leg to pump blood to the heart
in emergency patients. Gene therapy also may introduce drugs to promote new
blood vessel growth to reduce symptoms.

   "This whole field is in its infancy," he added. "It's where coronary bypass
surgery was in 1965, and angioplasty was in 1977."

   ANGINA TREATMENT
Transmyocardial revascularization (TMR) uses a laser to drill 10 to 30 holes
slightly larger than a toothpick into the wall of the heart.
It can be done two ways

   Under general anesthesia, with a 4" to 5" incision in the chest to expose the
heart

   Under intravenous sedation, with a catheter or thin tube laser threaded
through a leg artery to the heart. In this approach, called percutaneous
transmyocardial revascularization, cardiologists insert a tiny laser through the
tube. Because it awaits federal approval, it is not widely available.

   ANGINA EXPLAINED

   Angina is a dull, heavy pain usually in the center of the chest that can can
spread to the throat, upper jaw, back and arms.

   Symptoms often come and go with exercise, or after a meal or during cold
weather -- events that increase the work of the heart.

   Sources: Eclipse Surgical Technologies, Free Press research by Patricia
Anstett

   PATRICIA ANSTETT can be reached at 313-222-5021 or anstett@freepress.com.

NOTES: SEE CHART ON RECOVERY RATES ON PAGE 2A

GRAPHIC: DRAWING Detroit Free Press; CHART Detroit Free Press

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002


                             1314 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  September 30, 1999, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1333 words

HEADLINE: Medical Center booms with building projects

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   If you think Houston is booming with new development, from town-homes in the
Museum District to skyscrapers downtown, just take a drive through the Texas
Medical Center.

   Nearly $ 1 billion in new construction is under way in the world's largest
medical complex, with some still in progress and others poised for
groundbreaking. Dr. Richard Wainerdi, president of the Texas Medical Center,
says more construction totaling $ 600 million is in the pipeline.

   The latest project: The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
announced this week that it's constructing a nine-story, $ 137.2 million
building dedicated to basic science research. The building will be the first
facility on the new Texas Medical Center Research Campus.

   This campus could eventually feature interconnected facilities for the
University of Texas-Houston Health Science Center and Baylor College of
Medicine, as well as other Medical Center institutions. In addition, there are
plans for parking and other amenities such as dry cleaning, stores and food
service for the Medical Center's 56,000 employees.

   "Our goal is to emphasize the research strengths of the Texas Medical
Center," said Dr. John Mendelsohn, president of M.D. Anderson. "The whole world
knows how fine medical care is in the Medical Center, but I don't think the
world realizes the strength of biomedical research going on here."

   The facility will house six floors of basic science laboratories, living
quarters for small lab animals and space for the Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, a shared program of M.D. Anderson and UT-Houston.

   "We feel confident if we can get the increased research space, we can fill it
with great projects," said Mendelsohn, adding that M.D. Anderson gets the
highest number of grants from the American Cancer Society and the National
Cancer Institute of any academic institution in the country.

   "We now know what causes cancer. Cancer is caused by the mutation or
malfunction of a small number of genes that control cell proliferation and
protect DNA. That gives us new targets for diagnosis and treatment of cancer."

   Part of the money for the building will come from M.D. Anderson itself, but
Mendelsohn hopes to raise $ 75 million in philanthropic funds. The largest
contributor will get to name the building.

   The research campus will be located just north of the cancer center's main
complex on an acre now being used as a surface parking lot.

   The collaborative effort is one of several major,
multi-institutionalundertakings announced this year.

   In April, Rice University, Baylor and UT-Houston launched a project to
explore how social factors contribute to illness. Scholars specializing in
public health, social epidemiology and health economics will teach and conduct
research.

   In July, Baylor, Texas Children's Hospital and Methodist Hospital teamed up
to create the world's first center for cell-and-gene therapy to treat illnesses
ranging from cancer and AIDS to heart disease and diabetes. The center, located
within Texas Children's and Methodist, has an estimated start-up cost of $ 30
million.

   The concept of a multi-institutional research campus is a new direction for
the Medical Center. It resulted from discussions among Mendelsohn, UT-Houston
President David Low and Baylor College of Medicine President Ralph Feigin about
the need for additional research facilities and the diminishing availability of
land on which to construct these buildings.

   They envisioned a joint effort that would boost the Medical Center's
scientific reputation and place Houston in a stronger position to attract top
faculty and leading biotechnology companies. Feigin said the campus will provide
leverage to obtain even more grants to fund scientists.

   "We will amplify each other's activities greatly," said Mendelsohn.

   Construction of M.D. Anderson's 420,000-square-foot research building is
expected to start in fall of 2000, pending final approval from the Texas Medical
Center Board of Directors, and be finished in 2003.

   "I think this spirit of cooperation is extremely important and positive for
the city," Feigin said.

   All told, eight buildings in the Medical Center are now being renovated,
expanded or built from scratch. New parking is slated for construction
throughout the Medical Center, and the Metropolitan Transit Authority will begin
resurfacing Fannin from South Braeswood to North Mac-Gregor in November. The two
priciest projects include a massive, $ 345 million Texas Children's Hospital
renovation and addition, as well as the $ 200 million Hermann Pavilion project.

   Visitors might come away with an impression of unprecedented development in
the Medical Center, but officials say the center has been a work-in-progress for
some time. Bob Stott, vice president of planning and development for the Texas
Medical Center Corp., said every decade has been marked by dramatic growth.

   Over the next 15 years, various institutions will be adding 10 million square
feet to the Medical Center's current total of 21 million square feet of hospital
rooms, labs, offices and other facilities.

   "This has been going on 50 years," Wainerdi said. "It's not anything
different."





   Medical Center construction


   New construction, renovations and additions are springing up all over the
Texas Medical Center. Here is a list of current projects.

   1. The Basic Science Research Building. The nine-story building being built
by University of Texas M.D Anderson Cancer Center is the first facility in the
new Texas Medical Center Research Campus. Construction begins next fall, with
completion scheduled for 2003. Cost: $ 137.2 million.

   2. Hermann Pavilion. The 12-story, 800,000-square-foot space replaces
outdated facilities and features a new trauma center, women's services facility
and Hermann Children's Hospital. Construction on all floors will be completed in
spring 2000. Cost: $ 200 million.

   3. The Baylor Center for Comparative Medicine. The 70,000-square-foot
research space is being built underground, beneath an existing courtyard.
Completion is set for February 2000. Cost: $ 40 million.

   4. Texas Children's Hospital. more than a million square feet of space in
three buildings is being added or renovated. Work in all three will be completed
by 2002. Cost: $ 345 million.

   5. Denton A. Cooley/Texas Heart Institute Building at St. Luke's. The
277,000-square-foot building is set to be finished in 2001. Cost: $ 112 million.

   6. The Dr. John B. Coleman Health Science Center. Part of the Houston
Community College Southeast system, the facility opened in August. Cost: $ 20
million.

   7. Smith Land West and Smith Land East. The two lots will add 4,800 new
parking spaces to the Medical Center. The west lot will be done in December, the
east lot in April 2000. Cost: $ 12 million.

   8. M.D. Anderson Faculty Center. Approximately 325,000 square feet of office
space is under construction. Cost: $ 49 million.

   9. Rotary House addition. Managed by Marriott, the M.D. Anderson facility
houses patients and families. The expansion will add 126 guest rooms. Cost: $
13.6 million.

   10. A new Texas Medical Center garage will add up to 1,800 parking spaces.
Estimated cost not available.

   11. A fitness center will serve M.D. Anderson's faculty center. The building
has not yet been designed.

   12. UT-Houston Health Science Center nursing and biomedical sciences
building. The current building in that location will be demolished.

   13. Parking renovation (not shown on map). New meters will dispense tickets
and accept cash and credit cards. The new system will be phased in at all
garages by the end of the year. Cost: $ 12 million.

   14. Fannin Street. Underground utilities will be repaired and the street
resurfaced from Braeswood to MacGregor. The Metropolitan Transit Authority is
doing the repaving, the city of Houston is taking care of utilities. The
15-month project starts in November. Cost: $ 7 million.


GRAPHIC: Graph: 1. Medical Center construction (p. 14, TEXT); Map: 2. Location
of Medical Center construction (p. 14); B.C. Oren / Chronicle, Robert Dibrell /
Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1999


                             1315 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  September 30, 1999, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 521 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   Death halts gene study


   PHILADELPHIA - Gene therapy may come under closer scrutiny following the
death of a teen-ager during an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   "It certainly should cause us to pause and reflect," Jeffrey Kahn, director
of the Center for Bioethics at the University of Minnesota, said Wednesday.

   Doctors do not know why Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17.
He was four days into an experiment in which researchers placed healthy genes in
his liver to combat a disease that inhibits the body's ability to rid itself of
ammonia, which is produced when protein is processed.

   The experiment involving 18 patients has been halted until researchers can
determine why Gelsinger died. Officials at the university's Institute for Human
Gene Therapy said an autopsy will be conducted to determine the cause of death.


   HIV 'pandemic' feared


   BOSTON - Unless the search for a cure for AIDS accelerates or preventive
methods improve, the worst of the HIV epidemic has yet to come, the director of
the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases predicted Wednesday.

   Dr. Anthony Fauci, writing in the New England Journal of Medicine, said "what
began as a handful of recognized cases among homosexual men in the United States
has become a global pandemic of such proportions that it clearly ranks as one of
the most destructive microbial scourges in history."

   In the United States, the number of new HIV cases each year has leveled off
at 40,000 people. However, the number of new cases elsewhere is growing at an
alarming rate.

   "An estimated 5.8 million new HIV infections occurred worldwide during 1998 -
approximately 16,000 each day. More than 95 percent of these new infections
occurred in developing countries," he said.


   A trolley, not a train


   DENVER - The campaign brochure promoting a proposed light-rail transit system
shows a sleek bullet train that can reach speeds of up to 100 mph.

   Trouble is, that is not what voters would get if they approve the idea Nov.
2.

   "It's the wrong train," said Rep. Glenn Scott, R-Westminster. "They're
building a trolley system. I don't want to speak to their motives, but it's
certainly suspicious."

   Supporters of the plan admit that the train pictured in the campaign
literature is not the same train being proposed. The planned train would be
boxy, use overhead electric lines and travel no faster than 55 mph.

   Officials said they did not have time to get a photograph of the actual
train.


   School bus skids, flips


   CLEVELAND - A school bus carrying 38 children and three adults overturned
Wednesday in central Ohio, officials said.

   Kim Chapman, a spokeswoman for the Pickaway County Sheriff's office near
Columbus, said there were some broken bones and fractures but most of the
injuries were bumps and scrapes. All on board were taken to two local hospitals
for checks.

   Sgt. Linda Welsh said the bus skidded off the narrow two-lane road into a
ditch and then flipped over.

   The Teays Valley Middle School class was on its way to a Renaissance Fair in
South Bloomfield, 20 miles south of Columbus.


LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1999


                             1316 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 30, 1999, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
 SCIENCE IN BRIEF;
 TEENAGER DIES WHILE UNDERGOING EXPERIMENTAL GENE THERAPY

BODY:


   An 18-year-old from Arizona has died after receiving gene therapy to treat a
rare genetic disease called ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. Jesse
Gelsinger died of failure of his liver and other internal organs four days after
researchers at the University of Pennsylvania infused a genetically modified
adenovirus into the liver, but the death has not yet been firmly linked to the
treatment.

   At last count, 313 gene therapy experiments have been approved by federal
authorities and more than 2,500 people have undergone treatments without
apparent harm--but also without major benefits. Critics have charged that
Gelsinger's death was needless, however, because he suffered from a mild form of
the genetic disorder and had it under control with drugs and diet.

   --Compiled by Times medical writer Thomas H. Maugh II

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1999


                             1317 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 30, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: Death Leads to Concerns For Future of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   The death of a patient in a gene therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania is another disappointment in a field that could provide radical new
treatments for many diseases but has had few successes.

   The patient, Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old from Arizona, died on Sept. 17,
four days after being injected with a high dose of genetically engineered
viruses intended to correct his condition.

    Dr. Steven Raper, the principal scientist in charge of the trial, said that
the cause of death was not yet known but that coming so soon after the
injection, the treatment could have been responsible.

   The virus used in this and 50 other current gene therapy trials is
adenovirus, one of the causes of the common cold. It usually causes no more than
inflammation at the site of injection and mild fever.

   Most gene therapy trials depend on viruses to deliver corrective genes to
human cells. In the course of evolution, viruses have learned how to penetrate
human cells and force the cell's machinery to make the products of the virus's
genes.

   In gene therapy, the virus's harmful genes are excised and a corrective human
gene is inserted in their place. But despite the promise of the idea, and
hundreds of gene therapy trials, only a handful have yet yielded possibly useful
treatments.

   Mr. Gelsinger was one of 18 patients who received varying doses of virus. He
received the highest dose.

   The patients all suffered from a serious metabolic disease, ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency, which impairs the ability to process ammonia. The
defective gene is usually inherited, but Mr. Gelsinger had a rare mutation that
must have occurred spontaneously.

   Dr. Raper said that the university voluntarily stopped the trial immediately
after Mr. Gelsinger's death and that the Food and Drug Administration, which
oversees such studies, later issued a clinical hold on the trial. Another
Federal body, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes
of Health, will send out a letter tomorrow to all scientists conducting gene
therapy trials with adenovirus. The committee reviews the protocols for gene
therapy trials on behalf of the Food and Drug Administration.

   Dr. Amy Patterson, the National Institutes of Health official who oversees
the advisory committee, said the letter would inform researchers of the
circumstances of Mr. Gelsinger's death and ask them to report any relevant
information that might explain it.

   Both Dr. Raper and Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the Institute for Human
Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania, said they intended to learn as
much as possible about Mr. Gelsinger's death and to share the information with
other gene therapists. "We owe it to the field and to the patient, who really
wanted to participate and wanted us to learn," Dr. Wilson said.

   Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, a gene therapy expert at New York Presbyterian
Hospital, said that Mr. Gelsinger's death was tragic but that it would not in
his view have a significant impact on the field. It is difficult to develop
revolutionary medical therapies in perfect safety and gene therapy is no
different, he said.

   One of the adenovirus's drawbacks as a delivery vehicle is that the body's
immune system attacks cells that harbor the virus and its corrective gene,
allowing the patient to benefit for a few weeks at best. Why were Mr. Gelsinger
and the 17 other patients in a trial that offered risk with little lasting
benefit?

   Dr. Wilson said the adenovirus treatment, if successful, could be used to
treat the acute crises that occurred in the disease. Adenovirus was the only
viral vehicle available when the protocol was approved in 1995. The health
institutes' advisory panel voted 11 to 1 in favor. The only dissenter objected
to the risk of catheterization, Dr. Wilson said.

   Dr. Patterson said that if Mr. Gelsinger's death proved to have been caused
by the adenovirus it would be the first treatment-related death she knew of to
have occurred in a gene therapy trial. Open discussion of such adverse effects
was particularly important, she said, to retain public confidence in gene
therapy.

   Mr. Gelsinger's father, Paul Gelsinger, a handyman in Tucson, Ariz., said his
son became interested in the gene therapy trial after he had begun to rebel
against the restrictive nonprotein diet and the 50 pill-a-day regimen that eased
his symptoms.

   "He was a rebellious teen-ager who thought he could manage his own illness,"
his father said.

   Mr. Gelsinger said he did not have hard feelings toward the researchers who
conducted the trial. "The doctors are as devastated as I am," he said. "It was
because of these men that I had my son for 18 years."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1999


                             1318 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                SEPTEMBER 30, 1999 Thursday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 74

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: TEEN'S DEATH HALTS GENE THERAPY STUDY

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   Gene therapy, a growing field of research that holds promise in curing
ailments from heart disease to cancer, may come under closer scrutiny following
the death of a teen-ager during an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   "It certainly should cause us to pause and reflect," Jeffrey Kahn, director
of the Center for Bioethics at the University of Minnesota, said yesterday.
"It's a very difficult thing for us to confront, especially when the death is
attributed to the research."

   Doctors do not know why Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17.
He was four days into an experiment in which researchers placed healthy genes in
his liver to combat a disease that inhibits the body's ability to rid itself of
ammonia, which is produced when protein is processed.

   Most victims of the rare disorder - known as ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency, or OTC - die as infants. Gelsinger, who was first diagnosed with OTC
at age 2, had a mild form of the disease that he kept in check with medications
and low-protein foods. He volunteered for the study to help other sufferers,
said his father, Paul Gelsinger.

   While gene therapy studies usually involve people whose diseases are so
advanced that traditional treatment does not work, the Penn experiment included
OTC sufferers with milder symptoms.

   "There's a good reason, therapeutically, to do gene therapy before people are
so sick it can't help them. But if the person is relatively healthy and the
research poses a significant risk of harm or death, it poses a difficult
dilemma," Kahn said. "When do you engage in what could be quite risky research
when the individual could live a long time?"

   In gene therapy, working genes are inserted to compensate for genetic flaws,
such as the ones that lead to OTC.

   "Research is a risky business," said Dr. John Lantos, associate director of
the MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics at the University of Chicago.
"Often, experimental interventions are themselves dangerous. The hope is they're
less dangerous than the disease."

   Penn's experiment involving 18 patients has been halted until researchers can
determine why Gelsinger died. Officials said an autopsy will be conducted to
determine the cause of death.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1319 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     SEPTEMBER 30, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1057 words

HEADLINE: PENN GENE THERAPY DEATH LEADS TO INQUIRIES FEDERAL HEALTH OFFICIALS
ARE LOOKING AT 50 OTHER STUDIES NATIONWIDE. THE FATALITY WAS THE FIRST IN THE
FIELD.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, Susan FitzGerald and Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER, STAFF
WRITERS

BODY:

   The death of an 18-year-old boy in a gene therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania has prompted federal health officials to begin
examining 50 other experiments elsewhere in the country.

   The experiments, being conducted by major research universities with the help
of federal funds, all involve the use of a genetically engineered cold virus,
known as adenovirus, to deliver a correct copy of a defective gene.

   The Sept. 17 death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., marks the first
fatality in the burgeoning and still highly experimental field of gene therapy,
which has promised to bring cures to a wide range of diseases ranging from
cancer and heart disease to a multitude of inherited conditions.

   While gene therapy researchers have been criticized for not speedily
delivering any effective treatments, the drugs proved safe in early testing.
Until now, safety issues have been largely theoretical.

   James M. Wilson, director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, said
yesterday that Penn had immediately stopped its trial after Gelsinger's death.
He said the Food and Drug Administration put a hold on the study until it
reviewed the circumstances of his death.

   Wilson said he didn't know what caused the boy's death, but he and his team
of scientists were looking into all possible explanations. He said he suspected
that it was somehow linked to the adenovirus.

   Today, the federal Office of Recombinant DNA Activities, which oversees
patient safety in gene therapy experiments, will send out letters to each of the
approximately 50 other research teams in the country that are using the same
virus. The scientists will be asked to report their latest data.

   Amy Patterson, who heads the office, said the Penn case "may cast light on
areas that may need to be looked at more closely." The office's outside advisory
committee - known as the RAC (Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee) - will discuss
the data at its Dec. 9-10 meeting in Bethesda, Md.

   Scientists fear that the Penn death could dampen enthusiasm for gene therapy.
"It's going to give everybody pause," said Robert L. Nussbaum, branch chief of
genetic diseases at the National Human Genome Research Institute.

   Nussbaum, a former Penn geneticist, wrote a medical paper in 1988 describing
Gelsinger's unusual genetic profile, which was published in the New England
Journal of Medicine.

   The boy had a metabolic disorder called ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency, a disease that blocks the liver's ability to break down ammonia so
that it can be eliminated in the urine. The buildup of ammonia in the body can
lead to coma and death, often soon after birth. Gelsinger had a less serious
form that could be treated through diet and medicine.

   The OTC trial focused on patients with the least serious forms of the
disease.

   The study was controversial because it did not use patients facing imminent
death, as did all the other gene therapy trials that preceded it.

   At a Dec. 4, 1995, meeting of the government's RAC, Robert P. Erickson, a
University of Arizona geneticist who was the primary reviewer of the proposed
experiment, questioned whether it was right to do gene therapy on patients who
had no symptoms of disease.

   He also questioned Penn's proposal to deliver the gene therapy through a
catheter inserted directly into the liver's main artery. He said such an
invasive procedure could be risky and suggested that the Penn team use a simpler
intravenous line to deliver the drug into the bloodstream and eventually to the
liver.

   Wilson believed that the direct route to the liver was actually safer because
it could target a confined portion of the liver. In case the therapy proved to
be toxic, at least part of the liver would still be functional.

   The RAC voted to approve Penn's experiment on the condition that the team use
the intravenous method, rather than going directly into the liver. The vote was
12-1 with four abstentions.

   Penn's next step was to get approval from the FDA, which raised another set
of concerns. Since delivery through the circulatory system would make it more
likely that the doctored adenovirus would reach the reproductive cells, was
there a risk that offspring could be affected?

   To satisfy the FDA, Penn conducted extensive mouse experiments, which found
no genetic alterations in offspring.

   In the end, though, Wilson abandoned the intravenous approach and the FDA
approved a revised protocol involving the direct route into the liver.

   Wilson said that by then, RAC had been stripped of its power and its approval
was no longer necessary.

   Another member of the RAC, Richard Jude Samulski, director of gene therapy at
the University of North Carolina, said yesterday that he, too, had concerns at
the time the protocol was reviewed. "People get IVs all the time," he said.
"When you go into the hepatic artery, you are running the risk of doing
something fatal."

   Wilson, however, said yesterday he didn't think that the catheterization
would turn out to be "the Achilles' heel" that triggered Gelsinger's death.

   Gelsinger was the 18th and next-to-last patient in the two-year trial, which
involved giving increasingly larger doses of the drug in an attempt to find the
maximum safe dose. The boy and one other woman had been given the maximum dose
called for in the trial. It was 300 times greater than the dose that the trial's
first patients had gotten.

   Still, this was 50 times less than the maximum safe dose for monkeys and
other nonhuman primates.

   Penn is now reviewing charts to make sure that the boy got the proper dose of
drug. Samples of the same batches of drug that Gelsinger had gotten were being
given to monkeys to see if it had somehow been contaminated. Doctors were
checking to see if the adenovirus that transported the genes into the boy's
liver cells had infected other tissue in his body, in particular whether it
caused an inflammation of the boy's lungs, which led to his death. Yesterday,
Gelsinger's father, Paul, recalled the willingness of his son to undergo the
procedure. After the two of them met with Penn doctors, they weighed the pros
and cons.

   "I told Jesse, there's risks here. There's a 1 in 5,000 chance of
complications," the father recalled.

   Jesse, he said, looked at the odds and said, "I can beat that, Dad."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1320 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  September 30, 1999, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: Federal scrutiny for gene therapy Death prompts investigation of side
effects

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   The first death of a person undergoing gene therapy has triggered
a government review of side effects associated with the gene delivery
system used in the experiment, officials said Wednesday.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., was participating with
17 others in a gene therapy study of a rare metabolic disorder
at the University of Pennsylvania. He died Sept. 17 after progressive
organ failure, which began in the liver. The others were not affected.


   The goal of gene therapy is to replace missing or defective genes
with healthy ones. Since 1990, more than 4,000 people have received
gene therapy, most with the same gene delivery method. Mild immune
system responses are the most common side effects.

   The delivery vehicle, or vector, used on Gelsinger is an adenovirus,
which is a cold virus modifed to carry genes into cells. The modified
virus does not cause a cold, but it retains the machinery for
getting itself inside cells. Patients tend to react to proteins
on the virus' shell.

   The review of studies using adenovirus vectors is intended to
reveal side effects that may have been unreported or overlooked,
if they exist, says Amy Patterson, director of the Office of Recombinant
DNA Activities at the National Institutes of Health. Results will
be discussed at a December meeting of NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, RAC.

   "This is prompting a very careful review by the scientists involved
in the study, federal investigators and others in the field. That
is the first step," Patterson says.

   Additional oversight of gene therapy trials does appear necessary
for now, she added. Human gene therapy studies are approved by
internal review boards at institutions where studies are done
and by the Food and Drug Administration. The RAC may hold public
hearings on novel studies, but it does not have authority to approve
or reject a study.

   "It is truly a very sad and unfortunate incident," says Savio
Woo, president of the American Society of Human Gene Therapy.
"The trial was well designed and properly reviewed by all regulatory
agencies. There was nothing wrong with it, but it reflects the
fact that, indeed, gene therapy is an experimental therapy."

   James Wilson, director of the Human Gene Therapy Institute at
Penn, says the study team is trying to determine what happened
in Gelsinger at the cellular level. The results will be presented
to other scientists and published when available.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1999


                             1321 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                  September 30, 1999, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 855 words

HEADLINE: Family's Debate Mirrored Scientists' on Gene Therapy Risk

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   Just before Paul Gelsinger sent his son off to Philadelphia to take part in a
gene therapy experiment for the teenager's childhood disease, the Tucson man had
a heated dining room debate with his mother-in-law over the wisdom of the trip.

   He's healthy, she argued. He's doing well on his current treatment. Why take
the gamble?

   It's a low-risk study, Gelsinger told her. He wants to do it. And it might
lead to a cure for the rare genetic ailment he had, called ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency.

   "Turns out she was right," the devastated father said yesterday.

   Gelsinger's son died shortly after starting the pioneering treatment at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia--the first apparent casualty since
scientists began experimenting with ways to permanently alter disease-causing
genes. The death is being investigated by the university and federal officials.

   Although he didn't know it at the time, Gelsinger's argument with his
mother-in-law was a dinner table replay of a similarly vigorous discussion over
a meeting room table four years ago, when a federal advisory committee wrestled
with whether to endorse the controversial study.

   Of particular concern to committee members was the researchers' decision to
experiment on patients who were doing well on conventional treatment or no
treatment at all. The first round of human testing for new therapies is usually
done on ill patients who haven't responded to standard treatments, and thus have
less to lose by trying unproven approaches.

   The Pennsylvania protocol was discussed at length at that December 1995
meeting of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), an advisory group to
the director of the National Institutes of Health that examines the scientific
and ethical basis of all proposed gene therapy experiments involving federal
funds.

   Robert P. Erickson, an RAC member affiliated with the University of Arizona,
opened the discussion with several criticisms of the proposed experiment. The
study was not justified, he said, in part because the procedure was very
"invasive"--a catheter would have to be threaded through critical blood vessels
and the new genes would be delivered directly into the liver via millions of
living viruses that had the potential to trigger organ damage--and because most
of the patients to be studied were in good health and many in fact had never
experienced symptoms.

   At a minimum, he suggested, the viruses should be delivered through a less
dangerous intravenous line. The Philadelphia researchers, in attendance at the
meeting, accepted that advice. But ultimately they used the original approach
anyway because of fears that the intravenous approach might create problems of
its own by delivering the new genes to the wrong parts of the body.

   That reversal was approved in private meetings with the Food and Drug
Administration, but was never reviewed in public by the RAC--a fact that
concerned some committee members, who did not learn about the change until they
read it in newspapers yesterday.

   "The public and the RAC didn't know," said LeRoy B. Walters, a Georgetown
University ethicist who sat on the committee. "I think the early years of a
promising area like gene therapy ought to be out in the light of day."

   Researchers said on Tuesday that the method of delivery is one of several
possible reasons that Jesse Gelsinger went into multiple organ failure soon
after getting his first infusion of new genes--although none of the previous 17
patients had suffered any ill effects from the treatment.

   At the 1995 meeting, Erickson also said he was troubled by the fact that the
treatment did not have the potential to lead to a long-term improvement, since a
single infusion of viruses would not be curative and subsequent infusions would
be neutralized by the body's immune response.

   Another committee member, Rochelle Hirschhorn, expressed similar
reservations. It would be more promising to pursue further work in laboratory
animals, she said, and then use those results to help design a safer approach
before starting work in people.

   Study leaders James Wilson and Mark Batshaw spent considerable time
explaining why they thought the project was worthy and ultimately prevailed. The
RAC approved the project, with some modifications to satisfy members' concerns,
12 to 1 (with four abstentions), with Erickson the sole dissenter.

   There is an irony to Erickson's leading role in the debate over the
Pennsylvania study. It was a close colleague of his at the University of Arizona
whom Jesse Gelsinger approached for advice on what to do about his disease. That
colleague, Randy Heidenreich, who specializes in metabolic diseases like the one
the boy had, recommended that Gelsinger look into the Philadelphia experiment.
Erickson's office is just two doors away from Heidenreich's. But the boy and his
father never spoke to Erickson about the study.

   Paul Gelsinger said yesterday he had no idea that there had ever been a big
debate about the study. But he said he has faith that the renewed soul-searching
by scientists will lead to some good.


LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1999


                             1322 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                  September 29, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 76 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF

BYLINE: From our news services

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
Patient's death halts gene therapy study
A patient has died while undergoing gene therapy in a trial study at the
University of Pennsylvania. The Sept. 17 death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of
Arizona, who had a genetic metabolic condition, has caused a halt to the study
at the Philadelphia school for now. It is not yet known whether the therapy
played a role in his death, but if it did, the case would be a severe setback
for the experimental technique.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1999


                             1323 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                              The New York Times


              September 29, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

HEADLINE: Patient Dies in Trial Of Gene Treatment

BODY:

   A patient has died while undergoing gene therapy in a trial study at the
University of Pennsylvania.

   If the treatment itself should prove to be the cause of his death it would
likely be the first by someone undergoing gene therapy and could be a severe
setback for the experimental technique, whose fulfillment has long fallen short
of its high promise.

    The 18-year-old patient suffered from a genetic defect that prevents the
correct metabolism of ammonia. He was part of a group of 18 patients who were
being tested with different doses of a virus carrying a corrective gene. He and
another patient, who was unaffected, received the highest dose being given in
the trial.

   Article, page A24.


   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1999


                             1324 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                              The New York Times


              September 29, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 683 words

HEADLINE: Patient Dies During a Trial Of Therapy Using Genes

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   A patient has died while undergoing gene therapy in a trial study at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.

   If the treatment itself should prove to be the cause of his death it would
probably be the first by someone undergoing gene therapy and could be a severe
setback for the experimental technique, whose fulfillment has long fallen short
of its high promise.

    The patient, Jesse Gelsinger, was an 18-year old from Arizona who suffered
from a genetic defect that prevents the correct metabolism of ammonia. He was
part of a group of 18 patients who were being tested with different doses of a
virus carrying a corrective gene. He and another patient, who was unaffected,
received the highest dose being given in the trial.

   Mr. Gelsinger died on Sept. 17, four days after a dose of genetically
engineered virus was injected into one of the main arteries of his liver, so as
to deliver the highest possible dose of a corrective gene to the cells where it
was needed.

   The virus, known as adenovirus, is one of the causes of the common cold and
usually causes only a mild fever. It has been used in many previous gene therapy
trials. Mr. Gelsinger's death was first reported in Tuesday's editions of The
Washington Post.

   "We're all devastated by this," said Rebecca Harmon, a spokesperson for the
University of Pennsylvania. "Jesse truly was a hero in advancing the cause of
science."

   Ms. Harmon said Mr. Gelsinger's was the first death to have occurred among
the 130 patients who have been treated at the university's Institute of Gene
Therapy. The institute, headed by Dr. James M. Wilson, is one of the leading
gene therapy centers in the United States.

   Dr. Steve Raper, the principal scientist in charge of the trial, said that
the timing of the treatment and Mr. Gelsinger's death suggested a possible
relationship but that the cause had not yet been determined.

   "The major impact of Jesse's sacrifice," Dr. Raper said, is that safer
viruses may need to be developed. "Gene therapy," he said, "still holds
tremendous promise for a variety of diseases."

   To get corrective genes into cells, gene therapists have to rely on viruses,
which specialize in exactly this task.

   Adenovirus is used partly because it causes such a mild gene. Results have
been generally disappointing, however, because the body's immune system usually
roots out and destroys the virus after six weeks, along with the beneficial
genes it has inserted. Well before Mr. Gelsinger's death, gene therapists had
been trying to develop more suitable viruses as vectors.

   Mr. Gelsinger's disease, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, is usually
inherited but Mr. Gelsinger had a rare form in which his gene mutated after
birth.

   Mr. Gelsinger's father, Paul Gelsinger, 47, a licensed handyman in Tucson,
Arizona, said his son became interested in the experimental gene therapy after
he had begun to rebel against the restrictive nonprotein diet and the 50
pill-a-day regimen that mitigated his symptoms. He faced a life of increasingly
larger doses of medication.

   "He was a a rebellious teenager who thought he could manage his own illness,"
his father said.

   Jesse was especially interested in the gene trial since it promised dramatic
improvement.

   Jesse was also interested because the particular phase of the trial he was in
might benefit newborns who get the worst form of the disease that kills in the
first year.

   Paul Gelsinger and Jesse, who at 18 was the actual person giving consent for
the trial, were told the largest risks from the trial would come from possible
hepatitis and blood clots. The cause of death has not been determined, Mr.
Gelsinger said, "but it's obvious it had to have been the procedure itself."

   Mr. Gelsinger does not have hard feelings toward the doctors in the trial.
"The doctors are as devastated as I am. It was because of these men that I had
my son for 18 years."

   Jesse died on Sept. 17, when artificial life support was discontinued, but
his vital signs began to fail the second day after the introduction of the
modified gene on Monday, Sept. 13.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1999


                             1325 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    SEPTEMBER 29, 1999 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 930 words

HEADLINE: PATIENT, 18, DIES AT PENN DURING GENE-THERAPY TEST HE WAS UNDERGOING
TREATMENT FOR A RARE DISORDER. SOME HAD SAID RESEARCH MOVED TOO QUICKLY.

BYLINE: INQUIRER WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   An 18-year-old patient with a rare metabolic disease has died at the Hospital
of the University of Pennsylvania while participating in a major gene-therapy
experiment, doctors said.

   The death of Jesse Gelsinger, of Tucson, Ariz., is a setback for a promising
approach that has been criticized as moving too quickly from the laboratory
bench to the bedside.

   Some members of a federal advisory committee that approved the study had
expressed concerns about the experiment because they felt it posed unduly
serious risks and included people who were already being treated successfully
with conventional therapy, the Washington Post reported.

   Gelsinger, whose family lived in Woodbury, N.J., before moving to Arizona,
had suffered on and off from a serious genetic disorder that often leads to coma
and death in childhood. He died Sept. 17 after undergoing an experimental
therapy administered at the University of Pennsylvania, university and federal
officials said yesterday.

   Scientists and doctors involved in the case said Gelsinger succumbed over a
four-day period after doctors infused a batch of genetically engineered viruses
into his liver at the highest dose allowed under an experimental protocol
approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

   The experiment, the first in which such a virus was shot directly into the
liver's blood supply, has been halted pending an investigation, and federal
officials today will send out letters to the more than 100 researchers in the
country conducting human research with similar viruses, asking them to report
any evidence of trouble.

   Seventeen other University of Pennsylvania patients who received various
doses of the virus before Gelsinger had no notable problems, and a few improved.

   "This was a tragic, unexpected event," said James M. Wilson, director of the
university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy. "I hope in a month we'll have
looked at every angle so we can share with whomever is interested in listening
what we've learned from this."

   In a telephone interview last night from Tucson, the teenager's father, Paul
Gelsinger, said his son had been looking forward to the treatment.

   "He was ecstatic," Gelsinger said. "He was excited about being able to help."

   His son took a leave from his job as a courtesy clerk at a supermarket, and
flew to Philadelphia on Sept. 9.

   Although they had been warned that the procedure had some risks, the
Gelsingers and their doctors had been optimistic. "They were expecting great
results from Jesse," Gelsinger said.

   The procedure began in earnest the following Monday, Sept. 13.

   "It was taking the expected course for the first 20 hours," Gelsinger said.
"But then he developed jaundice.

   Officials said Jesse Gelsinger's liver and other organs began to fail. The
next day his son was put on life support. He died three days later.

   Researchers and officials familiar with the case said they had few clues
about what may have triggered the death, so its impact on the field of gene
therapy remained uncertain. Thousands of U.S. patients have been treated with
various kinds of gene therapy, an experimental technique in which doctors use
live viruses and other means to transport potentially therapeutic genes into the
body.

   The class of virus used in the Philadelphia experiment, a modified version of
a cold virus called an adenovirus, is the most common type of gene-therapy virus
in use today. But the study had raised several novel concerns when the
researchers began their long effort to gain federal approval to conduct the
work.

   Typically, gene-therapy studies involve desperately ill patients who have
failed conventional therapy. But this one included healthy people and people who
were already being treated successfully with dietary and drug regimens. The
method was controversial because the genetically altered virus, which often
causes severe inflammation, risked exacerbating the disease in some patients
when it was injected directly into their livers, while promising at best only a
transient improvement.

   Gelsinger suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a
genetic disorder that affects mostly boys. The disease blocks the body's ability
to break down ammonia and often causes death soon after birth.

   Gelsinger was born with a mild form of the disease and had it well under
control during the last year with drugs and a strict non-protein diet, said his
father.

   Paul Gelsinger, who moved to Tucson from Woodbury, N.J., 12 years ago, said
doctors diagnosed Jesse's disease at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia in
1984.

   Jesse had a particularly bad bout last December, ending up in the hospital
for two weeks. He was close to death at that time, his father said.

   Nevertheless, he improved dramatically and graduated from high school in May,
his father said.

   He volunteered in the hope that it might lead to a cure that would benefit
him and children with more deadly forms of the disease.

   "I lost a hero," Paul Gelsinger said.

   Gelsinger said he was not angry at the researchers.

   At the same time, he said, "I've got a ton of questions for them."

   Among them, he said, was why they accepted his son as a subject when they
knew that Jesse had a different form of the disease than most affected
individuals.

   Dr. Mark Batshaw, who headed the study and is chief academic officer at the
Children's National Medical Center in Washington, said he simply didn't know why
the youth died.

   * Inquirer staff writers Frederick Cusick, Francisco Delgado and Donald C.
Drake contributed to this story.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1326 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                     September 29, 1999 Wednesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: PATIENT DIES IN GENE THERAPY;
MAN'S DEATH LATEST RESEARCH SETBACK

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss and Deborah Nelson The Washington Post

BODY:

   An 18-year-old Arizona man with a rare metabolic disease has died while
participating in a controversial gene therapy experiment, marking the first
death attributed by doctors to a burgeoning field of research that seeks to cure
people by giving them new genes.

   The death is the latest in a series of setbacks for a promising approach that
has so far failed to deliver its first cure and that has been criticized as
moving too quickly from the laboratory bench to the bedside.

      Some members of a federal advisory committee that approved the study had
expressed concerns about the experiment because they felt it posed unduly
serious risks and included people who were already being treated successfully
with conventional therapy.
   Jesse Gelsinger, a high school graduate who had suffered on and off from a
serious genetic disorder that often leads to coma and death in childhood, died
Sept. 17 after undergoing an experimental therapy administered at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, university and federal officials
said Tuesday.
   Scientists and doctors involved in the case said Gelsinger succumbed over a
four-day period after doctors infused a batch of genetically engineered
viruses into his liver at the highest dose allowed under an experimental
protocol approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
   The experiment, the first in which such a virus was shot directly into the
liver's blood supply, has been halted pending an investigation, and federal
officials Wednesday will send out letters to the more than 100 researchers in
the country conducting human research with similar viruses, asking them to
report any evidence of trouble. Seventeen other University of Pennsylvania
patients who received various doses of the virus before Gelsinger had no
notable problems, and a few improved.
   "This was a tragic unexpected event," said James Wilson, director of the
university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy. "I hope in a month we'll have
looked at every angle so we can share with whomever is interested in listening
what we've learned from this."
   Researchers and officials familiar with the case said they had few clues
about what may have triggered the death, so its impact on the field of gene
therapy remained uncertain. Thousands of U.S. patients have been treated with
various kinds of gene therapy, an experimental technique in which doctors use
live viruses and other means to transport potentially therapeutic genes into
the body.
   The class of virus used in the Philadelphia experiment, a modified version
of a cold virus called an adenovirus, is the most common type of gene therapy
virus in use today. But the study had raised several novel concerns when the
researchers began their long effort to gain federal approval to conduct the
work.
   Typically gene therapy studies involve desperately ill patients who have
failed conventional therapy. But this one included healthy people and people
who were already being treated successfully with dietary and drug regimens.
The method was controversial because the genetically altered virus, which
often causes severe inflammation, risked exacerbating the disease in some
patients when it was injected directly into their livers, while promising at
best only a transient improvement.
   Gelsinger suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a genetic
disorder that affects mostly boys. The disease blocks the body's ability to
break down ammonia, a normal byproduct of metabolism, and often causes death
soon after birth.
   Gelsinger was born with a mild form of the disease and had it well under
control during the past year with drugs and a strict non-protein diet, said
his father, Paul Gelsinger, of Tucson.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1999


                             1327 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                  September 29, 1999, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1002 words

HEADLINE: Teen Dies Undergoing Experimental Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:



   An 18-year-old Arizona man with a rare metabolic disease has died while
participating in a controversial gene therapy experiment, marking the first
death attributed by doctors to a burgeoning field of research that seeks to cure
people by giving them new genes.

   The death is the latest in a series of setbacks for a promising approach that
has so far failed to deliver its first cure and that has been criticized as
moving too quickly from the laboratory bench to the bedside.

   Some members of a federal advisory committee that approved the study had
expressed concerns about the experiment because they felt it posed unduly
serious risks and included people who were already being treated successfully
with conventional therapy.

   Jesse Gelsinger, a high school graduate who had suffered on and off from a
serious genetic disorder that often leads to coma and death in childhood, died
Sept. 17 after undergoing an experimental therapy administered at the University
of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, university and federal officials said
yesterday.

   Scientists and doctors involved in the case said Gelsinger succumbed over a
four-day period after doctors infused a batch of genetically engineered viruses
into his liver at the highest dose allowed under an experimental protocol
approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

   The experiment, the first in which such a virus was shot directly into the
liver's blood supply, has been halted pending an investigation, and federal
officials today will send out letters to the more than 100 researchers in the
country conducting human research with similar viruses, asking them to report
any evidence of trouble. Seventeen other University of Pennsylvania patients who
received various doses of the virus before Gelsinger had no notable problems,
and a few improved.

   "This was a tragic unexpected event," said James M. Wilson, director of the
university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy. "I hope in a month we'll have
looked at every angle so we can share with whomever is interested in listening
what we've learned from this."

   Researchers and officials familiar with the case said they had few clues
about what may have triggered the death, so its impact on the field of gene
therapy remained uncertain. Thousands of U.S. patients have been treated with
various kinds of gene therapy, an experimental technique in which doctors use
live viruses and other means to transport potentially therapeutic genes into the
body.

   The class of virus used in the Philadelphia experiment, a modified version of
a cold virus called an adenovirus, is the most common type of gene therapy virus
in use today. But the study had raised several novel concerns when the
researchers began their long effort to gain federal approval to conduct the
work.

   Typically gene therapy studies involve desperately ill patients who have
failed conventional therapy. But this one included healthy people and people who
were already being treated successfully with dietary and drug regimens. The
method was controversial because the genetically altered virus, which often
causes severe inflammation, risked exacerbating the disease in some patients
when it was injected directly into their livers, while promising at best only a
transient improvement.

   Gelsinger suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a
genetic disorder that affects mostly boys. The disease blocks the body's ability
to break down ammonia, a normal byproduct of metabolism, and often causes death
soon after birth.

   Gelsinger was born with a mild form of the disease and had it well under
control during the past year with drugs and a strict non-protein diet, said his
father, Paul Gelsinger, of Tucson. But he volunteered in the hope that it might
lead to a cure that would benefit him and children with more deadly forms of the
disease.

   "I lost a hero," Paul Gelsinger said.

   Gelsinger said he is not angry at the researchers. "They're as hurt as I am.
They've promised full disclosure."

   At the same time, he said, "I've got a ton of questions for them."

   Among them, Paul Gelsinger said, was why they accepted his son as a subject
when they knew that he had a different form of the disease than most affected
individuals.

   Mark Batshaw, the study's principal investigator and now chairman of
pediatrics at the George Washington University Medical School, yesterday
confirmed that Gelsinger did not have the usual inherited form of OTC
deficiency. Typically it is caused by a tiny missing piece of genetic material
passed along from the mother, but Jesse Gelsinger's form was caused by a much
larger deletion that occurred after he was conceived.

   Perhaps because of that difference, Gelsinger's liver functioned at an
especially low efficiency level -- lower than anyone else in the clinical test
even though he was healthier than many others with the disease.

   Batshaw and other doctors involved in the case said they did not know if that
difference left Gelsinger more susceptible to fatal liver damage from the
therapy. They said when the trial started, they had no reason to believe so, and
had some reason to believe he might benefit more than most. That question will
be among many it the things they will now investigate.

   Whatever the reason, his liver went into a steep decline the day after
getting the virus infusion, which was meant to deliver a gene that would help
him make the enzyme he lacked. Other organs progressively failed over the next
three days, including much of his brain.

   "By Friday morning, studies suggested that even if -- and this was a big 'if'
-- he were able to come through the multiple organ system failure, the chances
that Jesse would be able to be Jesse again were essentially zero," said Steven
Raper, a Penn surgeon involved in the clinical trial.

   The team recommended to the young man's father that they withdraw life
support equipment, and he agreed.


   Staff researcher Alice Crites contributed to this report.


LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1999


                             1328 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       September 28, 1999, Tuesday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,6A

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: Blocking enzyme stops cancer's growth, study finds; New process could
lead to treatment of disease

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Researchers have found that blocking production of an enzyme
interferes with the ability of many cancers to reproduce, a step that could lead
to treatments for the disease.

    In laboratory experiments, the scientists prevented cancer cells from
producing the enzyme telomerase, which helps the cells grow without limit. That
resulted in the cells stopping their reproduction and dying.

    "We haven't developed a chemical, a therapeutic drug," stressed Dr. Robert
Weinberg of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass.,
a member of the research group. He added that the method used in the laboratory
study is not practical for use in humans.

    But, Weinberg said, the findings being published in the October issue of the
journal Nature Medicine point the way for pharmaceutical companies to search for
drugs that do the same thing.

    Dr. Jerry Shay of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in
Dallas called the report "very dramatic proof of the principle that inhibiting
telomerase may in fact lead to the death of cancer cells."

    Shay, a leading cancer researcher, was not a member of Weinberg's research
team.

    In normal human cells, structures called telomeres protect the ends of the
DNA that codes the cell's purpose. Each time the cell reproduces, the telomeres
shrink slightly, until they reach a critical length that stops the cell from
reproducing and it dies.

    Scientists have learned that from 80 percent to 90 percent of cancer cells
have developed the ability to produce the enzyme telomerase, which protects the
telomeres, allowing the cell to keep reproducing indefinitely, growing into a
tumor. These cells produce a chemical called hTERT that provides a template for
the creation of telomerase.

    Weinberg and his fellow researchers were able to alter hTERT into a form
that blocks telomerase production, and in laboratory experiments they inserted
the so-called negative-hTERT into human colon, ovarian and two types of breast
cancers.

    With the negative hTERT present, the cells stopped producing telomerase,
their telomeres began to shrink with each reproduction and the cells eventually
stopped reproducing and died.

    When mice were injected with the treated cells, tumors failed to develop.
Mice injected with untreated versions of the same cells developed cancer.

    Weinberg's team used a form of gene therapy to introduce the negative hTERT
into the cancer cells.

    "That is practicable in a culture dish, but it isn't practicable in a living
animal bearing a tumor," he said.

    "I really believe over the next several years one company or another will
develop a chemical to interfere with this enzyme," he added. "But one has to be
very clear and explicit that such a chemical does not yet exist."

    Weinberg added that if a telomerase-interfering drug were developed, it
would need to be used with other therapy because it does not always act quickly.

    For example, in the colon cancer cells, which have short telomeres,
reproduction stopped promptly. But the breast cancer cells continued to
proliferate for 10 to 20 days before stopping and the ovarian cancer cells took
30 to 40 days to be affected.

    In many cases, he said, it would be useful to remove the bulk of the cancer
first and then use anti- telomerase therapy to clean out small remaining nests
of the disease.


LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1999


                             1329 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    September 28, 1999 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 017

LENGTH: 380 words

HEADLINE: Enzyme find may lead to new cancer treatments

BYLINE: By ED HAYWARD

BODY:

   A team of Cambridge researchers has discovered that blocking the production
of an enzyme can handcuff the ability of many types of cancers to reproduce,
opening wider a research field that could lead to new cancer-fighting drugs.

   Scientists with the Whitehead Institute for Biological Research successfully
prevented cancer cells from producing the enzyme telomerase, which helps the
cells grow without limit. Shut off the production of telomerase and cells stop
reproducing, then die.

   The gene therapy used by researchers in the lab would not work on humans. But
a pharmaceutical company could use the findings, published in October's Nature
Medicine, to engineer a chemical or therapeutic drug treatment.

   "Ultimately, the reason we do this, and we think it is important, is that it
identifies a new target to make drugs to fight cancer," said Dr. William Hahn, a
co-author of the study with Dr. Sheila Stewart. "We want to understand cancer
cells so we can learn how to stop the disease."

   Also on the Whitehead team directed by Dr. Robert Weinberg were Dr. Roderick
Beijersbergen, researchers Mary Brooks, Elinor Ng Eaton and Akiko Kurachi; Dr.
Joan Knoll and researcher Shoshana York, of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center; and researcher Matthew Meyerson of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.

   In normal human cells, structures called telomeres protect the ends of the
DNA blueprint that outlines the cell's purpose. Each time the cell reproduces,
the telomeres shrink slightly, until they get so short they stop the cell from
reproducing and it dies.

   Scientists have learned that 80 percent to 90 percent of cancer cells produce
the enzyme telomerase, which protects the telomeres. That allows indefinite cell
growth and produces a tumor.

   The research team was able to alter a chemical that helps create telomerase
and make it block production of the enzyme.

   When they injected mice with the treated cells, tumors failed to develop.
Mice injected with untreated versions of the same cells developed cancer.

   Because some telomeres are longer than others, the research killed cells for
human colon, ovarian and two types of breast cancers at different rates.

   In the colon cancer cells, which have short telomeres to begin with,
reproduction stopped promptly.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1999


                             1330 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



               September 28, 1999, TUESDAY, Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 432 words

HEADLINE: Study: Cancer cells die if enzyme is blocked

BYLINE: BY RANDOLPH E. SCHMID

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers have found that blocking production of an enzyme interferes with
the ability of many cancers to reproduce, a step that could one day lead to new
treatments for the disease.

   In laboratory experiments, the scientists prevented cancer cells from
producing the enzyme telomerase, which helps the cells grow. That resulted in
the cells stopping their reproduction and dying.

   "We haven't developed a chemical, a therapeutic drug," said Dr. Robert
Weinberg of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass.,
a member of the research group. He added that the method used in the study is
not practical for use in humans.

   But, Weinberg said, the findings being published in the October issue of the
journal Nature Medicine point the way for pharmaceutical companies to search for
drugs that do the same thing.

   Dr. Jerry Shay of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in
Dallas called the report "very dramatic proof of the principle that inhibiting
telomerase may in fact lead to the death of cancer cells."

   Shay, a leading cancer researcher, was not a member of Weinberg's research
team.

   In normal human cells, structures called telomeres protect the ends of the
DNA that codes the cell's purpose. Each time the cell reproduces, the telomeres
shrink slightly, until they reach a critical length that stops the cell from
reproducing and it dies.

   Scientists have learned that 80 percent to 90 percent of cancer cells have
developed the ability to produce the enzyme telomerase, which protects the
telomeres, allowing the cell to keep reproducing indefinitely, growing into a
tumor. These cells produce a chemical called hTERT that provides a template for
the creation of telomerase.

   Weinberg and his fellow researchers were able to alter hTERT into a negative
form that blocks telomerase production and, in laboratory experiments, they
inserted the so-called negative-hTERT into human colon, ovarian and two types of
breast cancers.

   With the negative-hTERT present, the cells stopped producing telomerase,
their telomeres began to shrink with each reproduction and the cells eventually
stopped reproducing and died.

   When they injected mice with the treated cells, tumors failed to develop.
Mice injected with untreated versions of the same cells developed cancer.

   Weinberg's team used a form of gene therapy to introduce the negative-hTERT
into the cancer cells.

   "That is practicable in a culture dish, but it isn't practicable in a living
animal bearing a tumor," he said. "That's why it's not convertible to
therapeutic potential."

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: October 01, 1999


                             1331 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                  September 28, 1999, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: TABS, Pg. G-2, HOSPITAL CHANGES

LENGTH: 1828 words

BODY:


   As the new century arrived, Pittsburgh was in the midst of a hospital boom.
During the last 15 years of the 19th century, the city saw the construction of
nine hospitals, including Allegheny General, Presbyterian and Children's.
Operating rooms sprouted in several area hospitals at the same time and, in
1896, Shadyside Hospital was the first hospital in the region to put X-ray
technology to use. The 20th century say hospitals became the primary source of
care for pregnant women, the home of technological advances such as MRIs and CT
scans and, in Pittsburgh, a key component of the region's economy.

   - Compiled by Anita Srikameswaran and Christopher Snowbeck 1896 Shadyside
Hospital is the first in the area to get an X-ray machine, a year after the
discovery of X-rays by German Wilhelm Roentgen. By 1970, Americans are receiving
an average of one X-ray exam a year, either from dentists or physicians.

   1899 Bayer Co. begins making aspirin. By the end of the century, the
medication is used not only for pain relief, but also as a treatment for heart
attacks and prevention of heart disease. In 1999, the company stops putting
cotton in the container, which had been used to keep pills from crumbling.

   1900 Karl Landsteiner discovers blood types. In 1937, the first blood bank is
set up at Cook County Hospital in Chicago.

   1906Pure Food and Drug Act establishes the U.S. Food and Drug Administration;
medications now must be proven safe and effective before they can be sold.

   1908 The University of Pittsburgh purchases the Western Pennsylvania Medical
College from West Penn Hospital for $ 100,000. Montefiore Hospital opens as a
65-bed facility in a converted mansion at the corner of Centre and Herron
avenues in the Hill District. Rabbis say the hospital is necessary because
Jewish patients are turned away elsewhere.

   1910 The Flexner Report, sponsored by the Carnegie Foundation, reviews the
performance of medical schools in the nation and fails many of them, including
Pittsburgh's. Abraham Flexner demands that medical schools be connected with
hospitals for teaching purposes and that research be conducted.

   1911 The Maples, home of politician Christopher Lyman Magee, serves as the
first site for what will become Magee-Womens Hospital, one of several
turn-of-the-century hospitals for pregnant women. The hospital's first medical
director, Dr. Charles E. Zeigler, invents an obstetrical bed with a removable
section to make deliveries easier, an umbilical clamp and, perhaps in response
to long nights attending births, the coffee percolator. Most women, however,
still give birth at home - hospitals with delivery wards are sometimes
criticized because their patients often are unwed mothers with nowhere else to
go. In 1920, just 18 percent of Pittsburgh births are in hospitals, but the
percentage jumps to 60 percent by 1933 and to 99 percent by 1997.

   1915 St. Francis Hospital is one of the first six hospitals in the country to
get an electrocardiogram, or EKG, machine. Willing subjects are few, however,
because people are afraid of being electrocuted by the contraption.

   1920 Earle Dickson, a Johnson & Johnson employee, invents the Band-Aid after
getting tired of putting gauze on his wife Josephine's frequent minor cuts from
her housekeeping work.

   1925 Veterans' Hospital is established for the care and treatment of
ex-servicemen suffering from tuberculosis, one of seven TB facilities in
Allegheny County in the first half of the century. The Aspinwall medical center
expands to a complete hospital in 1933.

   1938 In the Great Depression, hospitals are in danger of closing their doors
because of the high demand for charity care. They establish Blue Cross, a
prepayment program that, for a few pennies a day, provides hospital care when
needed. The insurance program provides financial stability to hospitals and
spurs unprecedented demand for hospital beds.

   1942 Western Psychiatric Hospital admits its first patients. Soon renamed the
Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, its researchers will be known by the
end of the century for groundbreaking work on depression, eating disorders and
sleep disturbances.

   1945 Public water systems in Newburgh, N.Y., and Grand Rapids, Mich., are
fluoridated as part of field tests by the Public Health Service, which finds a
two-third reduction in dental cavities. Now, 75 percentAllegheny County's water
supply is fluoridated, a procedure that began in the 1950s.

   1953 Francis Crick and James Watson discover the double-helix structure of
DNA, the molecule that embodies the genetic code.

   1954 Mercy Hospital is one of the first hospitals in the nation to treat
cancer patients with cobalt 60, a radioactive isotope. Surgery remains a primary
treatment for solid tumors, but radiation, chemotherapy and bone marrow
transplants will play increasingly important roles in cancer care.

   1959 Western Pennsylvania Hospital opens the first intensive care unit in
Pittsburgh. Now patients can get round-the-clock attention from specialized
staff, greatly improving the chance of recovery from life-threatening injuries
and diseases. Critical care medicine and resuscitation practices are pioneered
by Drs. Peter Safar and Ake Grenvik at the University of Pittsburgh.

   1960 The first pacemaker is implanted to regulate the heartbeat. In 1988 at
Allegheny General Hospital, a 67-year-old Clarion County man becomes the first
U.S. patient to receive a pacemaker that adjusts the heart rate to activity
level.

   1967 Pittsburgh's first paramedics are trained through Freedom House
Ambulance Service. Ambulance services previously have been run by funeral homes
and simply provided transportation, but trained personnel who begin care before
the patient arrives at the hospital will become standard practice.

   * A man accidentally irradiated at Gulf Oil's Harmarville research facility
undergoes a successful bone marrow transplant at West Penn Hospital the city's
first marrow transplant and, almost 20 years before the Chernobyl nuclear
accident, the first ever performed to treat a radiation victim. The University
of Washington's E. Donnall Thomas directs the procedure and will later win the
Nobel prize for his pioneering bone marrow work.

   1970 The PET, or positron emission tomography, scanner is developed. Among
other things, it allows scientists to view the brain's activity while it is
performing different tasks.

   1971 West Penn is the first Pittsburgh hospital to build a heliport.

   * While munching a burger at a Big Boy restaurant in New Kensington, chemist
Paul Lauterbur gets the idea to use an old chemical analysis trick nuclear
magnetic resonance to make internal images of the body. The former Mellon
Institute chemist, on sabbatical from a New York university, invents magnetic
resonance imaging, a technique using magnetic fields instead of radiation that
will find its way into virtually every U.S. hospital.

   1974 Allegheny General Hospital gets Pennsylvania's first CT scanner, a
device developed in 1967 that uses X-rays to produce cross-sectional images of
the body's internal features.

   1978 Allegheny General introduces LifeFlight, the first air response
emergency transport team in the Northeast

   1983 Five years after the birth in Great Britain of Louise Brown, the world's
first "test-tube baby," Pittsburgh's first in-vitro baby is born at St. Clair
Memorial Hospital to parents treated by a Virginia fertility clinic.
Magee-Womens opens the region's first in-vitro fertilization clinic, with a
waiting list of 600 for the $ 5,000 procedure, in which sperm and eggs and mixed
together in the laboratory to create a human embryo.

   1984 Pennsylvania closes Dixmont State Hospital, an inpatient facility for
mental health patients named after advocate Dorothy Dix. The hospital's closing
is part of a movement to de-institutionalize mental patients following the
development of effective psychotropic drugs.

   1985 An international study headed by the University of Pittsburgh's Dr.
Bernard Fisher shows that lumpectomy a less substantial removal of breast tissue
- combined with radiation therapy is as effective as the more disfiguring
mastectomy for many cases of breast cancer. Controversy arises in 1993 when it
is revealed that a major collaborator in Fisher's study included some ineligible
patients; but the National Cancer Institute decides that the study's conclusions
remain valid.

   1987 Pitt's Dr. L. Dade Lunsford is the first in the country to use the gamma
knife, a Swedish invention that allows bloodless brain surgery by using
radiation to destroy brain tumors.

   1990 The first human gene therapy trial treats a 4-year-old Ohio girl with
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency. Both she and a second Ohio child who undergoes
gene therapy the next year remain well, but costs prohibit the therapy's
development into a routine procedure.

   1992 The University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute begins a trial to treat
cancer with genetically altered immune system cells.

   1994 Dr. John Mellors of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center leads a
multicenter trial showing that the amount of human immunodeficiency virus in the
body is a good predictor of how likely someone is to develop AIDS, a finding
that influences federal HIV treatment guidelines.

   1996 University of Pittsburgh researchers begin the world's first clinical
trial of gene therapy for rheumatoid arthritis.

   1997 The conglomeration of hospitals in Pittsburgh goes into high gear as the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Health System, based in Oakland, becomes
the largest employer in the region. By 1999, the UPMC Health System includes 16
hospitals in Western Pennsylvania.

   1998 The Pittsburgh-based National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel
Project, the same organization responsible for the lumpectomy trial, completes a
federally sponsored study showing that the drug tamoxifen can prevent some
breast cancers in high risk women.

   * The region's second-largest hospital conglomerate, based at Allegheny
General Hospital, suffers a huge setback when its parent company files for
bankruptcy with $ 1.5 billion in debts. At its height, the Allegheny Health,
Education and Research Foundation included a Philadelphia medical school, four
hospitals in the Pittsburgh area and nine in Philadelphia. Drexel University
takes over the medical school and the Philadelphia hospitals are sold to a
for-profit company. The financially troubled Pittsburgh hospitals, not part of
the bankruptcy filing, will be bailed out a year later by West Penn Hospital,
backed by insurance giant Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield.

   * UPMC's Dr. Douglas Kondziolka performs the world's first implant of brain
cells in hopes of repairing stroke damage.

   1999 University of Pittsburgh Medical Center is ranked 12th among the
nation's best hospitals in an annual review by U.S. News and World Report.

   A PITTSBURGH CENTURY FOUNDATIONS FOR THE FUTURE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 7, PHOTO: ALLEGHENY GENERAL HOSPITAL ARCHIVES: This undated photo
from; Allegheny General Hospital shows the state of the art in surgery as
Pittsburgh; entered the 20th Century. The anesthesiologist cups the patient's
head, with a; bottle of chloroform sitting nearby, while the surgeons and nurses
prepare for; the operation in a setting that was clean by the standards of the
day, but; still did not require masks or gloves.; PHOTO: ALLEGHENY GENERAL:
Helicopter ambulance services were pioneered in the; northeastern United States
by Allegheny General Hospital's LifeFlight service.; This photo from the late
1970s shows the hospital's first helicopter and; flight nurse crew. Today,
medical helicopters and hospital helipads are; commonplace.; PHOTO: Matt
Freed/Post-Gazette: Blood banks were not created until the late; 1930s, about
four decades after Karl Landsteiner had discovered blood types.; Today, they are
indispensable for providing transfusions to surgery, dialysis; and other
patients. At this Central Blood Bank drive in the Hill District,; Lillian Giles
grimaces as Joyce Herman inserts the needle into her arm.; PHOTO: Post-Gazette
Archives: A former Mellon Institute scientist, Paul; Lauterbur, came up with the
idea for the magnetic resonance imaging scanner; while eating at a Big Boy in
New Kensington in 1971. The device uses magnetism; to create detailed pictures
of the body's interior. In these University of; Virginia images, the patient has
inhaled helium (right) to help light up the; lungs, which normally appear as
dark shapes in a normal MRI like the one on; top.; PHOTO: 1963 photo,
Post-Gazette Archives; 1998 photo, Steve; Mellon/Post-Gazette: (For two photos)
Birth and death both moved from the; privacy of people's homes to hospitals in
this century. In a 1963 photo at; Magee-Womens Hospital (right), nurse Nancy
Hinkel holds one of the many babies; that filled the bassinets there in the very
last year of the post-World War II; baby boom. But hospitals not only handle
most normal deliveries today they; also are able to save babies born
prematurely. In this scene from last year at; West Penn Hospital, a mother
cuddles her 33-week-old daughter in the neonatal; intensive care unit.; PHOTO:
MARK MURPHY/POST-GAZETTE: Magee-Womens Hospital, because women are well;
acquainted with the statistic that breast cancer is the leading cancer killer;
of women under age 54.; PHOTO: MARK MURPHY/POST-GAZETTE: Driven partly by the
findings of Dr. Bernard; Fisher of Pittsburgh, Americans' awareness of breast
cancer has increased; exponentially in the last several decades. Today, many
hospitals offer; mammography screenings, like the one shown above at
Magee-Womens Hospital,; because women are well acquainted with the statistic
that breast cancer is the; leading cancer killer of women under age 54.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1999


                             1332 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      September 27, 1999 Monday 2D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F-08

LENGTH: 2672 words

HEADLINE: Biotech with Internet twist Gene data goes on sale online

BYLINE: By Lawrence M. Fisher, The New York Times,

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO - It might not be happy holidays for the personal  computer
industry after all.

   The end of the year was forecast to be a banner sales period  for PC makers,
with cheap computers, new models and rebates from  Internet providers luring
consumers. Fourth-quarter PC sales are  expected to rise 21 percent,
International Data Corp. said earlier  this month.

   Now, sales and profits are at risk after a magnitude-7.6  earthquake hit
Taiwan last week, shutting most of the plants where  computer chips, circuit
boards and other PC parts are made.

   Intel Corp., Advanced Micro Devices Inc., Dell Computer  Corp., Gateway Inc.
and Compaq Computer Corp. may see profits fall  below current expectations
because of rising prices and shortages  of parts that could leave them unable to
meet expected holiday  demand, analysts said.

   'A few days ago this looked like an astoundingly strong  period for PC
sales,' said analyst Drew Peck of SG Cowen  Securities, who expects to reduce
his fourth-quarter earnings  estimate of 67 cents a share for Intel. 'It's hard
to imagine that  this is not going to hurt.'

   Intel dropped $ 1.827 to $ 75.671 in trading of 62.3 million  shares, making
it the most active U.S. stock.

   Dan Niles at BancBoston Robertson Stephens added to the  concern by saying
Intel has had orders for about 2 million chips  canceled since mid-September. PC
demand may not be as strong as  expected, Niles wrote in a report to investors.

   Shares of computer makers and chipmakers have fallen in  recent days because
power outages left companies unable to predict  when full production would
resume.

   'People are in denial'

   Intel shares have fallen 11 percent since Sept. 17. Before  Friday, AMD had
dropped 15 percent. Dell, the No. 1 direct PC  seller, had declined 12 percent.
Dell rose 68.75 cents to $ 43.687  Friday, while AMD rose 18.75 cents to $
17.437.

   'People are in denial,' said Christian Koch, an analyst with  Atlanta-based
Trusco Capital Management, which has about $ 30  billion under management and
owns chipmakers such as Intel and  Texas Instruments Inc. 'It will definitely
impact Q4.'

   Koch said companies may be hoping to make up for lost revenue  later in the
fourth quarter. 'Some of the big companies will be  able to mask this dip in
production because end demand is so  strong,' Koch said.

   Though it will be several weeks before the full extent of the  damage to
production lines is known, analysts said the disruption  is likely to at least
cause shortages of key chips like graphics  accelerators and audio processors.
That will hold up production of  motherboards, the main circuit board and the
guts of a PC.

   'You may be able to produce motherboards or chips, but it  will sit there
waiting for a few parts,' said portfolio manager  Bob Finch of Aeltus Investment
Management, which owns 6.3 million  shares of Intel.

   Intel and AMD said it is too early to tell what the impact  from the quake
and the disruption of supply might mean. Both  companies said they will probably
have more information when they  report third-quarter earnings next month.

   All of the chip sets and motherboards for AMD's new Athlon  processors are
made in Taiwan, by companies including Via  Technologies Inc. and MicroStar.
Some K6 motherboard and chip sets  also are made in Taiwan by those companies,
AMD said.

   Intel has no manufacturing facilities in Taiwan, though it  does buy parts
for its motherboards from companies like Nvidia  Corp. and S3 Corp., which make
their products in Taiwan. Plus, if  PC makers and other motherboard makers can't
get parts, they won't  order processors from Intel.

   'If the supply chain is cut, Intel won't be selling any  processors - right
at a time when they were ready to exploit a  huge surge in demand,' SG Cowen
analyst Peck said. He said Intel's  fourth-quarter earnings could be lower than
third-quarter results.

   Graphics chips affected

   Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., the world's biggest  chip foundry,
expects a 10 percent decline in production for the  month because of the quake,
said Chuck Byers, a spokesman for the  company's North American unit in San
Jose, Calif. The company has  been able to ship out some finished chips that
were in the  quality-control process at the time of the quake, he said.

   A large percentage of graphics chips are made in Taiwan. As  inventories
begin to dwindle, that could leave major PC makers  searching for the devices
that drive pictures, graphics and visual  parts of software from the PC to the
computer screen.

   'There's not a lot of inventory because the graphics guys run  on such short
cycles,' said Hans Mosesmann, a Prudential  Securities analyst.

   S3 Inc., a Santa Clara, Calif.-based graphics chip and cards  design company,
said it has some inventory for big customers like  International Business
Machines Corp. and Compaq. If it takes  Taiwan chipmakers longer than five to 10
days to get up and  running, it could get dicey for everyone, said Paul
Crossley, S3  spokesman.

   'This is an event that will affect everyone in the PC  business in some form
or another,' Crossley said.

   3dfx Interactive Inc. spokesman Sean Kauppinen said his San  Jose,
Calif.-based company has about a 42-day inventory of its  latest chips and
cards.

   The No. 1 graphics card maker, Toronto-based ATI Technologies  Inc. has an
inventory, said spokesman Brian Hentschel. He could  provide no further details.

   Nvidia Corp.'s popular TNT2 graphic chips are made at TSM's  Wafertech joint
venture in Washington state. Other chips are made  in Taiwan.

   Depleting inventories

   The Santa Clara, Calif., company expects that there will be  some product
shortages in late October and early November. 'It's  too early to tell how big a
problem that might be or how it might  affect earnings,' said Michael Hara,
Nvidia vice president of  corporate marketing.

   PC makers will be hurt by rising prices for some parts as the  shortages jack
up prices of products including computer memory.  They also could report
disappointing sales if they aren't able to  get all the parts needed to make a
system.

   Almost 60 percent of all PC motherboards are made in Taiwan,  and many of the
components are manufactured there. Some of IBM and  Compaq's cheap computers are
assembled in Taiwan. Plus, as much as  70 percent of all notebook computers are
made in Taiwan, analysts  said. Notebooks were already in tight supply because
of shortages  of liquid crystal displays and some related components.

   'Taiwan's earthquake could have an impact' on fourth quarter  PC shipments,
said analyst Richard Gardner of Salomon Smith  Barney. The biggest problem for
PC makers is likely to be  shortages of chips, he said.

   Direct-sellers Dell and Gateway are likely to be hit first  because their
business models don't include carrying inventory of  parts, which helps them
keep costs down when prices for parts are  falling. Now, companies that have
some inventory will be slightly  better off if supplies are short.

   Dell carries less than a week's supply of inventory, while  No. 1 PC maker
Compaq carries about four weeks. While higher  inventories had hurt Compaq when
prices were falling rapidly and  it was stuck with older, more expensive
products, the cushion  could help it when supplies are short.

   Still, all PC makers have been working to whittle down  inventories, and
analysts said the longer the delays in getting  plants back up, the more severe
the impact.

   SAN FRANCISCO - Call it an end-of-the-century business case study.

   Pangea Systems Inc. is a small but leading company in  'bioinformatics,' a
hot new field that combines the two keystone  technologies of the 1990s -
computing and biotechnology. But its  products are expensive and difficult for
mortals to use, which  limits Pangea's potential market and reduces the
prospects for a  public stock offering.

   What to do? This being 1999, the answer if you are Pangea is  to dot.com
yourself.

   This week Pangea, which is based in Oakland, Calif., intends  to begin a
shakedown test of DoubleTwist.com, a new Web site  intended to make online
genetic and biological research fast, easy  and available to any amateur or
professional biologist. While the  test phase is available only to faculty and
students at Stanford  University, the site is scheduled to go live for general
use in  December.

   The DoubleTwist site, whose name is a play on the  double-helix structure of
DNA, holds the near-term promise of  lifting Pangea above the pack of
competitors chasing the business  opportunities in bioinformatics. But other
companies may not be  far behind. And the implications go beyond the interests
of  professional biologists and biotechnology executives.

   As more of the arcane secrets of genetics and molecular  biology become
available to the modemed masses, some industry  executives foresee the day when
an educated consumer might take a  CD-ROM containing a laboratory's rendering of
his or her genetic  profile and combine it with a Web surf through gene
libraries to  determine the person's predisposition toward adverse drug
reactions, for example, or for Alzheimer's disease, colon cancer  or other
afflictions that might eventually be treatable through  gene therapy.

   Sliding fee scale

   To promote its name and capabilities, Pangea plans to let  individuals who
make only casual use of the site have access to  its software and data base at
no charge. Heavy users and  corporations may obtain licenses to pay for access
on a sliding  fee scale - which could run tens of thousands of dollars a year
but would still be significantly less than the $ 500,000 or more  big
pharmaceutical companies pay to own the software outright.

   'The power of bioinformatics has been somewhat limited to  those who could
afford it,' said John Couch, Pangea's president  and chief executive, who was an
executive at Apple Computer in the  late 1970s and early 1980s. 'I've been
trying to figure out how to  empower the scientist the way we did computer users
at Apple in  the early days,' Couch said. 'We saw the opportunity to be the
first Web portal that enabled scientists to do molecular research.'

   Celera Genomics Group is another company that has said it  will offer its
bioinformatics tools from its Web site, although it  has not specified a launch
date.

   'This is an Internet company,' said Craig Venter, president  and chief
executive of Celera, a unit of the PE Corp., which is  based in Rockville, Md.
Scientists and nonscientists alike, he  said, will be able to use Celera's tools
to gain insights into  their genetic makeup. And as catalogs of common mutations

  correlated with disease become broadly available, he said,  individuals will
be able to make appropriate lifestyle changes or  health-care decisions. 'You'll
be able to log on to our data base  and get information about yourself,' Venter
said.   Bioinformatics  is a field that emerged from the Human Genome Project,
the  international quest to spell out the precise sequence of the three  billion
letters in the human genetic code. The first industry  spawned by the genome
project was genomics companies, which sell  data bases of individual genes whose
sequences have already been  identified or are developing drugs aimed at gene
targets. As these  efforts began to produce vast amounts of biological
information,  they needed powerful software to keep track and make sense of it
all. And so, in the early 1990s, bioinformatics was born as a tool of genomics.

   While the software created by the government-funded labs like  the Whitehead
Institute at the Massachusetts Institute of  Technology is in the public domain,
with intriguing names like  Blast and Fasta, the genomics companies, like Human
Genome  Sciences Inc. and Incyte Pharmaceuticals Inc., have kept their  tools
for use by themselves or their licensed partners. That is  Celera's primary
business as well, despite Venter's intent to  offer bioinformatics services on
the Web.

   Selling bio software

   It was not long before a few entrepreneurs and venture  capitalists saw an
opportunity in a pure-play bioinformatics  company, which would sell not genes
or data, but software. As  private companies, none of the bioinformatics players
publish  revenue figures, but most say they are between $ 5 million and $ 10
million in annual sales, and growing. Indeed, some analysts  predict a
multibillion-dollar bioinformatics market within the  next 10 years.

   'Bioinformatics is not necessarily the next wave, but the  glue that holds
everything together,' said Tim Wilson, an analyst  with S.G. Cowen. 'If you
don't get that part right, it's hard to  realize the value of genomics,' he
said. 'The opportunity is  something obvious to anyone who speaks to
pharmaceutical companies.'

   With the DoubleTwist site, according to Pangea, a researcher  would have many
of the same capabilities previously available only  to the company's big
corporate customers, which include drug  companies like Bristol-Myers Squibb and
Hoechst Marion Roussel.

   After logging on to the DoubleTwist site, a visitor could  enter a partial
sequence of a gene - some combination of the  letters A, C, T and G, which make
up the genetic alphabet - and  then search for contiguous sequences that might
lead to a  full-length gene. Or if the code of a full-length gene were known,
the researcher could ask in which tissues of the body that gene is  found or
found only when in the presence of cancer. To the extent  the answer is
available in the scientific literature, including  patent filings, the software
would retrieve it and highlight  relevant passages. Other cross-referenced data
might include  notations on what biochemical materials are required for working
  with a given gene in the laboratory.

   Such are the capabilities of the computational biology that  underlies
bioinformatics - a field that Francis Collins, director  of the Human Genome
Project for the National Institutes of Health,  says he now often counsels
promising graduate students to look to  for career opportunities.

   'I just think it is going to hit us like a freight train and  we really have
too small a supply of expertise in that area,' he  said.

   But there has been a dichotomy between the opportunity and  the market
reality for Pangea and competitors like Netgenics Inc.  of Cleveland; Informax
Inc. of Rockville, Md.; Lion Bioscience AG  of Heidelberg, Germany; Compugen
Ltd. of Tel Aviv; the Genomica  Corp. of Boulder, Colo.; and Molecular
Applications Group of Palo  Alto, Calif. Most of these companies are five years
old or more,  yet few are profitable.

   Couch, Pangea's president, said the two hurdles to expanding  the market have
been complexity and cost. Besides the $ 500,000  price for Pangea's suite of
software programs, a suite customer  must make a comparable investment in
hardware. And even though  they have a point-and-click graphical user interface,
their  sophistication has tended to restrict their use to bioinformatics
specialists within large pharmaceutical or biotechnology  companies, not to
individual research scientists without special  training.

   DoubleTwist is intended to complement rather than supplant  Pangea's
established software suites. But Couch said it was  possible that a growing
portion of the company's revenues would  come from the Web.

   Rather than buy Pangea's software suite for $ 500,000,  companies or academic
institutions could spend, say $ 10,000 a year  to provide each user access to
these programs over the Web.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The New York Times/Thor Swift Kyle Hart, Bruce Xuefeng Ling and
Brian King of Pangea Systems Inc. work on genetic database software for the
human genome.  John Couch, left, president, and Robert Williamson, senior vice
president of Pangea Systems Inc. are launching the Web site Double Twist.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 06, 1999


                             1333 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                           September 27, 1999, Monday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 056

LENGTH: 1605 words

HEADLINE: FIGHT THE GOOD FIGHT AGAINST CANCER

BYLINE: DEE COVEY CAPPS The Health Network

BODY:

   The news about cancer is mixed.

   Given the recent media focus on breast, prostate and colon cancer, it may
seem the disease is on the rise. Yet a joint report from three major cancer
organizations shows new cases actually declined 6 percent from 1990 to 1996.

   The bad news is that melanoma - potentially fatal skin cancer - is definitely
on the upswing. There are more than a hundred types of cancer, and the disease
is still a leading cause of death nationwide.

   What "flips the switch" that turns normal cells into cancerous ones? Who is
most likely to get the disease? What can be done about it?

   The human body has more than 10 trillion cells, each with a unique genetic
code to tell it what to do. Liver cells and bone cells are programmed
differently. When some cells suddenly go berserk, stop doing their designated
jobs and reproduce like crazy, it is called cancer.

   Three promising areas of experimental research involve "turning off"
misbehaving cells, identifying who is at risk, and strengthening the body's
ability to fight off the disease.

   Gene Therapy. Genes are the cells' "brains" that give the marching orders.
Researchers are injecting targeted cells with specially coded genes, hoping they
will attack cancerous cells and make them self-destruct or stop reproducing
altogether.

   "Our doctors are finishing clinical trials on a tumor-suppressor gene called
P53, which may be able to reduce or stop the spread of head and neck cancers,"
says Channing Burke, a representative of Introgen Therapies of Austin, Texas.

   Since treatment choices are now limited to removing tumors, lumps or cysts,
zapping them with radiation and giving the patient high doses of toxic drugs,
gene therapy may prove to be a safer and more effective option.

   Tumor Marker. This is a term for an early-detection blood test that screens
for substances associated with a particular cancer. There are reliable markers
for ovarian and prostate cancer; others simply indicate a higher-than-normal
risk for the disease. Rigorous research is ongoing to find reliable markers for
a wider variety of tumors.

   Targeted Immunotherapy. Doctors are now testing special vaccines to boost the
body's ability to fight cancer.

   "This is a very exciting aspect of research," says geneticist Dr. Savio Woo
of Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York. "Over 75 percent of terminal
patients do not die from their initial tumor, but from its metastasis [spread]
to other organs. Finding a way to stimulate immune cells to hunt down metastases
is the Holy Grail in cancer research."

   The trick is how to provide high doses of protein-based immune drugs without
toxic side effects, which was a problem in early trials. Investigators have seen
signs of tumor rejection in mice, but whether the treatment will work in humans
is unknown. It is being tested nationwide.

   Progress is being made, but doctors caution that the best way to avoid cancer
is to live a healthy lifestyle. For updated news on advances in cancer research,
readers can log on to thehealthnetwork.com.

   PICTURE TELLS A THOUSAND WORDS

   Cancer isn't a pretty picture, but this photo is a beauty.

   For the first time, scientists at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in
New York have taken a snapshot of the new experimental anti-tumor drug, SAHA, at
work.

   Why is this a big deal? Because now they can see how SAHA interacts with its
targets, therefore creating a more potent drug.

   The news was published in the Sept. 9 issue of Nature.


GRAPHIC: KEEPING ABREAST: Detection is still a big part of the battle against
cancer. Here is a digital mammogram from a routing breast cancer exam.
Elizabeth Lippman

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1999


                             1334 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    September 26, 1999, Sunday ,City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2469 words

HEADLINE: Reading the human genome;
DNA REVOLUTION;
Invisible to the naked eye, genes control us from before birth to old age

BYLINE: By Aaron Zitner and Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Scientists using the most powerful computers ever brought to bear on human
biology are within months of completing a first reading of the genetic "Book of
Life," the information coded in DNA that says why one person looks and acts
differently than another, why some are more prone to fall sick, and what exactly
goes awry in the body when that happens.

    This work, underway in laboratories from Cambridge to Tokyo, is almost
certain to ignite a revolution in medicine in the early 21st century.

    Such knowledge should help doctors and researchers understand more about
disease: what causes a child to develop cancer, a teenager to have
schizophrenia, and an older person to be stricken by Alzheimer's disease.

    And if researchers' highest hopes are met, knowledge of the human DNA code
will help scientists fashion novel treatments for nearly every human ailment.

    Already the new genetic information is fueling a boom in pharmaceutical and
biotechnology research. The Kendall Square area of Cambridge - next door to the
Whitehead Institute at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a key node in
the government-sponsored Human Genome Project - has become a magnet for
companies working on gene-based diagnostic tools and treatments. They are
expected to become increasingly important in the regional economy.

    By spring, the Human Genome Project will have produced a rough draft of the
human genome, what some scientists refer to as the "Book of Life," the basic
instructions for operating the human body. The complete text of all human DNA
will be posted on the Internet for anyone to use.

    "This may be the most important step we've taken in science," said James
Watson, who helped launch the new era of genetics nearly 50 years ago by
discovering, with Francis Crick, the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA.

    "We've got our instruction book: how to build the 747," Watson said. "We
can't read it all yet. But that we've evolved to where we can have the book,
that's pretty good."

    Scientists involved in the genome project say they are building a kind of
public infrastructure that will fuel a boom in medical research, just as the
interstate highway system laid the groundwork for the nation's economic growth.

    Their work will prove to be more important than splitting the atom or
putting a man on the moon, said Dr. Francis Collins, a geneticist at the
National Institutes of Health who acts as coordinator of the Human Genome
Project.

    "This is going to change the way medicine is practiced, and it will forever
alter the way biological and medical research is done," Collins said. It could
bring new treatments for every single human disease, he added.

    DNA is carried by every person, in the heart of almost every cell. It is
made up of four chemicals linked in a huge chain estimated at 3 billion
chemicals in length. Mapping it all has been a decade-long task involving
thousands of scientists in laboratories around the world. The rough draft of the
human genome will list the order of all 3 billion chemicals, but it may contain
some errors. A final version is expected in 2003.

    With the genome text in hand, Collins and others say, researchers will be
able to find all the estimated 80,000 to 140,000 human genes, or segments of DNA
that tell cells how to function. Finding the genes and understanding their work
in the body will allow scientists to develop medical treatments that attack
disease at its root cause.

    Doctors hope one day to replace the faulty genes responsible for illnesses
like cystic fibrosis. New drugs that make some genes more active and others less
active may treat hypertension, obesity, and heart disease.

    By studying genes more closely, researchers should deepen their
understanding of human behavior and mental illnesses such as schizophrenia and
manic-depressive disorder. By analyzing a person's genes, doctors might be able
to diagnose an illness long before the patient develops symptoms.

    But some see risks. Just as the World War II-era Manhattan Project brought
the risk of nuclear war to an unprepared world, the human genome project could
give scientists potent genetic tools before society has sorted out their
implications.

    As scientists fashion new treatments for cancer or obesity by manipulating
genes, they may also learn how to alter the genes that control traits such as
height, athleticism, or intelligence. Scientists have already reported
manipulating genes to make laboratory mice "smarter" and "more sociable." That
leaves society to face questions about which traits should be changed, which
left alone, and who should have power to decide.

    "Even those of us who don't take Genesis literally see a vast mystery in the
origin of our species and in each of our destinies," said Ronald Green, a
Dartmouth College professor who served as an ethicist to the Human Genome
Project.

    Now, he said, we are learning how to change, almost at will, the blueprint
for building a human being. "We can fashion new life forms; we are already doing
that," Green said. "Some of us see us taking the evolution of our species into
our own hands."

    As scientists learn to diagnose diseases by analyzing genes, the public will
have to decide what to do with the knowledge. Should a 7-year-old be told that
she may develop breast cancer at age 35 or Alzheimer's at age 70? Should her
insurance company know? What if there were no steps she could take to cut her
risk?

    US law allows companies to patent genes, but some critics argue that the
genome is a natural human resource that shouldn't be licensed to anyone
exclusively. Critics also fear that putting so much emphasis on the importance
of genes could lead people into extreme "genetic determinism" - the notion that
most human activity is dictated by genes - and prompt discrimination based on
peoples' DNA.

   A key to illness

    Genes are small sections of DNA scattered throughout the genome that tell
cells how to handle the daily tasks of life, such as reproducing, fighting
illness, and communicating with other cells. They tell an embryo how to turn
into a fetus and a child how to turn into an adult. Specifically, each gene
tells the cells how to build a protein, and proteins, in turn, are the agents
that do work in the body.

    Many illnesses can be traced to a flawed gene or set of genes, which produce
a faulty protein or too much or too little of a protein. In fact, nearly every
illness seems to have a genetic component, even those in which a person's
behavior or living conditions clearly play a role. Why does one french fry-lover
develop clogged arteries while another doesn't? Why does one asbestos factory
worker develop cancer while another remains healthy? At least in part,
scientists say, the answer is in the genes.

    It will take decades to find all the genes and learn how they function in
the body and interact with each other.So far, progress has been slow. Even
knowing which genes are responsible for cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy,
sickle cell anemia, and many other illnesses, scientists have not come up with
cures. Gene therapy, the attempt to replace faulty genes with new ones, has
still to prove successful after more than two decades of research.

    "What really bothers me is the hype going along with these projects, giving
the sense that cures are just around the corner," said Jonathan Beckwith, a
Harvard microbiologist and an advisory board member of the Council for
Responsible Genetics in Cambridge.

    But others see reason for enthusiasm. "There is a risk of us overselling the
usefulness [ of the genome] , but one doesn't have to do that, because it's
going to be just terrific," said Victor McKusick, the Johns Hopkins University
biologist sometimes called the father of genetic medicine. "It's not going to
come next year or the year after that, but the coming century is going to be a
very exciting one of profiting from the available information from the genome."

    Already, information gleaned from the project has become a valuable resource
for thousands of medical researchers, including many at Boston's hospitals and
universities.

    Nearly all big pharmaceutical companies have refocused their drug-discovery
processes around the new understanding of genes, and some - including Pfizer
Inc., Amgen Inc., Bayer AG, and Merck & Co. - have set up shop in Boston or
Cambridge or have plans to do so. Together, the two cities are becoming known as
"Genetown."

    Some 7,000 people are expected to visit Boston next March for a
biotechnology conference, making it the largest such conference ever held,
according to the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, which will host the event.

    The new genetic knowledge is also expected to add to the state's base of
25,000 biotechnology jobs. Not only are companies likely to spend millions of
dollars on using it to develop medical treatments, but they will likely hire
workers and spend money to sequence the DNA of hundreds of other organisms for
the clues they give to how human genes work. Moreover, the human genome will be
mapped again and again to find the small but significant differences in the
genetic code that make individuals vary.

    "There are going to be big changes," predicts Jonathan Rothberg, president
of the New Haven biotech company CuraGen. "The human variations we discover and
the associations we make between human genes and disease will be the basis of
medicine for the next century."

    There are several private companies trying to catalog all human genes. One
of them, Celera Genomics Group of Rockville, Md., says that it will use a
different technique than the Human Genome Project to sequence human DNA and that
it will finish the job two years before the government's final version is done.
However, unlike the Human Genome Project, Celera will charge others a fee to see
most of its data.

    William Haseltine, chairman and chief executive of Human Genome Sciences
Inc., also of Rockville, says his company has already catalogued 95 percent of
the medically useful human genes. Instead of scanning the chemical sequence of
DNA, Haseltine's company found genes by looking for the telltale signs they
leave when they are active within cells.

    "When the Human Genome Project sequence is completed, it will be a rather
meaningless footnote to a revolution that is well under way," Haseltine said.

   A road map for drug research

    Increasingly, pharmaceutical companies are using genetic research to
streamline the creation of new drugs.

    In the past, developing new drugs was an expensive and tedious process of
trial and error, taking many years and costing hundreds of millions of dollars.
Often the drugs were discovered haphazardly through their effects on patients
who took them for other reasons. In other cases, it required time-consuming
testing of thousands of compounds, one at a time, in animals, says Robert
Tepper, chief scientific officer of Millennium Pharmaceuticals in Cambridge.

    Now, companies like Millennium are developing techniques for testing
thousands of drugs at the same time. Those drugs can be washed across tiny "gene
chips" that contain hundreds or thousands of genes taken from cells of healthy
or ill people. All these interactions are analyzed by computers that quickly
report which drugs had the desired effect on the genes.

    A perfect example of the new approach came in an announcement last week from
scientists at the Whitehead Institute in Cambridge and Millennium
Pharmaceuticals. They said they had identified a new target for obesity therapy,
a protein in the small intestine that regulates how much fat from food is taken
up into the body. Having found that protein and the gene that causes it to be
made, the researchers will try to find a drug that blocks that process, reducing
fat uptake.

    "Drugs . . . will be more selective and less toxic, much more geared to a
specific type of a disease that you have," said Tepper. Beyond this, he said,
"we will be able to offer patients many many more tests that will help them
predict their risks and change their lifestyles" to help them avoid diseases to
which they are genetically predisposed.

    Another goal of the genome project is identifying genetic variations that
dictate differences in the way humans respond to drugs. The same drug may help
some people but not others, and in still others cause harmful side effects.

    In the not-too-distant future, people might be given a DNA test at birth and
then issued a small card or computer chip that indicates what type of health
problems they are likely to encounter. The hope is that they would be able to
make lifestyle decisions and perhaps take new preventive drugs to forestall
those problems.

    Inevitably, though, predictive tests will arrive before preventions,
creating dilemmas for patients and doctors. "We are going to be going through
hell, because we'll learn a lot about biology and physiology" but there won't be
immediate treatments, said Collins, the genome project coordinator at the
National Institutes of Health.

    The earliest effect of the genome project could come in cancer treatment, in
which many patients routinely receive chemotherapy and other painful therapies
with no benefit. By studying genes, researchers are finding that what they
thought was a single type of cancer is really a family of genetically distinct
diseases, each of which might require a different treatment.

    Already, doctors are checking the genetic signature of a tumor before
recommending treatment. Breast cancer patients who have an overabundance of a
gene called HER2 now are often given Herceptin, which blocks the gene and
prevents it from overproducing a protein that prompts tumors to spread quickly.
If HER2 is not overabundant, the woman is not a candidate for Herceptin.

    Ultimately, the work is aimed at finding new treatments for cancer. If
researchers could figure out which genes are involved, they could fashion drugs,
like Herceptin, to block a particular gene or to spur a gene to become more
active.

    "Cancer has been a black box,," said Dr. Richard Klausner, director of the
National Cancer Institute. "It's been hard to know what's going on inside and
how to fix it."

    Studying the genes that cause cancer "has been like switching on the
lights," Klausner said. "It's that dramatic."

   Reading the "Book of Life"

   Although researchers will have completed a first reading of the human genome
by spring, that will only be the beginning. It will take further work to make
this knowledge medically useful. Deciphering the 3-billion-letter code will
eventually let researchers unravel the basic mechanics of how our bodies work -
and understand the fundamental causes of disease.

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

   GLOBE STAFF GRAPHIC / SEAN MCNAUGHTON

GRAPHIC: PHOTO DIAGRAM
, 1. GLOBE PHOTO ILLUSTRATION / PHOTOS BY PHOTO RESEARCHERS
2. Robert Tepper is the chief scientific officer at Millennium Pharmaceuticals.
His company is developing techniues for testing thousands of drugs at the same
time. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / JOHN BLANDING

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1999


                             1335 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                    September 25, 1999 Saturday East Edition

SECTION: MET; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 234 words

HEADLINE: CONGRATS

BODY:

   Student wins medal for information tech

   Mount Notre Dame High School graduate Katie O'Connell, daughter of Jim and
Mimi O'Connell of Symmes Township, received the school's Medal for Excellence in
Information Technology.

   She is attending Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green, majoring in
computer applications and Web design.

   Teachers honored

   The Indian Hill Primary School's Hall of Fame honored its two retiring
teachers, Mel Reno and Mary Ann Rothe,both of Sycamore Township.

   Dr. Reno, a National Board Certified teacher, has taught kindergarten at
Indian Hill since 1985. She is a licensed Praxis assessor and developed
guidelines for the inclusion of special needs students in the district, for
which she received an award from the Hamilton County Office of Education.

   A second-grade teacher at Indian Hill since 1973, Mrs. Rothe began in the
district at Concord School and has mentored dozens of student teachers.

   UC prof wins grant

   Lyon Gleich of Mount Lookout, a professor of otolaryngology at the University
of Cincinnati, is the recipient of a two-year, $70,000 grant from the American
Head and Neck Society and the American Society of Otolaryngology for his
research on gene therapy in head and neck cancer.

   Congrats runs daily. Call: 860-7100. Fax: 860-5190. Mail: Congrats, The
Cincinnati Enquirer, Tri-County Bureau, 4820 Business Center Way, Cincinnati
45246.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2003


                             1336 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                     September 24, 1999 Friday Tris Edition

SECTION: MET; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 993 words

HEADLINE: New era begins for UC

BYLINE: TIM BONFIELD, The Cincinnati Enquirer

BODY:

   By TIM BONFIELD

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   If you're driving along Martin Luther King Drive late at night and see lights
burning through the massive, oddly shaped windows of the new Vontz Center for
Molecular Studies, think about this:

   That white-coated scientist spending the wee hours staring into a microscope
or pecking at a computer terminal could be the one who finds a breakthrough
therapy for breast cancer or Alzheimer's disease.

   High hopes for the status of a university, for the economy of a Midwestern
city, and ultimately for the legions of people stricken by cancer and other
diseases were evident at dedication ceremonies Thursday for the Vontz Center.

   The curves and bulges of the $46 million building, designed by world-renowned
architect Frank Gehry, have drawn international praise in architectural circles
and a new respect for UC from local critics who have long viewed the campus as a
stodgy jumble of concrete boxes.

   "This campus was a huge parking lot for most of its existence," said UC
President Joseph Steger. "Not much thought had been given to architecture . . .
beauty . . . or a sense of place. Now, we're starting to realize that."

   But the deeper impact of the Vontz Center will come from what goes on inside.

   None said it better than Al Vontz Jr. himself, a Cincinnati businessman whose
$5 million donation led to the building's name.

   "I'm happy I'm able to give back to my university and the city of Cincinnati
in a manner that will give them international attention," Mr. Vontz said. "I
hope the work that will be done in this building will have as great an impact as
the building has been on the architectural community."

   UC officials call the project a new gateway to the medical campus and a
symbol of a new entrepreneurial spirit in local research. Many see the basic
research to be conducted at the Vontz Center as the first step in a wider
community effort to make Greater Cincinnati a major player in the fast-growing
world of biotechnology.

   The economic potential made it worth spending more than $30 million in state
funds for the Vontz Center, said state Sen. Lou Blessing, R-Colerain Township.

   "It has been said that the government on occasion wastes money. This isn't
one of them," Mr. Blessing said.

   The 150,000-square-foot building has three floors of laboratories and offices
for researchers from five divisions of the UC Medical Center:

   The French Cancer Institute will house expanded cancer research under the
direction of Dr. Kenneth Foon, a cancer vaccine expert who was recruited to UC
last year from the University of Kentucky.

   The Hemotology-Oncology Division of Internal Medicine, another arm of cancer
research, under the direction of Dr. John Winkelmann.

   The Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, which performs a
wide range of basic medical research, under the direction of Dr. Peter
Stambrook.

   The Department of Neurology, under the direction of Dr. Frank Sharp, a
professor recently recruited from the University of California-San Francisco,
who is noted for his work in stroke, Alzheimer's and other neurological
diseases.

   The Endocrinology and Metabolism Division of Internal Medicine, under the
direction of Dr. James Fagin.

   The new building thrills Dr. Larry Sherman, a researcher in the cell biology
division who is working on genetic therapy ideas for breast cancer.

   He looks forward to having more space to work, more money for the best
equipment, plus an open laboratory layout that encourages collaboration among
scientists who previously had little personal contact.

   In fact, its users raved almost as much about the modular lab layout --
designed by Earl Walls -- as they did about Mr. Gehry's overall architectural
statement.

   The most unusual aspect of the Vontz Center is the extra-thick "floors"
between the research levels, which Mr. Walls calls interstitial spaces.

   Rather than cramming miles of pipes, wires, and air ducts into narrow
crawl-spaces between floors, the Vontz Center was designed with walk-through
utility levels between the research floors.

   It cost more to build "walk-on" ceilings, but long-term, the design will save
money by allowing rapid refitting and upgrading without the work interfering
with research projects. This will allow the building to remain modern longer,
Mr. Walls said.

   Less than 5 percent of medical lab buildings nationwide use interstitial
spaces, Mr. Walls said.

   If the lofty spaces and cutting-edge equipment aren't enough inspiration for
researchers, those who enter the Vontz Center's main lobby will pass through a
permanent display of medals and memorabilia from Cincinnati's greatest scientist
-- Albert Sabin.

   Dr. Sabin's oral polio vaccine, developed in Cincinnati, is credited with the
near-global eradication of the once-feared disease.

   The display was never intended to resolve the debate over whether Dr. Sabin's
name will stay on Cincinnati's soon-to-be-expanded convention center. But Dr.
Sabin's widow, Heloisa Sabin, said it was still a great honor to see the display
in such a "spectacular building."

   "Some of the things were difficult to give (especially Dr. Sabin's
most-prized Medal of Science)," Mrs. Sabin said. "But this is for generations to
come. Dr. Sabin would have loved this building."

   Building houses hope: Keys to cures sought

   Open house

   Ohio tax money built it. So taxpayers can go see what they're paying for. The
public is invited to tour the new Vontz Center for Molecular Studies from noon
to 4 p.m. Sunday. The building is at the northwest corner of Eden Avenue and
Martin Luther King Drive.

   Frank Gehry points out features of the building he designed to his wife,
Berta, during the formal opening on Thursday. The gateway to UC's medical
complex has curved walls and windows at odd angles.

   Visitors fill a stairway and balconies in the Vontz Center Thursday. This
view is from the top of the stairwell in a decidedly modern building.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2003


                             1337 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 24, 1999, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A11

LENGTH: 756 words

HEADLINE: ADVANCES IN GENE THERAPY CAN RENEW HOPE FOR THE SICK

BYLINE: George Johnson

BODY:


   While genetically modified foods are becoming increasingly controversial,
genetically modified humans are much in demand.

   The search for a way to introduce "healthy" genes into humans that lack them
has gone on for 35 years. A trio of Nobel Prize winners (Ed Tatum, Joshua
Lederberg and Arthur Kornberg) suggested in 1964 that it should be possible to
cure often-fatal genetic disorders like cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and
multiple sclerosis - just by replacing the defective gene with a functional one.

   To a modern ear conditioned by the success of gene technology in agriculture,
such gene therapy sounds direct and simple, but it has not proved to be so. Like
a well-crafted play, the gene therapy saga has an exciting beginning, a
catastrophic letdown and a hopeful rebirth.

   The exciting beginning was in 1990, when two teenage girls were cured of a
rare, sometimes-fatal blood disorder due to a defective gene for the enzyme
adenosine deaminase. Scientists isolated working copies of this gene and
introduced them into bone marrow cells taken from the girls. The gene-modified
bone marrow cells were allowed to proliferate, then injected back into the
girls. The girls recovered, and stayed healthy. For the first time, a genetic
disorder was cured by gene therapy.

   Like hounds to a hot scent, researchers set out to apply the new approach to
one of the big killers, cystic fibrosis. This is the place in the gene therapy
saga where the catastrophic letdown occurs.

   The defective gene, labeled CFTR, had been isolated in 1989. In 1995
scientists placed healthy copies of the CFTR gene into adenovirus, a virus that
causes colds. They then squirted the gene-bearing virus into the lungs of cystic
fibrosis patients. The well-publicized experiment had worked fine in preliminary
trials with mice, and the world looked on, confident of success.

   For eight weeks the gene therapy did seem successful. Then disaster. The
gene-modified cells in the patients' lungs came under attack by the patients'
own immune systems. The "healthy" CFTR genes were lost, and with them any chance
of a cure.

   Other attempts at gene therapy met with similar results, eight weeks of hope
followed by failure. In retrospect, the problem with these early attempts seems
predictable, although it wasn't obvious then. Adenovirus causes colds.

   Do you know anyone who has never had a cold? All of us have antibodies
directed against adenovirus, from previous contact with it. We were introducing
therapeutic genes in a vector, or carrier, that our bodies are primed to
destroy.

   In 1995 the newly appointed head of the National Institutes of Health, Harold
Varmus, held a comprehensive review and then called a halt to all further human
clinical trials of gene therapy. "Go back to work in the laboratory," he told
researchers, "until you get a vector that works."

   Now it looks like we have one. This new gene-carrier is a tiny virus called
adeno-associated virus, or AAV. It has only two genes, both of which can be
removed. The shell that remains is still quite infective, and can carry human
genes into patients. Importantly, AAV does not elicit a strong immune response -
cells infected with AAV are not eliminated by a patient's immune system.

   This summer AAV successfully cured anemia in rhesus monkeys. In mammals, red
blood cell production is stimulated by a protein called erythropoietin, or EPO.
People with anemia (that is, low counts of red blood cells) get regular
injections of EPO. Using AAV to carry a souped-up EPO gene into the monkeys,
scientists were able to greatly elevate their red blood cell counts, curing the
monkeys of anemia - and they stayed cured.

   A similar experiment using AAV cured dogs of an eye disease called retinitis
pigmentosa. These dogs lacked a gene for an enzyme necessary for proper pigment
production in the retina and were blind. Injection of AAV bearing the needed
genes into the fluid-filled compartment behind the retina restored their sight.

   This is the hopeful rebirth of the gene therapy saga. Human clinical trials
are now under way again.

   Late this summer, scientists performed the first gene therapy experiment for
muscular dystrophy, injecting genes into a 35-year old South Dakota man. He is
an early traveler on what is likely to become a well-worn therapeutic highway.
Trials are also under way for cystic fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis, hemophilia
and a wide variety of cancers. The way seems open, the possibility of progress
once again tantalizingly close.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1999


                             1338 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 23, 1999, Thursday ,City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: Cell therapy may help fight muscle disease

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A finding by researchers at Children's Hospital suggests that bone marrow
transplants might be a new strategy for restoring strength to patients with
muscular dystrophy and other muscle-wasting diseases.

    In very preliminary experiments, the scientists infused mice weakened by
muscular dystrophy with bone marrow stem cells taken from healthy donor mice.

    As expected, the stem cells generated new bone marrow and blood cells in the
sick mice, whose own bone marrow had been destroyed with radiation. The surprise
was that the stem cells also generated healthy, mature muscle cells that found
their way through the blood stream to the ravaged skeletal muscles of the mice,
and, to a small degree, restored them.

    If these immature bone marrow stem cells can give rise to muscle cells, they
might also prove to be a source of repair cells for other kinds of tissues in
the body, say the scientists, led by Richard Mulligan and Louis Kunkel of
Children's and Harvard Medical School. This line of research could create a new
kind of stem cell therapy for a range of disorders, they said.

    Emanuela Gussoni, a biologist in Kunkel's lab and lead author on the paper
in today's issue of the journal Nature, said the findings are important because
"in adult tissues we may have a reservoir of stem cells that has more potential
than we think" to differentiate into other types of cells.

    One implication is that instead of having to obtain stem cells from embryos,
with all the ethical questions that entails, researchers may be able to use bone
marrow cells as versatile "pluripotent" cells in developing repairs for diseased
tissues.

    In a related, reverse experiment, Gussoni and her colleagues isolated muscle
stem cells from mice and showed that they could generate adult muscle cells, as
expected, but could also give rise to bone marrow cells.

    What prompted some of the muscle stem cells to take the bone marrow pathway
isn't known - just as scientists can't say why some of the bone marrow cells in
the first experiment became muscle cells. But they suspect that these biological
transformations are made in response to some signals from the body, perhaps
calling out for help in repairing tissues.

    Dr. Leon Charash, chairman of the medical advisory committee of the Muscular
Dystrophy Association, called the findings "exciting" because "the work may
eventually lead to an unanticipated treatment approach for all the muscles
ravaged by neuromuscular disease."

    Muscular dystrophies affect some 250,000 Americans. In 1986, Kunkel
identified the gene causing Duchenne muscular dystrophy, or DMD, which affects
mainly boys and is ultimately fatal. Kunkel and his colleagues also identified
the protein made by the normal DMD gene, and named it dystrophin. The muscles of
DMD patients decay because they lack dystrophin.

    The gene discovery prompted a series of unsuccessful efforts to restore DMD
patients' muscles. One tack has been to take donor muscle cells, called
myoblasts, and transplant them into patients' muscles. This takes hundreds or
thousands of separate injections, and has not been proven to increase strength.

    Another tack uses viruses to carry the dystrophin gene into patients'
muscles. But this approach has suffered from a larger problem in gene therapy,
that the patient's immune system attacks the foreign virus and genes and
destroys them.

    Against this background, the new experiments are encouraging because the
stem cells are the patient's own, and because the cells are carried throughout
the muscles via blood vessels.

    The existence of the stem cells that proved so versatile in the experiment
had been known for several years. They are even more immature, or "primative,"
than the stem cells used in current bone marrow therapy.

    Mulligan, who heads the gene therapy program at Harvard and its affiliated
hospitals, refined a laboratory method for sorting out the special stem cells, a
rare population called SP stem cells.

    The results reported today, he said in a recent interview, "tell us that we
may want to look in far greater detail at the possibility of bone marrow
transplantation used to treat a range of diseases affecting the heart, pancreas,
liver, and so forth."

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1999


                             1339 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 23, 1999, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 145 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
 SCIENCE IN BRIEF;
 NEW GENE THERAPY METHOD FOR MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY UNCOVERED, BUT HURDLES REMAIN

BODY:


   Bone marrow transplants using stem cells can insert a missing protein into
muscles in mice with muscular dystrophy, Boston researchers report in today's
Nature. The achievement may open the door to a new way to carry out gene therapy
for muscular dystrophy and other diseases, but the risks from the procedure as
it now stands are far greater than any potential benefits, according to the
researchers.

   Molecular biologists Richard Mulligan and Louis Kunkel of Boston's Children's
Hospital were surprised to find that the transplants introduced the dystrophin
gene into muscle tissue. But not enough was introduced to provide therapeutic
benefit, they said. The treatment also requires irradiating the mice to destroy
their natural bone marrow--a process that is not likely to be attempted in
children.

   Compiled by Times medical writer Thomas H. Maugh II

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1999


                             1340 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                 September 22, 1999, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1126 words

HEADLINE: CANCER CENTER HEADS FOR THE TOP

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   A groundbreaking achievement in cancer research occurs today, but this one
doesn't involve lab mice, new drugs or miraculous cures.

   At least, not yet.

   If all goes as planned, the University of Pittsburgh's Cancer Institute will
break through to join the ranks of the nation's top-notch research and medical
centers within just five years.

   This afternoon, ground will be broken for construction of the $ 104 million
Hillman Cancer Center, a 355,000-square-foot facility dedicated to cutting-edge
research and outpatient services for cancer patients. The center is named for
businessman Henry Hillman, who is providing it with $ 10 million.

   Once work is completed on the complex, all University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute programs that are now scattered throughout Oakland will be brought
under one roof, across the street from UPMC Shadyside.

   UPMC envisions a future in which the Hillman Cancer Center will be as
familiar a name as Houston's M.D. Anderson and New York's Memorial
Sloane-Kettering. Both institutions are known not only for research advances,
but also for patient services.

   "We want people to come to Pittsburgh for cancer treatment as they have for
transplants, as they do in certain neurosurgical areas," said Jeffrey Romoff,
president of the UPMC Health System. "We want people to come from all over the
world for something unique that Pittsburgh provides and that we provide."

   Officials plan to recruit more than 250 scientists, physicians and other
health care workers for the Hillman Cancer Center, adding to the 600
professionals already on staff. The number of patients seen at the institute has
been increasing by 10 to 15 percent every year. Staff expansion should allow
patient volume to grow by as much as 30 percent a year.

   According to Dr. Ronald Herberman, the institute's director, 50,000 people a
year will be seeing UPCI specialists by the time the center opens.

   "The central part of our vision is to be able to offer highly innovative
approaches in prevention, diagnosis and treatment, deliver best current state of
cancer care, and also be at the forefront," he said.

   Emphasis will be placed on developing expertise in prostate cancer, bone
marrow transplants, leukemia and lymphoma, as well as on building on already
strong programs for lung cancer and colorectal cancer.

   The cancer institute has received more than $ 93 million this year from the
National Cancer Institute, foundations and medical research companies. Of the
institutions sponsored by NCI, the Pittsburgh center is ranked 15th with $ 23
million in funding.

   In the early 1990s, UPCI was one of only two centers given federal approval
to use gene therapy for cancer treatment.

   Herberman said that new biotechnology companies will likely spring from the
cancer center's growth and with that, new jobs would also be created. Every
year, one or two ventures start up from UPCI research, he said. The institute
currently has $ 5 million in research agreements with industry.

   Hillman said that his company, which invests in a wide range of businesses,
would not invest in enterprises that arise from the new center.

   "A couple of times we've been asked if we'd be interested in doing something
with an institution where we have been involved from a charitable standpoint,"
he explained. "We've turned down the commercial opportunity because we never
would want to have any body think there's a conflict."

   The Hillman Co. has invested in biotechnology concerns partially because of
an interest in scientific matters.

   "I've been kind of a medical buff for many years," Hillman said. At one time,
he was a member of the board of directors at Merck, the pharmaceutical giant.
"Listening to some of the work that they were doing and going to their
laboratories and having certain things explained was a wonderful experience," he
said.

   The $ 10 million donation to the cancer center project is the largest single
gift the family has made to the medical community in its 100-year history of
contributions.

   "We wanted to make a statement that we were believers in this," Hillman said.
"Because of all the past connections, it seemed like a very appropriate thing to
do."

   The ties between the Hillmans and the local medical community are many.
Hillman was a longtime trustee of the University of Pittsburgh and of Children's
Hospital. His uncle, brother-in-law and cousin served as trustees for Shadyside
Hospital. His wife, Elsie Hillman, has been on the board of the Cancer Institute
since its inception 14 years ago.

   Hillman said he could not pass up the opportunity to bring two of those
interests, UPMC Shadyside and the Cancer Institute, closer together. The
hospital will provide beds for patients who need to stay and services like
radiation therapy. The center will handle outpatient visits and provide lab and
research facilities. The buildings will be connected by a skybridge over Centre
Avenue.

"It just impressed us that this was one of the happiest alliances that could
happen in Pittsburgh, which will just be good for everyone," he said. "People
don't appreciate the really far-reaching importance. Pittsburgh is, and can be
even more so, one of the leaders in this field."

   Research leaders

The University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute has provided significant advances
in the understanding and treatment of cancers. Here are some of the scientists
who currently lead its research teams:

Donald L. Trump, M.D., deputy director of clinical investigations, oversees all
the oncology programs. His own research interests lie in new approaches to
prostate cancer, particularly in the ability of vitamin D and similar compounds
to slow progression of the disease in late stages.

John Kirkwood, M.D., director of UPCI's Melanoma Center, led a national study of
alpha-interferon 2b, which reduces the risk of recurrence in melanoma patients
who, despite surgical removal of their lesions, were very likely to develop more
disease. It was the first adjuvant melanoma therapy to be federally approved. He
is now comparing this drug to a vaccine that could prevent melanoma recurrence.

Olivera Finn, Ph.D., director of UPCI's Immunology Program, was the first to
study a cancer treatment vaccine made of a synthetic protein fragment. Early
trials of the vaccine are under way for pancreatic, breast and colon cancer.

   Michael T. Lotze, M.D.,co-director of UPCI's biological therapeutics program,
is renowned for applications of cancer vaccines and gene therapies. In the early
1990s, UPCI was one of two centers to be federally approved to carry out gene
therapy trials for cancer. Lotze has pioneered the use of immune system cells
called dendritic cells for cancer treatment.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 2, DRAWING, MAP, PHOTO: 1989 photo; John Kirkwood, M.D.; PHOTO:
Olivera Finn, Ph.D.; DRAWING: Cutting-edge research; An Architect's rendering of
the cancer center; seen from Centre Avenue; MAP: (Site of new Hillman Cancer
Center)

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1999


                             1341 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                 September 20, 1999 Monday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: VALLEY AND STATE; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 949 words

HEADLINE: SAVING UMBILICAL BLOOD: MEDICAL BOON OR USELESS? LITTLE KNOWN ABOUT
RESULTS OF COSTLY PROCESS

BYLINE: By Kerry Fehr-Snyder, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   With each passing day, Susan Luchenta frets. Nearly halfway through
herpregnancy, she worries she's missing the chance to donate her umbilical
cordfor potentially groundbreaking genetic research.

   "To just throw it away, to waste it instead of using it to the
fullestcapacity, it just breaks my heart," said Luchenta, 29, an IBM employee
inPhoenix.

   But whether Luchenta really has reason to lament remains a matter ofdispute
in the medical community.

   Umbilical cord blood may be the answer to genetic maladies and the
latestcure-all for patients with certain cancers and blood disorders.

   Or it may be merely a high-tech medical fad, an "investigational" -
andexpensive - alternative to bone-marrow transplants that is making money for
afew well-placed companies.

   What everyone does agree on is that "stem cells" from umbilical cords arethe
building blocks of all blood cells: red, white and platelets.

   Stem cells can be extracted from umbilical cords immediately after
birth,stored in liquid nitrogen and later thawed for use.

   While some labs across the country will store and harvest umbilical cordblood
for public use, the only lab in Arizona won't. Instead, it wantspatients to bank
cord blood for themselves.

   The problem, according to David Harris of the University of Arizona's
cordblood bank, is that more individuals want to donate than the lab can afford.

   Private cord blood storage runs about $1,395, plus $95 a year. Donated
cordblood must undergo a battery of tests that can double that amount.

   "The cost to store it is minimal; the cost to obtain it, process it,
etc.,runs $2,000," Harris said. "For donations, we have to do additional
testingand typing that you wouldn't do with a family sample."

   The Tucson bank, which is run by a California company called Cord
BloodRegistry, has accepted donated cord blood samples in the past -- 2,500
since1992. But the vast majority of samples -- 16,000 -- have been stored
byfamilies for private use.

   "You see people who've had a history in their family of cancer or
certainother diseases, and they store it as a hedge against that coming up
again,"Harris said.

   Even Harris, who provides lab work for Cord Blood Registry, banked
hischildren's cord blood, just in case.

   "Having worked in this field for a number of years, it was an opportunityI
couldn't let pass," he said. "It would be very difficult to say why Ididn't do
it."

   Which raises the question: What does the medical community know that therest
of us don't?

   "The big thing will be gene therapy, inserting new genes into stem cellsand
giving them back to donors to repair their own genetic problems," Harrissaid.

   But private storage is a costly proposition, ranging from $1,000 to $1,500up
front plus annual maintenance fees. And in most cases, insurance companieswon't
cover the cost.

   And the American Academy of Pediatrics stated in July that there's nostrong
evidence to recommend routine cord blood banking for a child's futureuse.

   "Private storage of cord blood as 'biological insurance' is unwise,"
theacademy concluded.

   The exception would be if there's a family member with a current orpotential
need for a stem cell transplantation.

   But money is just one downside to storing cord blood for private use.

   Among other negatives:

   / The odds that someone will need their own cord blood range from 1 in1,000
to 1 in 200,000. By comparison, the chances of getting struck bylightning are 1
in 30,000.

   / The effectiveness of using your own cord blood to cure leukemia,
forexample, is unclear because if your own immune system failed you once,
itcould fail you again.

   / The length of time cord blood can be stored and still be usable is
notknown.

   / Cord-blood transplants in adults aren't as effective because of both
theamount of blood that is needed and the inability of "mature" blood cells
totake up donor cells.

   / Success rates of cord-blood transplants from a donor to an
unrelatedrecipient aren't as good as with related donors and recipients.

   "Weighing everything, it's hard to see the real advantage," said Dr.Michael
Graham, a pediatric oncologist at the University Medical Center inTucson.

   "If it were readily available and inexpensive, I would say everyone shoulddo
it. But it's not."

   But even critics of cord blood banking admit that the practice has
somemerits.

   "No human diseases are being treated yet, but it's conceivable that cordblood
could be a better vehicle for treating genetic diseases than your ownbone
marrow," Graham said.

   LeeAnn Jensen, an immunologist at the National Institute of Health, agreed.

   "Just like we didn't envision the powers of PCs 30 years ago, we may notbe
seeing all the uses of cord blood yet," she said.

   The NIH is funding a $20 million study to determine the effectiveness ofcord
blood transplants between unrelated donors and recipients.

   Because the genetic matches required in cord blood are less stringent thanfor
bone marrow, it is easier and quicker to find donors whose blood can beused.
That's especially true for Black patients and other minorities whogenerally have
trouble finding a good bone-marrow match.

   Children under age 1 who receive cord-blood transplants have a 90 percentrate
of "event-free" survival. For those under the age of 2, the rate is 80percent.
For those under 10, the rate is 60 percent.

   At 10 and over, the rate drops to 40 percent.

   Meanwhile, some in the medical profession question the private
cord-bloodbanks and the ethics in selling a service few will ever need.

   "I think this is an area that should not be a profit center," Kurtzbergsaid.
"The costs should be covered, but I don't think people should makemoney off of
this."

GRAPHIC: Susan Luchenta, who is 4 1, 2 months pregnant gets a hug from her
5-year-old son, Jordan Harrison. Luchenta would like to save the umbilical cord
blood after her baby's birth, but the only lab with that capability in Arizona
requires patients to pay for storage themselves.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2005


                             1342 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 20, 1999, Monday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: D; Pg. 6 Medicine

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: OF NOTE

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Funds for gene-therapy research

   The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center will use a $ 4 million
grant to establish a new multidisciplinary program for gene-therapy research.

   The grant, awarded by the the W. M. Keck Foundation in Los Angeles, will
establish the W.M. Keck Center for Cancer Gene Therapy at M.D. Anderson. The
foundation is known for funding projects in science, engineering and medical
research.

   A vector core laboratory is one of the most significant features of the newly
funded center. Instead of having to individually produce vectors - a means of
delivering a gene to a cell - in their own laboratories, M.D. Anderson
scientists will be able to request the specialized laboratory produce them in
mass, saving time and expense.


   Heart-healthy seminar planned

   Heart disease will be the focus of discussion at a heart- health seminar
sponsored by Christus St. Joseph Hospital.

   The seminar will be held at 10 a.m. Sept. 30 at the Caroline Senior Health
Center, 5009 Caroline, Suite 201.

   Dr. Ethan Podet, a Christus St. Joseph cardiologist, will discuss abnormal
heart rhythms and the importance of cholesterol screenings.

   The hospital will also be offering free cholesterol screenings and
blood-pressure screenings after the seminar.

   To register for the seminar, or for more information, contact the hospital's
HealthPrompt line at 713-757-7575.


   Baylor professor is honored

   Dr. Joseph Jankovic, professor of neurology and director of the Parkinson's
Disease Center and Movement Disorders Clinic at Baylor College of Medicine, has
received an honorary degree from Charles University, the oldest university in
Central Europe.

   The degree is given to individuals who have made extraordinary contributions
to medicine and science.

   Jankovic is a senior attending physician at The Methodist Hospital and a
consultant at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital.


   Conference begins Sept. 24

   An estimated 1,000 cancer survivors, their families, friends and health-care
professionals will attend University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center's
annual patient conference.

   The event begins at 8 a.m. on Sept. 24 and ends at 4 p.m. on Sept. 25 at the
Houston Marriott Westside Hotel.  Entertainer Diahann Carroll, a breast-cancer
survivor, will headline the conference. Speakers will present the latest
information on research, health care and how to enhance quality of life.

   Registration is $ 60 per person and covers all meals, educational sessions
and the grand finale, a "Celebration of Life Birthday Party."

   The registration fee can be waived through M.D. Anderson's scholarship
program.

   For more information, call 713-792-2553 or 800-345-6324.


   Transplant information available

   A new database that provides key information on organ and transplant
information went online earlier this month.

   The resource, collected by the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) and
available at www.unos.org, provides information - searchable by organ type,
geographic region and individual transplant centers - includes:


   Number of people on the organ transplant waiting list.

   Number of people who die waiting for an organ.

   Demographics of the people on the waiting list, including bloods types.

   Survival rates.

   The site also includes a step-by-step introduction designed to guide patients
and their families through every stage of the organ transplant process.


   To contact us Mail information with a contact name and phone number to:
Medicine Page, Houston Chronicle, P.O. Box 4260, Houston, Texas 77210. Call
713-220-2550 or fax to 713-220-6806. Send electronic mail to medicine@chron.com.




LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1999


                             1343 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1999, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2435 words

HEADLINE: Surfing the Human Genome;
Data Bases of Genetic Code Are Moving to the Web

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 19

BODY:

   Call it an end-of-the-century business case study.

   Pangea Systems Inc. is a small but leading company in "bioinformatics," a hot
new field that combines the two keystone technologies of the 1990's -- computing
and biotechnology. But its products are expensive and difficult for mortals to
use, which limits Pangea's potential market and reduces the prospects for a
public stock offering.

   What to do? This being 1999, the answer if you are Pangea is to dot.com
yourself.

    This week Pangea, which is based in Oakland, Calif., intends to begin a
shakedown test of Doubletwist.com, a new Web site intended to make on-line
genetic and biological research fast, easy and available to any amateur or
professional biologist. While the test phase is available only to faculty and
students at Stanford University, the site is scheduled to go live for general
use in December.

   The Doubletwist site, whose name is a play on the double-helix structure of
DNA, holds the near-term promise of lifting Pangea above the pack of competitors
chasing the business opportunities in bioinformatics. But other companies may
not be far behind. And the implications go beyond the interests of professional
biologists and biotechnology executives.

   As more of the arcane secrets of genetics and molecular biology become
available to the modemed masses, some industry executives foresee the day when
an educated consumer might take a CD-ROM containing a laboratory's rendering of
his or her genetic profile, and combine it with a Web surf through gene
libraries to determine the person's predisposition toward adverse drug
reactions, for example, or for Alzheimer's disease, colon cancer or other
afflictions that might eventually be treatable through gene therapy.

   To promote its name and capabilities, Pangea plans to let individuals who
make only casual use of the site have access to its software and data base at no
charge. Heavy users and corporations may obtain licenses to pay for access on a
sliding fee scale -- which could run to tens of thousands of dollars a year, but
would still be significantly less than the $500,000 or more that Pangea now
charges big pharmaceutical companies to buy its software outright.

   "The power of bioinformatics has been somewhat limited to those who could
afford it," said John Couch, Pangea's president and chief executive, who was an
executive at Apple Computer in the late 1970's and early 1980's. "I've been
trying to figure out how to empower the scientist the way we did computer users
at Apple in the early days," Mr. Couch said. "We saw the opportunity to be the
first Web portal that enabled scientists to do molecular research."

   Celera Genomics Group is another company that has said it will offer its
bioinformatics tools from its Web site, although it has not specified a launch
date.

   "This is an Internet company," said Craig Venter, president and chief
executive of Celera, a unit of the PE Corporation, which is based in Rockville,
Md. Scientists and nonscientists alike, he said, will be able to use Celera's
tools to gain insights into their genetic makeup. And as catalogues of common
mutations correlated with disease become broadly available, he said, individuals
will be able to make appropriate life style changes or health care decisions.
"You'll be able to log on to our data base and get information about yourself,"
Mr. Venter said. "Our ultimate customer on the Internet is individuals."

   Bioinformatics is a field that emerged from the Human Genome Project, the
international quest -- which began in 1988 and is expected to be concluded in
the next two years -- to spell out the precise sequence of the three billion
letters in the human genetic code. The first industry spawned by the genome
project was genomics companies, which sell data bases of individual genes whose
sequences have already been identified or are developing drugs aimed at gene
targets. As these efforts began to produce vast amounts of biological
information, they needed powerful software to keep track and make sense of it
all. And so, in the early 1990's, bioinformatics was born as a tool of genomics.

   While the software created by the Government-funded labs like the Whitehead
Institute at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is in the public domain,
with intriguing names like Blast and Fasta, the genomics companies, like Human
Genome Sciences Inc. and Incyte Pharmaceuticals Inc., have kept their tools for
use by themselves or their licensed partners. That is Celera's primary business
as well, despite Mr. Venter's intent to offer bioinformatics services on the
Web.

   It was not long before a few entrepreneurs and venture capitalists saw an
opportunity in a pure-play bioinformatics company, which would sell not genes or
data, but software. As private companies, none of the bioinformatics players
publish revenue figures, but most say they are between $5 million and $10
million in annual sales and growing. Indeed, some analysts predict a
multibillion-dollar bioinformatics market within the next 10 years.

   "Bioinformatics is not necessarily the next wave, but the glue that holds
everything together," said Tim Wilson, an analyst with S. G. Cowen. "If you
don't get that part right, it's hard to realize the value of genomics. The
opportunity is something obvious to anyone who speaks to pharmaceutical
companies."

   With the Doubletwist site, according to Pangea, a researcher would have many
of the same capabilities previously available only to the company's big
corporate customers, which include drug companies like Bristol-Myers Squibb and
Hoechst Marion Roussel.

   After logging on to the Doubletwist site, a visitor could enter a partial
sequence of a gene -- some combination of the letters A, C, T and G, which make
up the genetic alphabet -- and then search for contiguous sequences that might
lead to a full-length gene. Or if the code of a full-length gene were known, the
researcher could ask in which tissues of the body that gene is found or found
only when in the presence of cancer. To the extent the answer is available in
the scientific literature, including patent filings, the software would retrieve
it and highlight relevant passages. Other cross-referenced data might include
notations on what biochemical materials are required for working with a given
gene in the laboratory.

   Such are the capabilities of the computational biology that underlies
bioinformatics -- a field that Francis Collins, director of the Human Genome
Project for the National Institutes of Health, says he now often counsels
promising graduate students to look to for career opportunities. "I just think
it is going to hit us like a freight train and we really have too small a supply
of expertise in that area," he said.

   But there has been a dichotomy between the opportunity and the market reality
for Pangea and competitors like Netgenics Inc. of Cleveland; Informax Inc. of
Rockville, Md.; Lion Bioscience A.G. of Heidelberg, Germany; Compugen Ltd. of
Tel Aviv; the Genomica Corporation of Boulder, Colo., and Molecular Applications
Group of Palo Alto, Calif. Most of these companies are five years old or more,
but few are yet profitable.

   Mr. Couch, Pangea's president, said the two hurdles to expanding the market
have been complexity and cost. Besides the $500,000 price for Pangea's suite of
software programs, a suite customer must make a comparable investment in
hardware. And even though they have a point-and-click graphical user interface,
like any Windows application, their sophistication has tended to restrict their
use to bioinformatics specialists within large pharmaceutical or biotechnology
companies, not to individual research scientists without special training.

   In moving to the Web, Pangea will find neighbors with some similar-sounding
offerings. This week, HySeq Inc., a genomics company in Sunnyvale, Calif., will
launch Genesolutions.com, which will sell genes and genetic information over the
Web. And there are various Web sites, for example, that freely offer
public-domain algorithms, or mathematical formulas, that can perform the basic
tasks of bioinformatics. These include a technique called clustering and
alignment, which pieces together full-length genes from the fragments spewed out
by so-called automated sequencing machines that derive their data from DNA
samples.

   But these public-domain tools tend to be difficult to use, and limited in
their application to specific gene data bases. Pangea's Doubletwist, by
contrast, will aggregate data from multiple sources, and then make it available
using software agents -- small automated software programs that will scan the
Web at a user's request and return answers to complex biological queries via
E-mail. Theses agents can update information as it becomes available, suggest
necessary laboratory supplies and provide links to vendors.

   Doubletwist is intended to complement rather than supplant Pangea's
established software suites. But Mr. Couch said it was possible that a growing
portion of the company's revenues would come from the Web rather than packaged
programs. Rather than buy Pangea's software suite for $500,000, companies or
academic institutions could spend, say $10,000 a year to provide each user
access to these programs over the Web.

   Pangea's competition in this arena is companies very much like itself: small,
financed with venture capital and possessing more programming prowess than
marketing skills. All of these companies are looking for ways to differentiate
themselves, and while an Internet presence is one way to do that, it is by no
means the only one.

   For example, the Netgenics programs run on corporate intranets, rather than
the World Wide Web. But they are built using Internet technology like the Java
programming language so that they can be easily adapted to the specific needs of
different customers. "Pangea decided they would come up with the perfect schema
for all types of drug discovery and put a nice graphic user interface on it,"
said Manuel J. Glynias, president and chief executive of Netgenics, which was
founded in 1996. "We decided there was no perfect schema because every
pharmaceutical company is different."

   Netgenics did consider a Web-based electronic commerce business model, but
decided a faster route to growth was to bundle consulting services with custom
bioinformatics software. So far, customers include Abbott Laboratories and
Pfizer. "We've very much targeted big pharma and biotech," Mr. Glynias said.
"They're the only ones who can afford it, and really the only ones it makes
sense for. At the end of the day, you've got 50 big pharma and biotech companies
and 100 medium-sized ones. It's not a big market."

   If the market is small, creating a big company requires that each sale be
large, and Netgenics bases its goals on finding at least 20 customers willing to
pay $5 million annually for its services.

   Another player, Lion Bioscience, takes that model a step further. It recently
announced a deal in which it would develop new bioinformatics systems and
identify target genes for drug development by Bayer A.G. for an investment
estimated at $100 million. The figure includes an up-front equity stake in Lion
as well as fees for use of Lion's existing information systems, research and
set-up costs for a new subsidiary to be based in Cambridge, Mass., and royalties
on drugs developed from the gene targets identified at the subsidiary.

   Lion calls its concept iBiology, and like Netgenics' approach, it uses
intranets rather than the Internet. "It goes far beyond the usual gene sequence
analysis software," said Claus Kermoser, Lion's vice president for corporate
development. "We crawl further up the value chain to include the chemical side,
and also pharmacological and toxicology data. It's not just a software package,
tools and data; it's a solution for pharmaceuticals research data management."

   In fact, Lion is actually a hybrid of pure-play bioinformatics and genomics,
because it sells gene targets along with information-processing capabilities.
Similarly, Compugen, after building a successful business selling bioinformatics
tools, has recently added a genomics thrust, selling novel gene variants the
Compugen researchers have identified with the company's tools.

   Compared with these other companies, which have aimed for a corporate
clientele, Informax has taken a vastly different tack. For six years it has sold
a program for individual scientists, Vector NTI, which is almost to biology what
desktop publishing software was to print publications. At $3,500 a user, for the
Windows or Macintosh versions, Vector NTI is not inexpensive. But because it is
a purchase that typically can be authorized at the department level, it is the
most widely used bioinformatics program in the industry. It is used at 60
pharmaceuticals companies, 250 biotechnology concerns and 500 academic
institutions.

   "We've built our franchise by meeting the needs of the bench biologist," said
Timothy Sullivan, Informax's senior vice president for marketing and sales.
"Informax took a bottom-up approach and did it well, versus Pangea and
Netgenics, who started out at the enterprise level," he said. Informax recently
introduced its own enterprise product, Software Solution for Bioscience, and
hopes to use the leverage of its existing customer base to win sales at large
companies.

   One hurdle for all of these competitors is that the large companies that are
their obvious customers often have substantial bioinformatics capabilities of
their own -- expertise that the company may even view as a proprietary
advantage.

   "You're trying to do cutting-edge research, and if you're on the leading edge
of the curve that means you also have to develop the software to do it," said
Paul Godowski, director of molecular biology at Genentech Inc., the pioneering
biotech company. "On the other hand, there are products out there from these
third-party vendors we can import for our programs. It's a mixture, and I don't
see that going away, certainly not at a place like Genentech."

   No wonder Pangea is looking to cyberspace to expand its potential audience.
"Only a few select pharmas can afford the tools, and if they can, then in some
cases they can also afford to produce their own software," Mr. Couch said. "Why
not take the infrastructure we've created, add a graphic interface that makes it
easier, and offer it directly to the scientist? We are taking the Internet,
which was originally developed to do research, and giving it back to the
researchers."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At Pangea Systems, left to right, Kyle Hart, Bruce Xuefeng Ling
and Brian King, revise genetic data base software. (Thor Swift for The New York
Times); Pangea Systems' Doubletwist is a Web version of genetics research
software designed to let a person search libraries of gene-code fragments for
matches. At the Doubletwist home page (1), a researcher would call up a form (2)
to describe the desired type of genetic data. Examples of human tissue
containing fragments of the desired code (written as combinations of the letters
A, C, G, and T) are given (3) in both tabular and graphical form. (pg. C1); John
Couch, left, president of Pangea Systems, and Robert Williamson, senior vice
president for marketing, say the Oakland, Calif., company's Web site will let
scientists do complex genetic research on line. (Thor Swift for The New York
Times)(pg. C6)

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1999


                             1344 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 20, 1999, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 963 words

HEADLINE: Science Notebook

BODY:


   Putting the 'Man' in Salamander


   All the Viagra in the world won't help a man if the woman he yearns for is
not interested in him. But there is hope. For the first time, scientists have
found a chemical compound that increases a female's "receptivity," or the speed
with which she will respond to a male's advances.

   Unfortunately for men, the compound--secreted from a gland under a male
salamander's chin--has been shown to work only on female salamanders.

   Males of the land-dwelling salamander Plethodon jordani rub their chin
secretions beneath a female's nostrils during a specialized courtship dance
known as a "tail-straddling walk," in which the two walk forward together with
the female straddling the male's tail while she rests her chin on the base of
his tail.

   Stephanie Rollmann of the University of Chicago and her colleagues isolated
the main component of the glandular secretion, a protein they call plethodontid
receptivity factor (PRF). Then the team measured how long it took for females to
be wooed by males, whose glands had been removed, when either PRF or salt water
was applied to the females' nostrils during the tail-straddling walk.

   On average, females dabbed with saline surrendered to the males after 47
minutes, while those dabbed with PRF were overcome by passion after 40 minutes,
the researchers report in the Sept. 17 Science.

   Rollmann plans to test PRF's effects on other species. But so far, she said,
none of her lab mates have tried it themselves.


   Fungi's Punching Power


   Many plant diseases are caused by fungi, which penetrate the plant's tough
outer skin, or cuticle, to feed on the soft and nutritious pulp within. Some of
these fungi gain access by secreting cuticle-dissolving enzymes, but others use
brute force to punch their way in. Now scientists have measured that battering
force directly and have found it to be surprisingly large for a supposedly
immobile life form.

   A team of physicists and biologists in Germany used a sensitive force-sensing
instrument to measure the power with which fungal cells of the species
Colletotrichum graminicola can push against a thin aluminum film. In nature, the
fungal cells (which cause a disease of corn) adhere tightly to plant leaves,
then fill with water taken up from dew drops. As they expand over the course of
two hours or so, they press with increasing force against the leaf, ultimately
bursting through the cuticle.

   The researchers found that the cells can build up astonishing internal
pressures of more than 5 megapascals, or about 30 times that found in car tires.
That translates into a force of about 17 micronewtons, more than enough to crush
the cuticle's cellular architecture.

   The work could speed development of crop-protecting fungicides that block the
pressure-building mechanism, the researchers report in the Sept. 17 Science.


   Lighting the Way to Better CDs


   Scientists have created a new kind of laser that emits pure blue light at
room temperature, a feat that could lead to the development of compact discs and
other information storage systems with much higher capacities than those
currently used.

   Today's commercial compact disc players produce sounds and visual images by
using beams of infrared light to "read" the pattern of microscopic potholes in
compact discs and CD-ROMs. Blue laser light has a shorter wavelength than
infrared, allowing it to distinguish among potholes that are much closer
together. That means a blue-laser CD player could read information packed much
more densely on a disc. But until now, blue lasers of the type used for CD
readouts worked only in supercold, subzero temperatures.

   Researchers in Japan, Germany and Italy have collaborated to make the first
"blue vertical cavity surface-emitting laser" that operates at room temperature.
The team achieved the feat by improving upon older methods of growing the
crystals that act as light-focusing mirrors in such lasers.

   The new technology could allow four times as much information to be stored
and read on a compact disc, and could drastically increase the readout speed of
digital video discs and high-resolution laser printers, the researchers report
in the Sept. 17 Science.


   Slowing the Brain's Age Decline


   Two new studies point to the possibility of slowing the natural decline in
brain function that comes with old age.

   In one study, reported in the Sept. 14 Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, researchers in California found extensive shrinkage of subcortical
neurons in old Rhesus monkeys. These brain nerve cells are not the ones usually
associated with memory and cognition, but they help coordinate the cortical
neurons that are involved in those critical processes.

   The team found that by injecting into the monkeys' brains some cells that had
been genetically engineered to secrete a nerve growth factor, the atrophied
subcortical neurons plumped up and appeared youthful again. Ongoing experiments
will tell whether the treated monkeys have better memory than their untreated
aging counterparts.

   People who don't want to wait until gene therapy is available can consider
adding more blueberries to their diets. Researchers in Boston and Denver,
working with senior citizen rats, tested the anti-aging effects of meals rich in
blueberry, strawberry or spinach extracts-- all of which contain flavonoids,
antioxidants that can prevent damage to brain cells. After eight weeks on the
special diets, the blueberry group demonstrated a notable reversal of the
normal, age-related decline in balance and coordination. And compared with rats
on conventional diets, all three groups performed better on memory tests, the
researchers report in the Sept. 15 Journal of Neuroscience.



LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1999


                             1345 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       September 19, 1999, Sunday , METRO

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1J

LENGTH: 2120 words

HEADLINE:  Model of medicine S. Texas Medical Center is aiming to reach status
ofHouston complex

BYLINE: Travis E. Poling




BODY: HOUSTON - The densely packed buildings overlooking tree-linedstreets
resemble a thriving downtown in a major city.

    But this is not downtown. It is the Texas Medical Center, a $10billion,
675-acre monument to architecture, high-tech equipment andhealers a few miles
south of downtown Houston.

    Fifty-seven years of growth, fueled by the wealth and power ofHouston's
philanthropists and corporations, has turned the medicalcenter into one of the
largest and best known in the world.

    More than 55,000 employees attend to 160,000 daily visitors to theurban
complex and its seven green parks.

    This is what the 26-year-old South Texas Medical Center in SanAntonio wants
to be when it grows up.

    By comparison, the San Antonio center has less clout with
nationalphilanthropic organizations, fewer big institutions and not as
manybig-name medical stars.

    That is all changing, said Jim Reed, chief executive officer of theSan
Antonio Medical Foundation, the non-profit overseer of theSouth Texas Medical
Center.

    San Antonio has had premier research institutions and researchersfor at
least a dozen years, Reed said, but its reputation lagsabout a decade behind.

    The growth in San Antonio has been internal with dollars scratchedout from a
small base - relative to Houston - of corporations andindividuals, federal
grants and the state.

    Nevertheless, the TMC's expansion has served as a model for SouthTexas
Medical Center's last 15 years of development as it has formany others around
the world.

    "We patterned what we did after Houston," said Clancy Woliver, whoserved as
CEO of the San Antonio Medical Foundation from 1987 untilhis retirement last
year.

    "Almost everything they were doing, we were one-third of that," hesaid of
the difference in size.

    From 1984 to 1990, San Antonio medical community leaders madeannual treks to
Houston to see how they could emulate the successof the center, said Richard
Wainerdi.

    For 15 years, Wainerdi has served as chief executive officer of
the250-employee Texas Medical Center Corp., which oversees thecomplex.

    The center boasts such citizens as world-renowned heart surgeonsMichael
DeBakey and Denton Cooley, and such globally recognizedinstitutions as M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center and Hermann Hospital.

    TMC was the vision of friends and trustees of businessman MonroeDunaway
Anderson.

    A bachelor, Anderson willed his fortune to help mankind in 1939. Heleft the
decision of what to do with his money to friends JohnFreeman and Col. William
Bates, both lawyers at the Houston lawfirm of Fulbright, Jaworski, Freeman &
Bates, and banker HoraceWilkins.

    Soon after Anderson's death, the trustees approached Harris CountyMedical
Society President Dr. Ernst Bertner and dentist FrederickElliott, who wanted to
build "a city of medicine" next to HermannHospital, the first institution in
what was to become the TexasMedical Center.

    They obtained 134 acres of undeveloped land near Hermann and madethe offer
of free land to hospitals and academic medicalinstitutions that would set up
shop in the center.

    Dallas' Baylor University College of Medicine was persuaded in themid-1940s
to move to Houston and DeBakey and his colleagues soonfollowed, an event that
set the stage for later successes.

    By the time Britain's royal couple Queen Elizabeth and PrincePhilip visited
TMC in 1991 to see the Veterans Affairs MedicalCenter, another $1 billion in
construction was about to begin.

    At that time, the medical center comprised 42 member institutionswith annual
operating budgets totaling $4 billion.

    Plans for the future

    The next round of construction, $1.5 billion at eight institutionsin the
medical center, will carry TMC's growth well into the nextcentury.

    The center's well-oiled philanthropy machine will help pay for theexpansion
of the center to 31 million square feet of patient care,research and classroom
space from the current 21 million squarefeet.

    Projects include:

    The new Texas Children's Hospital, a $345 million effort nowrepresented by a
gaping hole in the ground on Fannin Street. It isthe largest single building
project in the history of the center.

    The new Memorial Hermann Children's & Women's Pavillion, tocost $180
million.

    A new $130 million building for basic sciences research at theUniversity of
Texas' M.D. Anderson.

    An $80 million Denton Cooley Building at the Heart Institute ofSt. Luke's
Episcopal Hospital.

    The Texas Medical Center is spending $80 million to add 7,800parking spaces
and other amenities for visitors and employees overthe next decade.

    A new University of Texas building for nursing and biomedicalresearch,
Baylor's Center for Comparative Medicine and an expansionof Houston Community
College's TMC campus for a combined price tagof $129 million.

    Dr. Ralph Feigin, president of the Baylor College of Medicine, saidTMC has
acquired land beyond the existing boundaries of the centerfor future growth.

    At Baylor, the recently built 17-story Alkek Building will housenoted
researcher Dr. Richard Gibbs and his federally funded $80million human genome
sequencing program, making the institutioninstrumental in cracking the genetic
code.

    And Baylor also plans to build an underground research facility,Feigin said.
Contractors have been digging for the past eightmonths for the new building.

    When it is finished, grass and trees will be replanted to restorethe
park-like atmosphere on the campus.

    More than 10,000 donors from across the country had already givenBaylor $350
million toward a $500 million capital campaign by thetime the funding drive was
officially announced, a point of pridefor Feigin and the institution.

    The money will be used for genetic and gene therapy, studentscholarships and
endowed chairs for faculty.

    Models for success

    Wainerdi said the success of the Texas Medical Center is based notonly on a
reputation for excellence, but the fact that hospitalexecutives and academic
leaders aren't making decisions on patientcare, research and expansion to please
shareholders.

    Every one of the 42-member institutions is non-profit.

    Even so, the members compete for patients, personnel and donations.

    For example, there are two centers of excellence for cardiac careand heart
transplant and two pediatric facilities.

    Wainerdi said it all works out for the good of the community.

    "Most people believe that if you have thousands of doctors, there'sgoing to
be a big ego problem," he said. "That's absolutely nottrue."

    Ultimately, the physicians, researchers, administrators and otheremployees
work toward a common goal "because people take pride inthe place."

    Common goals are leading Baylor and M.D. Anderson into a jointproject for
molecular research - a V-shaped building withconnections at each floor so
researchers can feed one another ideasand share knowledge.

    "There's a tremendous spirit of competition, and I think that'shealthy,"
said Dr. John Mendelsohn, president of M.D. Anderson.

    But as admissions, clinic visits and surgeries at the cancer centerincrease
by 10 percent a year, there also are plenty of chances tocooperate, he added.

    The TMC's long-range plan for the next 50 years is to keep peoplemoving as
traffic increases, so it is considering sky bridges toconnect as many buildings
as possible.

    What's next for S.A.

    The leaders in San Antonio's South Texas Medical Center, faced withthe might
of the Houston center and its worldwide reputation, arenot content to stand in
TMC's shadow.

    San Antonio has been building steam to power its future expansion,but lacks
money and new major tenants in the medical center to feedthe fire.

    "We have a huge, unrealized potential asset for growth in thefuture," said
Bill Balthrope, chairman of the Medical CenterAlliance, a consortium of the nine
major landowners in the SouthTexas center.

    "What do we do with this asset to make it more valuable to thecommunity?"
Balthrope said of the alliance's most pressingquestion.

    The immediate goals include improving traffic flow in the cloggedmajor
arteries that connect San Antonio's medical heart on theNorthwest Side to the
rest of the city.

    Plans to slightly straighten Medical Drive from Interstate 10
toFredericksburg Road and create an underpass for Medical underFredericksburg -
an estimated $9 million, six-year project fromplanning to completion - are under
way by the Texas Department ofTransportation.

    Creating a look for the center, from signage to landscape, also isa
priority. The alliance will raise $1 million from among itsfor-profit and
non-profit members for new signage.

    Jim Gray of landscape designer Rialto has been hired to create aunified look
for the medical center.

    "Now, you pass a Brake Check, then a burger joint and then there'sa
hospital," said Balthrope of the need for more continuity in thearea. "We need a
place that says, 'You're here.'"

    Another key goal of the group is to increase available lodging andmedical
meeting space for guests of patients and visiting medicalprofessionals at
medical-center facilities.

    To remedy that situation in part, Methodist Healthcare Ministriesis selling
20 acres of prime medical center land to developerTrammel Crow for a large hotel
and conference center, retail,medical office space and food service.

    "The (South Texas) Medical Center has succeeded in spite of thefact that
there was no infrastructure to support it," Balthropesaid of the lack of roads
and amenities for visitors and employees.

    Building blocks

    Reed also points to the successes of San Antonio's relatively
younginstitutions.

    The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, forexample,
has garnered a reputation for great research and educationin the medical field,
particularly in the past few years. That hasbeen converted into a growing number
of buildings, top researchersand faculty at UTHSC.

    The foundation is making preliminary plans for 330 undevelopedacres adjacent
to the "old" medical center.

    Reed said the foundation is waiting on a new 30-year strategic planand
long-range impact study from UTHSC to determine if theuniversity will need some
of that land for possible expansion.

    Institutions such as UTHSC and the Cancer Therapy & Research Centerhave been
the most successful in drawing money from medicalresearch and education
benefactors.

    UTHSC and the CTRC each have completed multimillion-dollarexpansions in the
medical center in recent years and have largefund-raising campaigns under way.

    CTRC last month received a $3 million contribution from the ZellerCharitable
Foundation for an $11 million, 72,000-square-footclinical addition.

    The Zeller addition will expand the work that goes on at the CTRC'sGrossman
Cancer Center, named after major benefactors of medicalresearch in San Antonio.

    Likewise, new development in the medical center area by theMethodist
Healthcare System, Christus Santa Rosa Healthcare Corp.and the Baptist
Healthcare System has created jobs and increasedopportunity to draw patients
from South Texas and Mexico, industryinsiders say.

    Land on the outskirts of the formal boundaries of the medicalcenter has been
developed into long-term care facilities such asassisted living centers and
nursing homes and medical officebuildings for the growing number of doctors
drawn to the area.

    "We've got plenty of space to grow," Balthrope said of SanAntonio's
partially developed 900-acre complex.

    Attracting a major institution from outside the city, however, haseluded the
medical center.

    The famous Mayo Clinic and other organizations have been approachedabout
opening a clinical facility in San Antonio, but to no avail.

    Nevertheless, recent figures may speak volumes about the
center'sup-and-coming reputation within the medical world.

    At the end of 1994, the annual budgets of medical centerinstitutions
employing nearly 24,000 were nearly $1.6 billion. Bythe close of 1998, San
Antonio Medical Foundation surveys show,budgets topped $2 billion and employment
had swelled to about26,500.

    Institutions in the medical center report 1999 constructiontotaling $86.5
million. The long-range forecast for constructionfrom 2000 to 2005 is $231.5
million.

    In the past year alone, the number of inpatients - many without-of-state
license plates - was up 10 percent and outpatientvisits increased by one-third,
according to the medical centerprogress report.

    "Our reputation," Reed said, "is just catching up with us."

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS BY MICHAEL STRAVATO/SPECIAL TO THE EXPRESS-NEWS: Construction
cranes in Houston's Texas Medical Centermark the beginning of a $15 billion
expansion.;Dr. Si-Yi Chen, associate professor of Molecular and HumanGenetics,
right, looks over a slide with graduate student RandyStrube in the new
International Center for Cell and Gene Therapyat the Baylor College of Medicine
in the Texas Medical Center.;Fellow Cindy Zhue works at Baylor's International
Center forCell and Gene Therapy in the Texas Medical Center.; An aerial view of
the 675-acre, $10 billion Texas Medical Center just south of downtown
Houston.;Texas Medical Center CEO Richard Wainerdi oversees the complex that is
home to 42 medical institutions.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1999


                             1346 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 19, 1999 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: Gene may lower blood pressure;
Sequence discovered by S.D. hypertension research team

BYLINE: Susan Duerksen, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   San Diego scientists have identified a gene sequence that appears to protect
against high blood pressure. Eventually, the finding may lead to gene therapy
techniques to insert the protective code into the DNA of people with high blood
pressure -- in effect correcting the programming that causes the problem. In the
more immediate future, the discovery may help develop diagnostic tests to
identify those at higher risk for the condition, said the chief researcher, Dr.
Robert Parmer.

   He said it also may aid in designing drugs specifically to boost the gene's
function. Parmer, a professor of medicine at the University of California San
Diego and director of the San Diego Veterans Affairs Medical Center's
hypertension clinic, tested the genes of 296 people, most from families with
hypertension, or high blood pressure.

   He found 13 variations of a gene known to regulate the kidneys' production of
hormones called kinins. Kinins relax blood vessels and help the body excrete
salt and water, both functions that tend to keep blood pressure low. People with
one of the 13 gene variants, which Parmer labeled the B variant, had 75 percent
more of an enzyme that produces kinins than did people with the other variants.
"This B variant may offer a protective effect," Parmer said.

   "We're pretty excited about this result.

   It's a fairly strong effect on high blood pressure and it could help a fairly
large number of people." However, Parmer cautioned that his results must be
replicated and further studied before the significance is confirmed. Dr. Kathryn
Taubert, director of cardiovascular science for the American Heart Association,
said an inherited deficiency in kinins could be a significant cause of high
blood pressure, probably one of many causes that work together. "In time, with
gene therapy, we may be able to replace that defective gene," Taubert said.
Other scientists have determined, as Parmer also found, that blacks tend to have
lower levels of kinins than whites.

   Hypertension is much more common and more severe among blacks, and more often
leads to kidney failure. In Parmer's study, 24 percent of whites tested had the
protective B variant of the gene, compared with only 9 percent of blacks. Parmer
presented his results this week at an American Heart Association conference on
hypertension. One-quarter of adults in the United States have high blood
pressure, which greatly increases their risk of heart attack, stroke and kidney
failure.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1347 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                          September 18, 1999, Saturday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT , Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 428 words

HEADLINE: FIGHTING ALZHEIMER'S WORK ON GENE THERAPY, VACCINE GIVE HOPE

BODY:


   Alzheimer's disease can be devastating, not only for the sufferer but for the
victim's loved ones, as well. So the news that two approaches have come to the
fore in the past few months is encouraging, indeed.

   Neither will yield helpful results soon, but they may be important steps
toward a cure or a method of prevention.

   More than 4 million Americans are believed to be afflicted with Alzheimer's.
Patients go from forgetfulness to dementia and usually die five to 10 years
after diagnosis.

   Perhaps nothing written about the disease is more touching than Ronald
Reagan's open letter to the country after he learned he had the illness.

   Many people should be buoyed by a gene-therapy experiment that has
successfully restored youthful vigor to the aged brains of monkeys. The
technique almost completely reversed the effects of aging on brain cells in
monkeys in tests at the University of California at San Diego.

   The promising results of the study have prompted the Food and Drug
Administration to fund gene experiments in humans who have Alzheimer's.

   Along a different track, researchers hope that someday Alzheimer's can be
prevented by developing a vaccine that in mice appears to ward off and even
reduce deposits that clog the brain and are characteristic of the disease.
Trials will begin with humans later this year, and researchers aim to submit a
vaccine to the FDA within five years.

   This effort raises the prospect of using immunization to treat or prevent
other diseases associated with protein deposits, including Parkinson's disease
and myeloma, a form of cancer.

   And if gene therapy proves effective, there might be ways to treat other
disabling diseases.

   But already, concerns have been raised that some people would want to create
supersmart children using genetic engineering.

   One scientist in the field commented, "We already have a brain gap in this
society, when some children go to kindergartens that cost $ 15,000 a year and
other children go to kindergartens that don't have adequate plumbing.''

   The issue of possible misuse of a scientific discovery should be dealt with
later, rather than sooner. It would be foolish to put obstacles in the path of
medical science because of hypothetical misuses that might not develop in the
long term.

   Research should go forward on Alzheimer's on whatever promising tracks
present themselves.

   Although saying a cure is on the horizon would be premature, to know that
innovative work is being done must give a lift to the families of Alzheimer's
sufferers everywhere.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1999


                             1348 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                SEPTEMBER 16, 1999 Thursday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 472 words

HEADLINE: NEW CENTER TO ADVANCE BRAIN TUMOR RESEARCH

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT FREE PRESS MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Detroit has joined a handful of select U.S. cities at the forefront of brain
cancer advances, with a $10-million gift to create a new brain tumor research
center in the Henry Ford Health System.

   The Hermelin Brain Tumor Center is named for Norwegian ambassador David
Hermelin, who continues treatment at Ford for brain cancer.

   "This is the kind of statement a city like ours can make, a positive
statement," said Hermelin, 62, speaking at a news conference Wednesday to
announce the center. The donation was termed the largest single gift for brain
tumor research in the United States.

   Ford plans to use the money over the next five years to study how brain
tumors develop and spread and to test promising new approaches.

   An estimated 20,000 new cases of primary brain tumors -- those starting in
the brain -- will be diagnosed in the U.S. this year; another 100,000 cancer
patients will have tumors that spread to the brain. Brain cancer has claimed the
lives of former National Football League Commissioner Pete Rozelle, movie critic
Gene Siskel, and track legend Wilma Rudolph.

   Hermelin, co-owner of the Palace of Auburn Hills and the Pine Knob
Entertainment Centers, receives treatment for glioblastoma, a fast-growing type
of brain tumor.

   Five years ago, patients with glioblastoma on average lived less than a year
after diagnosis.

   Hermelin and his doctors expect he'll more than surpass those odds. He has
undergone an aggressive cancer regimen of surgery, radiation, two kinds of
chemotherapy, and a novel cancer drug. One type of chemotherapy involved
wafer-thin discs of medicine surgically implanted in his brain. Hermelin also
was among the first U.S. patients to receive an experimental drug known as CAI.
It is designed to stop tumors from growing by blocking signals that make normal
cells turn cancerous and spread.

   "For the first time, we have real hope," said Dr. Mark Rosenblum, chief of
neurosurgery at Ford and codirector of the new center with Dr. Tom Mikkelsen, a
neuro-oncology specialist.

   This fall, the Ford system and a half-dozen other medical centers began the
largest study yet of CAI in 80 patients with newly diagnosed tumors. Two Ford
researchers, Dr. Jae Ho Kim and Svend Freytag, PhD, also are continuing work on
a new gene therapy approach they developed that uses a common cold virus, or
adenovirus, to kill cancer cells.

   "This is our legacy to the next generation," Hermelin said, of the gift that
he and a dozen Detroit families and businesses made.

   Two donors -- Hermelin's boyhood friend, Eugene Applebaum, former owner of
Arbor Drugs Inc., and William Davidson, owner of the Detroit Pistons -- led the
fund drive.

   The center will be housed on the Ford System's West Grand Boulevard campus in
Detroit.

   PATRICIA ANSTETT can be reached at 313-222-5021.

GRAPHIC: Photo;
David Hermelin

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002


                             1349 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                     September 16, 1999 Thursday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: BRAIN BOOST

BODY:

   Working with a single gene, scientists at Princeton University have produced
longer memories and sharper wits in a family of mice. This research raises hopes
of one day helping humans with Alzheimer's and other brain-destroying diseases.

   But it also raises the specter of eugenics -- a common reaction whenever
scientists find ways to improve human traits genetically.

   Medical ethicists will wring their hands and fret over whether scientists
should use gene therapy not just to heal wounded brains but to improve mental
performance. Luddites will predict that evil cabals will try to use genetic
engineering to create races of superior beings.

   Those who fear people getting smarter through gene manipulation misunderstand
what intelligence is. It's not just good memory. It's creativity, good judgment
and adaptability. Those qualities cannot be manipulated genetically.

   And having measurably high intelligence doesn't ensure a productive,
successful, happy life. There are brilliant mathematicians who can't handle
everyday tasks such as paying bills.

   It's good for society to debate the value of scientific breakthroughs and to
concoct doomsday scenarios, the better to guard against them. But let's not
delay the development of medicine to stop memory-destroying diseases while we
debate the ethics of brain-enhancing gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1999


                             1350 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                  September 15, 1999, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Features; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: Health Watch: NEWS & NOTES

BYLINE: From news services

DATELINE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
Brain cell aging reversed: Aged brains cells have been restored in a gene
therapy experiment with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with
Alzheimer's disease, researchers report. This technique nearly completely
reversed the effects of aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in
elderly Rhesus monkeys, said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of
California, San Diego. Scientists hope the treatment, which involves inserting
genes for nerve growth factor into the brain, will reinvigorate thinking and
memory. But it's unclear whether that happened with the monkeys. Tuszynski,
senior author of a study that appeared Tuesday in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, said the studies reinforce an understanding of how
the brain ages and suggest that neurons in the older brain don't die at first
but atrophy. The therapy may be tried in Alzheimer's patients, if the Food and
Drug Administration grants approval.


   Cocaine and heart attacks: Cocaine delivers a double whammy to the blood
stream that may explain how the drug triggers heart attacks in its users, a new
study concludes. Cocaine use ''is even more dangerous than we had previously
known,'' said Dr. Arthur Siegel, lead author of a study in today's the Archives
of Internal Medicine. Cocaine causes blood to thicken by increasing the number
of red blood cells, and by triggering an increase in a protein that causes
platelets to stick together. That can cause clotting that can lead to heart
attacks and strokes.

   CAT scans find appendicitis in kids: A high-tech method of diagnosing
appendicitis was 94 percent accurate in children whose conditions were unclear
from the standard physical exam and blood tests, researchers say. The technique
already is used on adults with a 98 percent success rate. The approach, which
combines ultrasound and computer-enhanced X-rays, also called CAT scans, gave
doctors a 94 percent rate of accuracy in diagnosing 139 children with suspected
appendicitis, said researchers at Harvard-affiliated Children's Hospital in
Boston. The report is in today's Journal of the American Medical Association.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999


                             1351 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       September 14, 1999, Tuesday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,3A

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy restores monkey brain cells; Approach might help
Alzheimer's patients

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene
therapy experiment with elderly Rhesus monkeys that might soon be tested in
humans with Alzheimer's disease, researchers report.

    Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and memory.

    "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age
of 20," said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.
"Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

    Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

    He said his team found that it was control neurons in another part of the
brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected by aging
in the monkeys.  These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stopped
making some regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking
cortex.

    " These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," he said. "
They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the activities of cells
up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information in the cortex."

    The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and the rest had shrunk in size by 10
percent.

    But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and
restored to nearly full vigor.

    It isn't known whether the restored cells also reinvigorated thinking and
memory, but that is being tested in another group of old monkeys, he said.

    The therapy is considered so promising that the researchers have applied to
the Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans
with Alzheimer's disease.


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999


                             1352 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



             September 14, 1999, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy helps monkeys' memories

BYLINE: BY PAUL RECER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene therapy experiment
with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and
memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

   The results reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," said Tuszynski. "Well, that is false."

   His team found that it was control neurons in another part of the brain,
called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected by aging. These
cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size.

   "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," said the
researcher.

   The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and restored.

   The therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the Food
and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999


                             1353 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                          September 14, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: News; Pg.  72

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: FREED FALN MEMBERS WILL RALLY

BODY:


   SAN JUAN Puerto Rican nationalists freed under a controversial clemency by
President Clinton met their probation officers yesterday, and some said they
would attend an independence rally next week.

   One of the former prisoners, Elizam Escobar, said federal parole officials in
this U.S. territory had approved his plans to participate in the Sept. 23 rally
in the western mountain town of Lares, the cradle of Puerto Rico's independence
movement.

   "We can attend and participate in public activities. What we can't do is
organize among ourselves as a group," said Escobar, who was released Friday
after serving 19 years in U.S. prisons.

   Estaquio Babilonia, a Puerto Rican parole official, declined to comment on
the nationalists' probation terms.

   The freed prisoners had been imprisoned on sedition and weapons convictions
stemming from their involvement in FALN the Armed Forces of National Liberation,
a pro-independence group blamed for 130 bombings in the United States from 1974
to 1983. They were freed after they accepted Clinton's conditions that they
renounce violence, stay away from one another and abide by all laws.

   U.S. to aid Timor

   WASHINGTON The United States intends to play a limited role in an
international force to restore order in East Timor, possibly starting with
humanitarian airdrops to refugees, officials said yesterday.

   The U.S. contribution expected to involve hundreds of people will be part of
a peace mission expected to include at least 7,000 troops.

   Meanwhile, the United Nations is closing its besieged compound in Dili and
evacuating 1,300 East Timorese to Australia. UN mission chief Ian Martin said
that at least 12 flights would carry the East Timorese hiding in the compound to
safety.

   Aiding aged brains

   WASHINGTON Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene therapy
experiment with monkeys that soon may be tested in humans with Alzheimer's
disease, researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate
thinking and memory.

   By inserting genes for nerve growth factor into the brain, the atrophied
cells were revived and restored to nearly full vigor, said Dr. Mark Tuszynski of
the University of California, San Diego. His study appears today in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. If the Food and Drug
Administration gives its approval, nerve growth genes will be injected into the
brains of Alzheimer's patients to see if they will restore some cognitive
powers, he said.

   Keep some fats

   WASHINGTON Warnings to cut fat from the diet are good, but people should not
go overboard and cut out fats that are healthy, the American Heart Association
said yesterday.

   The group repeated recommendations that people cut animal fats, such as
butter, from their diets but said many vegetable oils, such as olive oil, can be
good for the heart. Among the so-called good fats, monounsaturated fat is
abundant in olive oil and canola oil, as well as in avocados, nuts and peanuts,
while polyunsaturated fats are found in corn oil, soybean oil, nuts and seeds.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1999


                             1354 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 14, 1999, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Process renews vigor of monkey brain cells;
Findings may help Alzheimer's patients

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: PAUL RECER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene
therapy experiment with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with
Alzheimer's disease, researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will
reinvigorate thinking and memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly Rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

   Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," said Tuszynski. "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   A count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part of the
brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that it was control neurons in another part
of the brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected
by aging. These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stopped making
some regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

   "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," said the
researcher. "They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the
activities of cells up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information
in the cortex."

   The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60 percent had shrunk in
size by 10 percent.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and
restored to nearly full vigor.

   "We restored the number of cells we could detect to about 92 percent of
normal for a young monkey and size of the cells was restored to within 3
percent," he said.

   It isn't known yet if the restored cells also reinvigorated the old monkeys'
thinking and memory, but that is now being tested in another group of old
monkeys, he said.

   But the therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's disease.

   If the FDA gives its approval, NGF genes will be injected into the brains of
Alzheimer's patients to see if they will restore some cognitive powers.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999


                             1355 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       September 14, 1999, Tuesday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 12

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy rejuvenates monkeys' brains
 Scientists seek permission to try their technique on people with Alzheimer's

BYLINE: PAUL RECER

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene therapy experiment
on monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report.

   Scientists hope the treatment will boost thinking and memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly rhesus monkeys,
said Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California at San Diego.

   Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons at first don't die but atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," Tuszynski said.

   "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   A count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part of the
brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that control neurons in another part of the
brain, called the basal forebrain, were most dramatically affected by aging.
These cells, Tuszynski said, shrank in size and stopped making some regulatory
chemicals, changes that seriously affect the thinking cortex.

   "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," Tuszynski
said.

   "They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the activities of
cells up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information in the
cortex."

   The researchers found that about 40% of the basal forebrain cells could not
be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60% had shrunk in size by 10%.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said.

   By inserting genes for nerve growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said,
the cells were revived and restored to nearly full vigor.

   "We restored the number of cells we could detect to about 92% of normal for a
young monkey and size of the cells was restored to within 3%," he said.

   It isn't known whether the restored cells also reinvigorated the old monkeys'
thinking and memory, but that is now being tested in another group of old
monkeys, he said.

   But the therapy is so promising that the researchers applid in June to the
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's disease.

   If the FDA gives its approval, NGF genes will be injected into the brains of
Alzheimer's patients to see whether they can restore cognitive powers destroyed
by the disease, he said.

   Alzheimer's disease is not exactly the same in animals as in humans,
Tuszynski said, so the only way to test the gene therapy technique is in human
patients.

   It could be years before the technique's full value is proved, he said.


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999


                             1356 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 SEPTEMBER 14, 1999 Tuesday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 61

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: HOPEFUL NEWS FOR THE ELDERLY / RESEARCHERS STUDY NEW BRAIN THERAPY

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene therapy experiment
with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and
memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly Rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

   Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," said Tuszynski. "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that it was control neurons in another part
of the brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected
by aging. These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stopped making
some regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

   "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," said the
researcher. "They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the
activities of cells up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information
in the cortex."

   The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60 percent had shrunk in
size by 10 percent.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and
restored to nearly full vigor.

   "We restored the number of cells we could detect to about 92 percent of
normal for a young monkey and size of the cells was restored to within 3
percent," he said.

   It isn't known yet if the restored cells reinvigorated the old monkeys'
thinking and memory, but that is now being tested in another group of old
monkeys, he said.

   But the therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's disease.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1357 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     SEPTEMBER 14, 1999 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: THERAPY THAT COULD REVERSE EFFECTS OF AGING ON THE BRAIN MAY GET TEST
THE GENE TREATMENT RESTORED AND REVIVED BRAIN CELLS IN MONKEYS. IT COULD
CONCEIVABLY HELP ALZHEIMER'S PATIENTS.

BYLINE: Paul Recer, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene-therapy experiment
with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and
memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly Rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

   Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," said Tuszynski. "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that it was control neurons in another part
of the brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected
by aging. These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk and stopped making some
regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

   "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," said the
researcher. "They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the
activities of cells up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information
in the cortex."

   The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and that the remaining 60 percent had
shrunk in size by 10 percent.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and
restored to nearly full vigor.

   "We restored the number of cells we could detect to about 92 percent of
normal for a young monkey, and size of the cells was restored to within 3
percent," he said.

   It is not known yet whether the restored cells also reinvigorated the old
monkeys' thinking and memory, but that is being tested in another group of old
monkeys, he said.

   But the therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's.

   If the FDA approves, NGF genes will be injected into the brains of
Alzheimer's patients to see if they will restore some cognitive powers gradually
destroyed by the disease, he said. Alzheimer's disease does not occur in animals
exactly as it does in humans, said Tuszynski, so the only way to test the gene
therapy technique is in human patients.

   The early trials, called Phase I, would involve only a small number of people
to determine safety. It could be years before the technique's full value is
proven, said Tuszynski.

   Dr. Bradley Wise of the National Institute of Aging said the study is
important because it suggests that "the decline in the numbers and size of
neurons with aging may be reversible."

   "A lot of studies have been done in rats in this area, but this is a step
forward because it used primates" - Rhesus monkeys, said Wise. But he cautioned
that "a lot of work will have to be done," including determining how long the
gene treatment lasts, before the technique could be used routinely in humans.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1358 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                  September 14, 1999, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: WORLD, Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 2095 words

HEADLINE: ATTEMPT NO RETURN TO KOSOVO, YUGOSLAV ARMY TOLD;
PEACE TREATY TALKS OPENED BY ISRAELIS, PALESTINIANS;
U.S. RIGHT ON TARGET IN DRUG WAR AT SEA;
COAST GUARD USING AIRBORNE SHARPSHOOTERS TO DISABLE SMUGGLERS;
APEC LEADERS AGREE TO WORK FOR FREER MARKETS

BYLINE: SCOTT MARTELLE, LOS ANGELES TIMES; RON KAMPEAS, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS;
DAVID BRISCOE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS; DIRK BEVERIDGE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: AUCKLAND, New Zealand

BODY:


   Pacific Rim leaders agreed yesterday that they had to help break down
barriers to world trade, while at the same time strengthening regional markets
and economies that took a massive hit from the Asian crisis.

   They said they also wanted to see if they could devise consistent banking
rules, shoring up an area that spun out of control in many countries and helped
cause the economic troubles.

   But by the end of a two-day summit, the 21 members of the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation forum had come up with no dramatic ways to achieve those
lofty goals.

   Critics attacked them for moving too slowly in making the reforms that they
believe can improve economies from the United States and Canada to parts of
Latin America and Asia, as well as Australia and New Zealand.

   The APEC leaders hope to persuade the World Trade Organization to cut or
eliminate tariffs on numerous industrial goods and service businesses when talks
open Nov. 30 in Seattle.

   They will also pose a challenge to the 15-member European Union with a
proposal to wipe out all global subsidies on agricultural exports, which APEC
members say creates an unlevel playing field for many of the world's farmers. It
remains unclear how such proposals will play out in Europe.

   "We challenge the world to move to freer trade, and we challenge ourselves as
leaders to bring our people with us to broaden support for the work of APEC,"
said the host, New Zealand Prime Minister Jenny Shipley.

   She vowed to "strengthen our markets and improve the international framework
governing trade and investment flows," by getting a new trade agreement at the
WTO, which is based in Geneva and sets rules for commerce among its 134 members.

   Critics in the corporate world said APEC needs to move more quickly to set up
its own regional free-trade zone - an area where the Pacific Rim nations lag far
behind their western Eu ropean counterparts.

   The EU economies are drawing ever closer under common rules set up by the
bureaucracy in Brussels, as well as the launch this year of a single currency
for most of the EU members.

   APEC hopes to have free trade among its developed members by 2010 and its
developing members by 2020.

   Corporate chief executives who held their own summit in Auckland said
yesterday that APEC must show "stronger resolve and urgency to accelerate trade
and investment liberalization, taking a robust APEC trade agenda forward."

   Before the APEC members held their final session yesterday, they applauded
Indonesia's announcement to allow international peacekeeping troops to enter
East Timor and stop the bloodshed that has followed a recent independence vote.

   APEC met as Asian economies are recovering from the devastating crisis that
began nearly two years ago, sweeping the region with currency devaluations,
tumbling stock markets, business failures and massive job losses.

    pg99 0116 990914 N S 9909140139 00003504 IT N

   With campaign finance legislation looming this summer, National Republican
Committee Chairman Jim Nicholson and a key GOP House lawmaker made a private
appeal aimed at the political self-interest of the party's rank-and-file.

   Passage of the bill would strip the party of a $ 40 million "soft-money"
advantage over Democrats, warned Nicholson and Rep. Tom Davis, the Virginian who
chairs the Republi can House campaign committee, according to GOP sources.

   The two men added that the bill's proposed ban on soft money would leave GOP
candidates vulnerable to unlimited expenditures by unions and other groups
laboring to overturn the narrow Republican majority in the House.

   Soft-money donations, unlimited in size and unregulated by the federal
government, are used by the parties and some politicians to advance their
causes.

   "During the 1998 election cycle, soft money helped fund over 32 mil lion
phone bank calls, over 27 million GOTV [get out the vote] mail pieces, over 18
million absentee ballots and over 4.5 million issue and GOTV calls," said
material prepared for the two men's presentation.

   In addition, Republicans used soft money to transfer $ 34.3 million to state
parties and to make $ 5.8 million in direct contributions to state and local
candidates.

   "Democrats know that eliminating soft money will give them an electoral
advantage," the material went on to say. "They will always have massive union
funds and manpower to make up the difference."

   The session marked another phase in a long effort by GOP leaders to kill the
bipartisan measure. The bill, due on the House floor today, enjoys the support
of the White House as well as most House Democrats and a minority of
Republicans.

   Prospects appear to favor House passage. But sponsors of the measure,
speaking at a news conference yesterday, cautioned that the outcome was not
assured.

   "This is the moment of truth for all who support reform to our corrupt
campaign finance system," said Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn. "It is a debate
that is long overdue."

   The House approved a nearly identical measure last year over first the
opposition, then the delaying tactics of the GOP leadership.

   This year, Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., made it a test of his leadership
to postpone debate until the fall. Republican advocates of the bill reported him
declaring at one session that passage of the soft-money ban would impose
"unilateral disarmament" on Republicans.

   This year, as last, House passage would leave the bill at the mercy of a
filibuster by Senate Republicans.

   The measure, authored by Shays and Rep. Martin Meehan, D-Mass, would ban
national political parties from accepting unlimited soft-money donations and
prohibit state parties from using such funds to influence federal elections.

   The measure also would impose restrictions on so-called "issue ads," which
sometimes sharply attack a candidate without specifically advocating his defeat.
These commercials could be financed only through hard money - raised in smaller
amounts than soft money - within 60 days of an election.

   A similar bill cleared the House a year ago on a vote of 252-179.

    pg99 0117 990914 N S 9909140140 00004187 IT N

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene therapy experiment
with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and
memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

   Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," Tuszynski said. "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that control neurons in another part of the
brain, called the basal forebrain, were most dramatically affected by aging.
These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stopped making some
regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

   The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60 percent had shrunk in
size by 10 percent.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, they were revived and restored
to nearly full vigor.

   "We restored the number of cells we could detect to about 92 percent of
normal for a young monkey and size of the cells was restored to within 3
percent," he said.

   It isn't known yet if the restored cells also reinvigorated the old monkeys'
thinking and memory, but that is now being tested in another group of old
monkeys, he said.

   But the therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's disease.

   If the FDA gives its approval, NGF genes will be injected into the brains of
Alzheimer's patients to see if they will restore some cognitive powers gradually
destroyed by the disease, he said.

   Alzheimer's disease does not occur in animals exactly the way it does in
humans, Tuszynski said, so the only way to test the gene therapy technique is in
human patients. The early trials, called Phase I, would involve only a small
number to determine safety. It could be years before the technique's full value
is proved, Tuszynski said.

   Dr. Bradley Wise of the National Institute of Aging said the study was
important because it suggested that "the decline in the numbers and size of
neurons with aging may be reversible."

   In their experiment, the University of California, San Diego researchers used
eight monkeys with an average age of 23, the monkey equivalent of the late 60s
to 70s in humans.

   Skin cells were taken from each of the monkeys. Into these cells, the
researchers inserted a gene that makes human nerve growth factor, an essential
chemical found in the brain. The modified cells were then injected into the
forebrain of four of the monkeys. Four others, acting as controls, got
injections of skin cells without the NGF gene.

   Once in the brain, the modified cells began making NGF.

   After three months, the researchers examined the brains of the eight monkeys.
The control monkeys showed a brain cell loss expected for animals their age. But
the brains of the monkeys with the NGF genes injections had an almost youthful
appearance, Tuszynski said.

    pg99 0118 990914 N S 9909140144 00002970 IT N

   The AIDS epidemic is expanding rapidly in sub-Saharan Africa despite all
initiatives to halt it, researchers yesterday told a conference in Lusaka on the
spread of the disease.

   They said a lack of awareness about the virus did not appear to be behind the
failure of health campaigns because many people knew the basic facts about AIDS
- that it was spread mainly by sexual intercourse and that it could be fatal.

   At least 11 million people have died of AIDS in Africa and 22 million more
have been infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. By 2005, AIDS costs
will represent more than half of Kenya's and two-thirds of Zimbabwe's government
health spending, according to the U.N. AIDS agency.

   "The spread of AIDS will not be halted in the near future," said John
Caldwell, a professor of demography from Australia. "In Nigeria, for example,
research shows that men and women see sex as a need, not pleasure."

   "Men go to commercial sex workers to satisfy a specific need. More than
two-thirds of Nigerian men sampled had sex with more than one partner. That is
the problem," he said.

   "There has been failure by African communities to justify these huge sexual
appetites," said Caldwell, adding that the only genuine behavioral change was in
Uganda, with the discarding of traditional practices such as wife inheritance
when a male partner died.

   Caldwell was speaking on the second day of the week-long 11th International
Conference on AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Diseases (ICASA) in the Zambian
capital.

   African experts at the conference have blamed poverty and low education
standards as some causes for the rise of AIDS on the world's poorest continent.
In some cases, they said, girls as young as nine took up selling sex to meet
school fees.

   Researchers urged governments to take up the leadership against AIDS,
especially by embracing programs that targeted teen-agers.

   Often, they said, religious and political leaders, taking a high moral
ground, refused to provide condoms to teen-agers, who then had casual and
unprotected sex anyway.

   "Governments must take it as a given that premarital and commercial sex
exists," said James Ntosi, a professor at Uganda's Makerere University. "Their
duty becomes how to minimize the risk for all those involved."

   Leading anti-AIDS activists, including Peter Piot of the U.N. AIDS agency and
World Bank executive Callisto Madavo, repeated yesterday that the epidemic posed
the single biggest obstacle to economic development in Africa, and urged
governments to unite with other groups in focusing on stemming its spread.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1999


                             1359 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                  September 14, 1999, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: WORLD, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 959 words

HEADLINE: GOP CHIEFS OPPOSE CAMPAIGN REFORM;
GENE THERAPY REINVIGORATES AGING BRAINS, AT LEAST IN MONKEYS;
ANTI-AIDS CAMPAIGN INADEQUATE IN AFRICA;
BAHAMIANS PANIC AS STORM NEARS; SURGE COULD SWEEP POPULOUS ISLE

BYLINE: DAVID ESPO, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS; PAUL RECER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS;
MANOAH ESIPISU, REUTERS NEWS SERVICE; CHRISTOPHER SAUNDERS, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: NASSAU, Bahamas

BODY:


   Panicked Bahamas residents abandoned beach-front homes and scrambled for
emergency supplies yesterday as Hurricane Floyd's 155- mph winds bore down on
the vulnerable, low-lying archipelago.

   Floyd was predicted to hit the Bahamas as soon as late yesterday and possibly
hit Florida by tomorrow.

   "I have never been this scared about a storm," said shopkeeper Angel Chea as
she hastily boarded up her windows.

   Residents and officials in the Bahamas reported the wind was picking up, and
many residents were already in hurricane shelters.

   "I don't want to be caught in the rush," said Margaret Bastian of Nassau, as
she settled into a shelter with a blanket, a pillow and a small bag full of
food.

   The storm interrupted airline flights, cruises and shipping traffic between
the United States and the Caribbean. American Airlines yesterday canceled its
nine daily flights between southern Florida and its hub in San Juan, Puerto
Rico, while both Carnival Cruise Lines and Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines sent
Bahamas-bound ships to Mexico instead.

   Bahamian officials warned that storm surges of up to 20 feet could sweep as
far as six miles inland. That's a terrifying prospect on this island of New
Providence, which is only seven miles from north to south and has some 165,000
people, more than half the Bahamas' entire population.

   All of the northwest and central Bahamian islands were under hurricane
warnings yesterday afternoon. A tropical storm warning was posted for the
southeastern Bahamas and the nearby British Turks and Caicos is lands.

   In Nassau, the Bahamian capital, long lines formed at gasoline stations and
grocery stores and two major supermarkets ran out of bottled water.

   Bahamian schools were converted into hurricane shelters, and officials
planned to close Nassau's airport later yesterday. Organizers canceled a parade
to welcome home Bahamian track runners from the Outdoor World Championship in
Seville, Spain.

   "We can't ask those girls to come from a safe place to an unsafe place," said
Sports Minster Zhivargo Laing.

   In San Salvador, a quiet resort island where Christopher Columbus is believed
to have first landed in the New World, Riding Rock Inn manager Carter Williams
said he moved all of his guests to a shelter at the nearby Church of God.

   "I worked until about 2 o'clock [in the morning] preparing for the
hurricane," Williams said.

   The island's Club Med resort said some customers would wait out the storm at
the resort.

   At 8 p.m., Floyd's center was located about 35 miles east of San Salvador in
the central Bahamas, and about 400 miles east-southeast of Miami. It was moving
west at 14 mph but was expected to turn slightly northward later in the evening.

   Its hurricane force winds extended up to 125 miles from its center with
tropical storm force winds stretching to 260 miles.

   Experts said the hurricane would likely rake across the Abacos Islands and
Eleuthera, which were blasted last month by Hurricane Dennis.

   Floyd was joined yesterday by Hurricane Gert, which grew from a tropical
storm to a hurricane with winds near 85 mph about 1,300 miles east of the
Leeward Islands.

    pg99 0120 990914 N S 9909140159 00002948 IT N

   Lifting one threat of criminal charges against independent counsel Kenneth W.
Starr but leaving others dangling, a federal appeals court has blocked a
contempt case against Starr and his staff over alleged leaks of grand jury
secrets during their investigation of President Clinton.

   The court revealed yesterday for the first time that a federal judge in July
had ordered the prosecution of Starr's office for disclosing to the media
internal discussions about possible criminal charges against Clinton. That order
was nullified by the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for Washington, D.C., in the
opinion made public yesterday.

   In its ruling, the appeals court significantly narrowed the definition of an
illegal leak. It concluded that prosecutors' internal deliberations about
potential indictments are not grand jury secrets.

   The court said grand jury secrecy rules only protect from disclosure
information currently before the grand jury or about to be given to grand
jurors.

   David E. Kendall, who heads the team of the president's personal defense
lawyers, said he will ask the full 11-member Court of Appeals to review the
three-judge panel's decision. The ruling, he said, was "inconsistent with the
precedents" of the D.C. court on grand jury leaks.

   Starr said in a statement that he was gratified by the ruling because it
provided "necessary guidance" on leaks. He said the decision "rejects defense
tactics of seeking to distract an investigation through accusations of illegal
leaks."

   U.S. District Judge Norma Holloway Johnson, who has been overseeing Starr's
investigation of Clinton, had adopted a broad view of leaks, saying prosecutors'
internal strategy discussions about their investigation was a protected secret.

   The appeals court rejected that view. "Bare statements" by some of Starr's
assistants that they wished to have Clinton indicted for lying and obstruction
of justice "do not implicate the grand jury," it said.

   Still, the new decision dealt with only one leak to the media, and left
unclear what has happened to Johnson's separate ruling that Starr or his staff
may have illegally leaked 24 other secrets about their Clinton investigation.
Johnson handed that inquiry to an outside investigator, a former judge, but no
word has emerged on the result.

   What was evident, barring a higher court decision to overturn yesterday's
ruling, was that Starr's office could not be prosecuted criminally for an
alleged leak early this year to The New York Times.

   That, the court concluded, was not illegal.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1999


                             1360 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                              September 14, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 14, 1999 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: EXPERIMENT GIVES AGED BRAINS A BOOST

BYLINE: By PAUL RECER; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene therapy experiment
with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and
memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly Rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

   Tuszynski is senior author of a CBstudy appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," said Tuszynski.

   "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that it was control neurons in another part
of the brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected
by aging. These cells had shrunk in size and had stopped making some regulatory
chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

   "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," said the
researcher. "They control the flow of information in the cortex."

   The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60 percent had shrunk in
size by 10 percent.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and
restored to nearly full vigor.

   "We restored the number of cells we could detect to about 92 percent of
normal for a young monkey and size of the cells was restored to within 3
percent," he said.

   It isn't known if the restored cells also reinvigorated the old monkeys'
thinking and memory, but that is being tested, he said.

   But the therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's disease.

   If the FDA approves, NGF genes will be injected into the brains of
Alzheimer's patients to see if they will restore some cognitive powers gradually
destroyed by the disease, he said.

   Alzheimer's disease does not occur in animals the same way it does in humans,
said Tuszynski, so the only way to test the gene therapy technique is in human
patients. The early trials, called Phase I, would involve only a small number to
determine safety. It could be years before the technique's full value is proven,
said Tuszynski.

   Dr. Bradley Wise of the National Institute of Aging said the study was
important because it suggests that "the decline in the numbers and size of
neurons with aging may be reversible."

   "A lot of studies have been done in rats in this area, but this is a step
forward because it used primates [Rhesus monkeys]," said Wise. But he cautioned
that "a lot of work will have to be done," including determining how long the
gene treatment lasts, before the technique could be used routinely in humans.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999


                             1361 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      September 14, 1999, Tuesday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Researchers say gene therapy restores withered brain cells

BYLINE: Paul Recer




BODY:  WASHINGTON - Aged brains have returned to youthful vigor in agene therapy
experiment with monkeys that soon may be tested inhumans with Alzheimer's
disease, researchers report.

    Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking andmemory.

    "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" theeffects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk inelderly Rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark Tuszynski of the Universityof California at San Diego.

    Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in theProceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

    The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages andsuggest
neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go intoshrunken atrophy, he
said.

    "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day afterthe age of
20," said Tuszynski. "Well, that is false. That doesn'thappen."

    An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in thethinking part
of the brain, shows very few cells are lost with age,he said.

    Instead, he said, his team found control neurons in another part ofthe
brain, called the basal forebrain, most dramatically wereaffected by aging.

    These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stoppedmaking some
regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affectsthe thinking cortex.

    "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain,"the
researcher said. "They are on the ground, deeper in the brain,controlling the
activities of cells up there in the cortex. Theycontrol the flow of information
in the cortex."

    The researchers found about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cellscouldn't
be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60 percent hadshrunk in size by 10
percent.

    But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes fornerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cellswere revived and
restored to nearly full vigor.

    "We restored the number of cells we could detect to about 92percent of
normal for a young monkey and size of the cells wasrestored to within 3
percent," he said.

    It isn't known yet if the restored cells also reinvigorated the oldmonkeys'
thinking and memory, but that's now being tested inanother group of older
monkeys, he said.

    But the therapy is so promising, the researchers in June applied tothe Food
and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy techniquein humans with
Alzheimer's disease.

    If the FDA gives its approval, NGF genes will be injected into thebrains of
Alzheimer's patients to see if they will restore somecognitive powers gradually
destroyed by the disease, he said.

    Alzheimer's disease doesn't occur in animals exactly how it does inhumans,
said Tuszynski, so the only way to test the gene therapytechnique is in human
patients.

    Early trials would involve only a small number to determine safety.It could
be years before the technique's full value is proven, saidTuszynski.

    Dr. Bradley Wise of the National Institute of Aging said the studyis
important but cautioned that "a lot of work will have to bedone" before the
technique could be used routinely in humans.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1999


                             1362 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1999 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 14, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:7,8; B-3:1; B-2:2,3

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy at UCSD may slow disease

BYLINE: David E. Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Some of the mental decline of old age might prove reversible, if experiments
on old monkeys are any indication, a UCSD neuroscientist said. Using gene
therapy, Dr. Mark Tuszynski was able restore shape and normal functions to cells
that had atrophied in the brains of aged monkeys. He supplied human nerve growth
factor (NGF) to nourish the brain region that is thought to be involved in
cognitive functioning but that had atrophied in the animals' old age.

   While cell shape was restored, Tuszynski did not test the cognitive abilities
of the monkeys. The work might benefit another area of his research, the
treatment of Alzheimer's disease, which is a decline in cognitive ability
associated with damage to the same group of cells. "It's the same system that is
much more profoundly affected in Alzheimer's disease," Tuszynski said. He is
planning trials, pending final approval from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, to test a gene therapy approach that would supply the gene for
NGF to the brains of Alzheimer's patients to nourish damaged cells there. "This
provides further support for that research," Tuszynski said. The research is
reported today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science. The NGF
that Tuszynski delivered to the monkeys' brains promoted recovery of cell
architecture and the production of neurotransmitters, chemicals that move
between cells, allowing them to communicate. Aged monkeys that did not receive
the treatment had cells whose size had shrunk, and they had 40 percent fewer
neurotransmitters and receptors for growth factors.

   The monkeys are the equivalent age of 70- or 75-year-old people, he said.
"There is a shrinking of those cells and loss of the chemical neurotransmitter
needed to communicate with the neocortex," Tuszynski said. But in another group
of aged monkeys that received the human NGF -- a natural factor -- the atrophy
was reversed almost completely, while the receptors and neurotransmitters
returned to 92 percent the rate of healthy cells. Many people lose some of their
cognitive abilities with advancing age, from forgetfulness to an inability to
focus attention or be as creative.

   Part of the decline could come from the region studied in the monkeys, the
cholinergic region that is thought to influence the efficiency of the flow of
information through the neocortex, the region of the brain responsible for
abilities of attention and reasoning. "We don't know how aging affects the
brain," Tuszynski said.

   "We don't know the basis for cognitive decline. "This begins to unravel that
mystery a bit." Dr. John H. Morrison, director of the Neurology of Aging
Laboratories at the Mt. Sinai School of Medicine in New York, said the work
offers a hopeful message. "What's most important is they have described an
age-related change that is reversible," Morrison said. "The hope is that if you
can find reversible changes like this, that you can treat it." The work also
gives scientists an additional view on how the brain changes with age, Morrison
said. Scientists have come in recent years to learn that the brain probably does
not lose cells continually through life, as an old medical wisdom held. Previous
work on cognitive decline has focused on the death of brain cells, as in disease
such as Alzheimer's, while another aspect has focused on changes in gene
expression and the synapses across which cells communicate. With Tuszynski's
work, there is an additional emphasis on the atrophy of cells, as well as
neurotransmitter production -- both of which were restored to more youthful
states, Morrison said. One of the hurdles facing neuroscientists from this
point, Morrison said, is to further clarify the changes in the aging brain that
are reversible and those which are not. Tests are planned, however, that would
measure the intellectual powers of another group of monkeys treated with NGF,
Tuszynski said. The monkeys in the study were housed at the California Regional
Primate Research Center at the University of California Davis.

   David Smith, a UCSD graduate student, and Fred Gage, neuroscientist at the
Salk Institute, also contributed to the study. Tuszynski's findings follow on
other, separate studies recently that suggest a similar durability in the brain.

   Earlier this year, Gage and Swedish scientists, for example, found that the
brain can grow new cells. It is too early to understand, however, how that
ability might be harnessed to provide practical benefits.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             1363 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                September 14, 1999, Tuesday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A8

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY THAT RESTORED VIGOR TO AGING BRAIN CELLS MAY RELIEVE
ALZHEIMER'S

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene therapy experiment
with monkeys that may be tested soon in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and
memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly Rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California at San Diego.

   Tuszynski is senior author of a study that is to appear today in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The study reinforces a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggests
that neurons in the older brain do not die at first but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," Tuszynski said. "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that it was control neurons in another part
of the brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected
by aging. These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stopped making
some regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

   "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," he said.
"They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the activities of
cells up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information in the
cortex."

   The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys and that the other 60 percent had shrunk in
size by 10 percent.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and
restored to almost full vigor.

   "We restored the number of cells we could detect to about 92 percent of
normal for a young monkey, and size of the cells was restored to within 3
percent," he said.

   It was unknown whether the restored cells also reinvigorated the old monkeys'
thinking and memory, but that is now being tested in another group of monkeys,
he said.

   But the therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's disease.

   If the FDA approves testing, NGF genes will be injected into the brains of
Alzheimer's patients to determine whether they will restore some cognitive
powers gradually destroyed by the disease, Tuszynski said.

   Alzheimer's disease does not occur in animals exactly as it does in humans,
Tuszynski said, so the only way to test the gene therapy technique is in human
patients. Early trials would involve only a small number to determine safety. It
could be years before the technique's full value is proved, Tuszynski said.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1999


                             1364 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           September 14, 1999 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: Study finds gene therapy restores aging brain cells

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene-therapy experiment
with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and
memory.

    "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly Rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

    Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

    The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

    "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age
of 20," said Tuszynski. "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

    An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

    Instead, he said, his team found that it was control neurons in another part
of the brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected
by aging. These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stopped making
some regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

    "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," said the
researcher. "They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the
activities of cells up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information
in the cortex."

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1365 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1999 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                    September 14, 1999 Tuesday, ST. BERNARD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS: GENE THERAPY RESTORES AGED BRAIN CELLS

BYLINE: By Paul Recer AP science writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigor in a gene therapy experiment
with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's disease,
researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and
memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly Rhesus monkeys,
said Mark Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

   Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

   "We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20," Tuszynski said. "Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that it was control neurons in another part
of the brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected
by aging. These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk and had stopped making some
regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

   "These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain," the
researcher said. "They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the
activities of cells up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information
in the cortex."

   The researchers found that about 40 percent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60 percent had shrunk in
size by 10 percent.

   But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and
restored to nearly full vigor.


LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1999


                             1366 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                    September 13, 1999 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2129 words

HEADLINE: Michigan at the Millennium: Health in Metro Detroit: Health care
advances

BODY:

   Genevieve Dunworth has seen revolutionary changes in the medical profession
since she began nursing school in 1937. Back then, treatment of patients was
usually restricted to a pain killer and casts were as heavy as lead.

   The 83-year-old Newaygo County native, who retired from the Henry Ford Health
System in 1980, remembers hospitals as cold, hard places before plastics came
along. To administer a dose of morphine, Dunworth had to heat a spoonful of
water and a pill over an open flame before drawing it into a glass hypodermic
needle.

   "I had a real busy job, I'll tell you that," she said. "Today, everything
comes mixed and prepared, and you just throw it away when you're done. The
changes are really quite wonderful."

   Treatment has become kinder and gentler -- and far more sophisticated.
Michigan has been at the forefront of many of these changes, from helping to
develop the vaccine that virtually wiped out polio to creating solid health care
benefits for workers and their families.

   As we enter the new millennium, the state's medical profession is positioning
itself for the future. Its medical schools and research laboratories work on
everything from a vaccine against cancer to a $1-billion "Life Sciences
Corridor" to explore the frontiers of biotechnology.

   Of all the great advances in the past century, many observers would say the
most dramatic have been in the field of medicine. We have gone from a day when
infectious disease was the most common cause of mortality to one in which
advancements offer people the mixed blessing of human cloning and exasperatingly
long lives.

   In 1900, 20-year-olds were in middle age and 40-year-olds were feeble and
preparing wills. Today, the average American lives to be 76, and middle age
means second or third careers and families. Centenarians, once a rarity, are now
a 60,000-strong group in the United States. In Michigan in 1997, 132,467 people
were age 85 and older.

   Michigan leads way

   Michigan's academic institutions have been leaders in medical research and
development since 1848, when Dr. Zena Pitcher of Detroit convinced the
University of Michigan it needed a department of medicine. Three years later,
the state's first medical school graduated six doctors and was on its way to
becoming one of the nation's premier medical training grounds.

   In 1868, five Civil War physicians in Detroit founded the Detroit Medical
College, which later came be be known as the Wayne State University School of
Medicine.

   The state's three medical schools, including the osteopathic program at
Michigan State University, now turn out more than 2,200 physicians each year.

   The state also has been on the frontlines of the wellness movement, which had
its roots in Battle Creek. In 1866, Ellen White opened the Western Health Reform
Institute. It offered Seventh-day Adventist theology, health foods such as
oatmeal and plenty of open-air exercise.

   Dr. John Harvey Kellogg took over the failing hospital in 1876. He renamed it
the Battle Creek Sanitarium and made it a destination spa for the rich and
famous.

   Kellogg summed up his philosophies in The Simple Life in a Nutshell: A
healthful day should include eight hours of sleep, two vegetarian meals, four
pints of water, nine miles of walking and no worrying, tobacco or alcohol. He
also pushed daily enemas and dunks in electrified pools, among other unorthodox
procedures.

   "Health of mind and body is one of the most valuable of all personal assets,"
he wrote.

   Kellogg's theories, while in line with modern thinking about health and
fitness, had its most lasting effect in the booming breakfast cereal industry
that sprang up in western Michigan. His teachings were like many of the passing
health fads the public latched onto.

   At the turn of the century, Mt. Clemens became known as "Bath City of
America" for its odorous, sulphur-rich waters that promised an answer for polio,
obesity, syphilis and other ills. More than 50,000 people visited, seeking cures
in the city's soothing baths. By 1928, Mt. Clemens' population had swelled to
16,000 and the city raked in $3 million from the baths a year.

   Part of a solution

   In the 20th century, Michiganians offered themselves as test subjects for
penicillin, the polio vaccine and fluoride in public water.

   Before fluoride, half of the population was without teeth by age 25 and tooth
decay was a primary reason for rejection from the armed services. Still, some
Grand Rapids residents balked when U-M researchers wanted to add fluoride their
water in 1945.

   "Some people thought it was an invasion of their rights and a communist
plot," said retired dentist Ray Stevens, 79, of Grand Rapids.

   Ten years later, researchers deemed fluoridation a success after the cavity
rate in Grand Rapids dropped 60 percent compared with control city Muskegon.

   At U-M in Ann Arbor, Dr. Thomas Francis was assigned the immense task of
coordinating the double-blind, placebo-controlled study of Dr. Jonas Salk's
polio vaccine. Thousands of Michigan school children took part in the study,
which was declared a success in 1955. By 1960, polio was all but wiped out in
Michigan and the rest of the country.

   Health insurance

   The creation of a health insurance system is one of the most dramatic and
influential changes in health care.

   Modern health insurance didn't materialize until the stock market crashed in
1929, forcing doctor's bills to the bottom of the debt pile. As a way to solve
the problem, Blue Cross and Blue Shield began offering group insurance in 1932,
deducting pay from employees' wages in return for care at reduced rates.

   Michigan's auto industry and its unions helped standardize health benefits,
set broad standards for care and funneled money into the medical community for
research and development.

   When Charles T. Head was laid off from his first postwar job at a Dodge Motor
plant, he wanted to work for another big company. "I knew a big automaker with a
union would offer me more for my family, since I was newly married and had a
newborn at home," the 77-year-old Troy man said. "The unions came in in 1937,
fought for us, and got us health benefits and dental benefits and good working
conditions a little at a time."

   In 1940, national health care spending was $30 per American, according to the
U.S. Health Care Finance Administration. Today, it is about $4,000 per person --
an amount that fuels medicine's excellence and innovation, but strains the
average American's budget.

   Beginning in the 1950s, Michigan's auto industries and unions helped increase
health care benefits and, by setting an employee standard, have slowly broadened
the types of care covered by insurers.

   "They were the first for hearing aids and eyeglass benefits," said Richard
Lichtenstein, associate professor of health management and policy for U-M's
school of public health.

   In 1960, Community Health Association, which later became Health Alliance
Plan, became Michigan's first nonprofit, prepaid group practice health plan.
Indemnity, or fee-for-service plans, covered most people until the 1980s.

   As medical spending skyrocketed, businesses such as General Motors Corp.,
which determined more than $1,000 of the cost of a car went to pay for workers'
medical care, turned to managed care. While controversial, it has slowed health
care inflation to less than 5 percent compared with the 10 percent or more that
was normal in the 1970-90 period, according to the Health Care Financing
Administration.

   But managed care, which now covers most Americans, has bred its own problems.
Some doctors and patients complain it has hampered their relationship and robs
physicians of their ability to make decisions. Doctors are talking of
unionizing. Patients are enraged when denied top-notch care by organizations
keeping tabs on the cost-benefit ratio.

   Managed care, said Michael Brock, a psychologist in Wyandotte, "is cutting
benefits at the cost of lives." He said one of his patients committed suicide
because his insurer limited his counseling sessions.

   "There's more people like myself who won't work with managed care anymore,"
he said.

   Doctor-patient relationships

   As work in genetics and immunology closes in on the top killers, doctors will
have more time to reevaluate their role in the next millennium.

   "Doctors have gotten far from patients with all this technological
whiz-bang," said Dr. Malcolm S. Mitchell, program leader in biological therapy
at Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute in Detroit.

   Bob Larson, 81, of Republic in the Upper Peninsula agrees. "Forty or 50 years
ago, we could get doctors to make house calls out here. But it's changed so
much. Now, you have to go to the doctor's office and wait."

   As a result, more patients are using tools such as the Internet to help
themselves. Today, patients go to the doctor's office armed with printouts from
the multitude of Web sites, solutions from magazine articles and plenty of
opinions, said Dr. Eddie Erlandson, vice-chief of staff at St. Joseph Mercy
Hospital in Ann Arbor.

   "The bottom line is that the physician is no longer the repository of the
greatest knowledge, particularly with the latest research and changes," he said.
"Our role has dramatically changed."

   In Southfield, Superior Consultant Holdings Corp. is helping engineer the
Internet health care revolution. The company is working with DrKoop.com, WebMD
and Microsoft to apply technology to medical science and delivery of health
care.

   "I think technology is going to transform traditional health care," said
Russell C. Coile Jr., Superior's senior vice president and national strategy
adviser. "Nobody knows what the far reach of this technology is."

   Pioneers of the future

   The state's companies, doctors and researchers are among the national leaders
in a variety of research fields, including cardiac care, organ transplantation,
gene therapy, AIDS and cancer. In 1983, for example, Wayne State University
developed the first in-vitro fertilization program and today it is a pioneer in
fetal surgery to treat birth defects in the womb.

   U.S. News & World Reports this year placed U-M as the nation's ninth best
hospital. Other hospitals and medical schools -- including William Beaumont
Hospital, Henry Ford Health System and the Karmanos Cancer Institute -- continue
to escalate Michigan's stature in medical science.

   Biotechnology, which uses living organisms or other biological systems in the
development of new drugs or products, is the wave of the future, and Michigan is
riding it.

   Gov. John Engler recently signed into a law an act creating a "Life Sciences
Corridor," which will invest $1 billion over 20 years to develop biotechnology
at Michigan's research institutions.

   In Kalamazoo, Pharmacia & Upjohn is developing Zyvox, the first drug in a new
class of antibiotics. Such a drug will prevent deadly infectious diseases, which
are outsmarting older anti-biotics, from making a comeback.

   At Karmanos, Mitchell continues to refine his vaccine for melanoma. In the
next millennium, he predicts, cancer will be controllable with the tools of
genetics and vaccines.

   "I think we're close to cracking it," he said. "This is one or two decades
away. We know what we need to do. We've just got to figure out a way to do it."

   The 20th century has witnessed such profound leaps in medical science that
the next millennium may be faced with a heady question: How long do you want to
live?

   "I think people need to think that through very carefully," said Dr. Richard
C. Bates, 78, a retired Lansing physician who began practicing medicine in 1950
when most doctors charged $5 a house call and infectious diseases were fatal.
"We only have a few horizons left."

   Detroit News Staff Writer Tracy Boyd and Librarians Pat Zacharias and Vivian
Baulch contributed to this report.

   What do you think?

   As part of our millennium coverage, each month we will ask your opinion on
issues concerning Metro Detroit's history and its future. Please share your
thoughts on the following:

   Register your opinion at www.detnews.com/millennium. You can also write us at
The Detroit News, Millennium, 615 W. Lafayette, Detroit, Mich. 48226.

   About this series

   Over 14 months, The Detroit News is publishing special reports leading up to
the new millennium. Each month, we will examine a topic that helps to define
Metro Detroit. We'll also look at the people of this community and what makes
them tick. And we'll give you a chance to get involved, too.

   Additional coverage: The News marks the millennium with additional coverage
that looks back and ahead. That coverage includes daily Michigan at the
Millennium reports on the back of the daily Metro section, quick looks at the
events that have changed our lives.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             1367 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                           September 12, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: Special; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1104 words

HEADLINE: NFL: GOIN BACK TO THE FUTURE  . . . THE MORE IT STAYS THE SAME

BYLINE: By LUKE CYPHERS Daily News Sports Writer

BODY:


   NFL people are sure of two things about the future: Their game will evolve,
and the evolution will be televised.

   "If there's one thing that football does compared to other sports, it changes
faster," says George Young, former GM of the Giants and a league vice president.
"You've got more people on the field, larger staffs, a lotta technology, and
it's all used in trying to win. Each year is like a different life cycle."

   That makes predicting what the NFL will look like in 50 years, or even 20,
something of a crapshoot.

   It's tempting to take to extremes current pro-sports trends, and apply them
to America's most popular game: 400-pound wideouts with 4.3 speed in the 40,
bulked up with gene-therapy supplements, clad in titanium-alloy pads on
ad-packed sidelines, crashing into even bigger players and causing
"Rollerball"-style mayhem, all available on pay-per-view.

   But unlike other sports, the NFL tries to put boundaries around its game,
rendering "Buck Rogers" scenarios of quarterbacks with jet packs unlikely.

   "Football is not going to change that much," says Howard Handler, senior vice
president of marketing and fan development. "It's going to be played on a
100-yard field, 11 a side, with the same power and passion," (though, it is
hoped, new ad slogans) "that got us this far."

   The NFL is a controlling, top-down organization, with a sense of history,
especially business history, and the gall to try to prevent the future from
getting away from it.

   Or, as Handler puts it, "We hold on to our heritage."

   That heritage was built on the T-formation and tackling, but more than that,
on TV.

   The NFL believes in television more steadfastly than a 6-year-old trusts the
Tooth Fairy. And why not? TV has stuffed the owners' pillowcases with a lot more
than quarters. It has generated billions of dollars for the league.

   "Only 1% of our fans are accessing our game via the stadium," says Chris
Widmaier, director of corporate communications. "Ninety-nine percent experience
it on TV."

   So what you're more likely to see is more TV, with more games televised from
more angles than ever before. Some of them you'll have to pay for - if, say,
you're a 49er fan stuck in New York - on a satellite or streaming Internet
service.

   The NFL has already capitalized on these "displaced fans" with its "Prime
Ticket" package.

   But you'll have more goodies for your trouble: statistics available to you at
the push of a button, custom-made replays, isolations on particular players.

   In short, the future may allow you to be your own TV producer.

   The league is experimenting with such ideas even now. Cameras are being
allowed in the locker room before games - under the league's supervision, of
course. "What our fans are telling us is they want better access to the games,
something they've never seen before," Widmaier said.

   The bigwigs swear they won't clutter up their games with stadium advertising.
"We zagged when every other sport was zigging," Handler said. "We won't have a
lot of logos all over the place."

   Nor do they play to pull a boxing and go pay-per-view for the big events.
"Not in the next 10-to-50 years," says Handler. "We are committed as ever to
free televised football on Sunday, on Monday night, for the playoffs and the
Super Bowl."

   It's all marketing. They don't want to squander the audience they've earned
by giving games away. They also haven't been content to let their current fan
base age into oblivion.

   So they're going after the kids. And unlike the NBA, they're not selling mere
licensed products. They're selling the game, or rather, giving it away. When
surveys found that fan loyalty was built as early as six years old, and that it
was based on kids playing the sport, the NFL woke up to the fact that the game
on the junior level was dwindling in popularity.

   The NFL is now plowing $ 100 million into youth football, including flag
football programs at Police Athletic Leagues, and junior-high clinics where kids
get to block, tackle and throw the ball.

   Kevin Fountaine, a local high-school and college coaching veteran, ran a
wildly successful pilot program in Brooklyn, where nearly 150 teens, many who'd
never played before, signed up for several weeks of spring football.

   By the end of the sessions, 120 seventh and eighth graders were still around,
and this fall, 54 are now out for high school teams.

   On the field, that could lead to a diversification of the faces under the
helmet. The league wants more inner-city kids playing football, and hopes its
efforts to introduce the game abroad will bring an influx of foreign-born
players - and not just kickers - in the next century.

   Ex-players like Bernie Kosar wonder how big and fast those new players, and
their American counterparts, will get. "It's just unbelievable how much it
changed during the time I played," Kosar said. "There used to be two or three
300-pounders on a team when I started. Now it's like 15."

   That's led to the health concern of the near future: sleep apnea. Some of
these giants have trouble breathing as they sleep, snoring to the point of
unhealthy oxygen deprivation, which can cause heart problems and chronic
fatigue. Young says the NFL is studying the problem.

   Some have suggested enlarging the field or going to 10 men, to allow for the
increased size and speed, but don't bet on it. For one thing, Young doesn't like
the idea of tinkering with the record book. For another, the latest generation
of stadiums wouldn't allow bigger fields.

   What Young believes in is cycles. Tall backs were the norm in the early '70s,
but 5-9 Barry Sanders-types hold sway today. Bigger linemen may already be
falling out of favor. Young points to the smallish Bronco offensive line as an
example of quickness being used to counter size. "I think in the future you'll
see linemen closer to 300 pounds than to 400," he said.

   "People think the passing game is a recent phenomenon, but Don Hutson set all
kinds of receiving records that look pretty good today - and he played in the
'30s," he said.

   A guy like Randy Moss is closer to Hutson than you think. Both were known for
uncanny body control, deceptive speed, and creatively tipping the ball over
defenders to themselves.

   In 50 years, the Randy Moss of the future may not look so different than
Hutson.

   Even with new technology, new equipment and new nutrition, Young says you can
count on one thing - gripes about officiating, even when it's done well.

   "We have a many-centuries-old problem, and that's human beings," says Young.
"There'll still be human beings in the 21st century."

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1999


                             1368 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: Details on Cardinal's Brain Tumor Are Scant

BYLINE: By DENISE GRADY

BODY:

   After John Cardinal O'Connor's recent surgery for removal of a brain tumor,
the Archdiocese of New York said that the tumor was small, confined to the brain
and on its surface, and that he would soon begin several weeks of radiation
treatment.

   But the Archdiocese released no information about the tumor's precise type,
size or location, leaving open the question of the 79-year-old Cardinal's short-
and long-term prospects of survival.

    Noncancerous brain tumors can often be successfully removed. Malignant brain
tumors are among the most feared forms of cancer, and patients with the primary
kind -- originating in the brain rather than spreading from other organs -- have
lower survival rates than those with other types of cancer. When survival rates
for all types of cancer are averaged, 60 percent of patients survive for five
years or more. But for brain cancer, the five-year survival rate is only 30
percent. Still, that is a better prognosis than cancers of the esophagus, liver,
lung and pancreas.

   This year, 16,800 Americans are expected to develop primary brain cancer,
according to the American Cancer Society, compared with 170,000 each for breast,
prostate and lung cancer. If tumors that spread to the brain from other organs,
like the lungs or breast, are also counted in the brain tumor total, the number
of brain tumors rises to about 100,000 a year in the United States.

   Dr. Ted Gansler, medical editor for patient information at the American
Cancer Society in Atlanta, said he did not know the details of Cardinal
O'Connor's case, but speaking about brain tumors in general, he said: "Some
tumors may be found in a part of the brain that's not essential for survival,
and surgery might be more feasible. But the converse is, if it's in the brain
stem, which controls breathing and life-sustaining functions, then curative
treatment may be much less likely."

   But there are many types of brain cancer, and the outlook for patients varies
widely depending on the type as well as the location of the tumor. Dr. Gansler
said the most common type of primary brain cancer in adults is a glioma. Those
tumors form not in the nerve cells of the brain, but in glial cells, which
comprise several different types of cells that carry out a variety of functions.
Some help to support and nourish nerve cells, some make the fatty material that
insulates nerve cells, others line cavities in the brain that contain
cerebrospinal fluid.

   Gliomas vary in both the type of cell they affect and their aggressiveness.
In some cases, the average survival is 6 to 8 years, but in others it may be
only 12 to 18 months.

   "In cases where the outlook is not very good, people might want to explore
clinical trials that offer new treatments that may be more effective," Dr.
Gansler said, noting that the National Cancer Institute Web site (the address is
www.nci.nih.gov) lists 106 studies now in progress, testing experimental
treatments for brain cancer in adults. The treatments include radiation,
chemotherapy, biological therapies that alter the immune system and gene therapy
designed to make tumor cells more vulnerable to certain cancer-killing drugs.

   Yesterday, a spokesman for the Archdiocese said that Cardinal O'Connor, who
was released from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center on Saturday, was
recuperating at home and still planning to say Mass this Sunday at St. Patrick's
Cathedral.

   "He is at his residence, and working," said the spokesman, Joseph Zwilling.
"He has been working all the way through, even while in the hospital. But he is
taking it easy. No public events are planned for him prior to Sunday."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1999


                             1369 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  September 8, 1999, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 844 words

HEADLINE: Cuts hinder research at teaching hospitals

BYLINE: Edward J. Sylvester

BODY:

   Neurologist Scott Sherman is juggling a memory cell from a rat
brain on the tip of a glass tube finer than any hair. After successfully
anchoring the two together, he hammers commands into a computer
keyboard as the monitor tells him the current running through
one of the cell's electrical "outlets."

   What kind of work is this for a busy hospital doctor with patients
to see?

   The phone rings, and Sherman abruptly switches from researcher
to practicing doctor: "Her tremors are increasing? How much Sinemet
are we giving her? Let's try increasing that to 35 cc's, and I'll
swing by in an hour."

   Hands suspended over the keyboard, Sherman is momentarily lost
in thought. Then he explains: A Parkinson's patient has rigidity
so serious she's unable to move at all. "Her medications aren't
even working as well as pre-operatively," he says. "We have
no idea why."


   Sherman seems torn between abstract research and down-to-earth
doctoring, but that belies his remarkably singular focus. He passionately
believes the secret to controlling Parkinson's, epilepsy patients'
seizures and other malfunctions involving the brain's electrical
signaling lie before him under the microscope.

   So does the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which gave Sherman
a $ 250,000 research grant. Thus, the government giveth . .
.

   . . . And with the other hand taketh away. Medicare payments
to teaching hospitals such as this one at The Arizona Health Sciences
Center in Tucson until recently provided residency training for
the next generation of physicians -- and the teaching hospitals'
cushion between black and red ink. But those federal funds are
dwindling so rapidly that Sherman, like thousands of other
physician-researchers,
spends ever more hours doing routine clinical work rather than
the research that, if successful, might send his patients home
-- or make it unnecessary for them to be here at all.

   Cutting off funds to spite your health?

   This is a profoundly destructive form of government give and take.
Through NIH, taxpayers are supporting magnificent basic research
projects that ultimately could deliver cures for staggeringly
costly diseases that cause untold suffering. But at the same time,
dwindling Medicare funds are forcing teaching hospitals, where
the lion's share of such research is translated into practical
applications, to face bankruptcy or closure.

   The government, for example, has pledged up to $ 3 billion to unravel
the code of all human genes in the Human Genome Project. This
could help Sherman and other researchers translate their work
into ways to control neurological diseases' costly symptoms so
effectively that treatment would amount to cure. That would save
billions of dollars. More importantly, gene therapy offers a potential
end to the destruction such diseases cause -- in time for most
of us and virtually all of our children.

   "With the Human Genome Project and advances in research, we'll
cure brain disorders," Sherman predicts.

   But the 1997 balanced-budget law slashed Medicare payments to
teaching hospitals, which count on those payments as their principal
source of federal funds to help pay both the direct costs of medical
education and some overhead costs.

   So, at a time when such promising projects as Sherman's are under
way, The Arizona Health Sciences Center is considering disbanding
its epilepsy center to make up for its income losses from Medicare
and managed-care contracts. If the center disappears, there will
be no merger between any discoveries Sherman might make and patient
treatment.

   Story is the same across the nation

   The Arizona center is not the only teaching hospital with such
woes. "What I hear at every place I go, in every state, in communities
large and small . . . is that we had cuts that were too
severe in the Medicare budget in 1997, which has imposed enormous
burdens on the teaching hospitals in every state in the country,"
President Clinton said recently.

   A year ago, Pennsylvania's Allegheny Medical Center became the
first major academic medical institution to go bankrupt. This
summer, Harvard University President Neil Rudenstine called teaching
hospitals' situation "an absolute crisis."

   Spending tax dollars on basic research ultimately can save enormous
expense in disease treatment. But the government also must approve
money to train and support medical researchers adequately -- and
do so steadily. If it doesn't, our highly trained, intensely motivated
cadre of physician-researchers will be decimated, sharply thinning
the ranks of those who can translate that basic research into
practical applications that someday may save your life -- or your
child's.


   Learn, practice

   There are 1,086 U.S. teaching hospitals. The largest 280 of those:

   * Provide 44% of all U.S. hospital indigent care

   * Train more than half of all medical residents

   * Do the vast majority of U.S. clinical research

   Source: Association of American Medical Colleges

LOAD-DATE: September 08, 1999


                             1370 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                          September 07, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: Telethon shoots for goal of $ 275,000 for state LR station, Jerry
Lewis team up to raise money for muscular dystrophy research

BYLINE: ERIN SCHULTE, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   The responsibility for unlocking the secrets of human disease belongs to
science.
Monday, it was all show biz.
The Jerry Lewis MDA Telethon, which last year brought in $ 51.5 million for
neuromuscular research, treatment and education, enlisted the help of Cher,
Sheryl Crow and Bill Maher, among many other celebrities, to woo watchers into
pledging money.
Little Rock's Fox 16 KLRT was one of more than 200 local stations nationwide to
broadcast the 211/2-hour telethon, which last year brought $ 260,000 from
Arkansans.
This year's goal is $ 275,000, and by 3 p.m., the local chapter and its 150
volunteers were almost halfway there with $ 135,059.
Every hour, the local station cut into the national show for 15 or 20 minutes to
give a more personal plea for money. John Lee, a local host for the telethon,
was persistent and persuasive in convincing viewers that donating their money
was a good thing.
"Southwestern Bell is going to match all the pledges in the next three minutes!
Let's hear those phones ring!" he encouraged in his smooth radio voice. "It's a
good chance to double your money!"
As if on cue, six phones chimed on top of each other and six volunteers wrote
down pledges.
About half the association's money comes from the telethons, said Philip
Forrest, district director for the Muscular Dystrophy Association.
Nonprofit work often entails long hours and low pay. But Monday, Forrest said,
he was reminded of what kept him going.
"There's two times a year you really find out why you're doing it," he said.
"Camp, because the kids are having such a great time, and today, because you see
the parents come in with hope on their faces that their children will be cured."

One parent at the KLRT studio Monday was Lisa McFadden of Jacksonville, who
herself was the 1975 national poster child for the Muscular Dystrophy
Association. McFadden, 30, has spinal muscular atrophy. Her 10-year-old
daughter, Brooke, does, too.
McFadden is petite and pixie-pretty but her muscles are weak enough that when
she sits down in a chair, she can't get back up and a flight of stairs presents
a challenge equal to that of a vertical granite wall.
She hopes that by the time her son, Jordan, grows up, they won't have to worry
if he carries the gene.
"Hopefully by the time Jordan's ready to have children, we'll have this thing
beat," she said.
McFadden and her husband, Kevin, have watched research -- heavily funded through
telethon dollars -- progress in fits and starts. Recent breakthroughs such as
gene therapy excite them.
Kevin's so hopeful he's preparing for the day his wife and daughter can do all
they've been wanting to do for years -- roller skate, play soccer, run with
abandon and without fear of falling.
"I don't think she'll ever sit on the couch," he said of his wife. "I better get
in shape -- I'm not going to be able to keep up. She's going to get to do all
the things she hasn't done and she's going to want to do it all in one day."
The 34th annual telethon was broadcast live on the Internet in English, Spanish
and Japanese.
The telethon raised a record $ 53.1 million in pledges for the Muscular
Dystrophy Association.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1999


                             1371 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         September 6, 1999, Monday All

SECTION: Health and Science : COUNTDOWN TO 2000 Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1583 words

HEADLINE: Century of change
 Health highs, lows of past 100 years

BYLINE: NEIL D. ROSENBERG

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   The past century can best be described as Dickensian concerning health and
medicine: It was the best of times and the worst of times.

   It was a century that saw the end of one of the world's longtime scourges,
smallpox.

   Not long after, a new plague arose: AIDS.

   It was a century when tuberculosis, another major killer, was reduced, in
most developed countries, to a nuisance.

   Only to be replaced by an epidemic of lung cancer and related lung diseases
brought on by cigarette smoking.

   It was a century when development of coronary bypass surgery, heart
transplants and artificial heart pumps saved or prolonged the lives of millions
of patients.

   Only to be countered by near-record levels of gluttony, obesity and sedentary
lifestyles that sent the incidence of heart disease soaring until only very
recently.

   But despite these ups and downs, there have been major discoveries in the
past 100 years that forever changed the course of medical treatment, the
understanding of human biology and the control of the human condition.

   They are:

   The advent of antibacterial drugs.

   The discovery and use of vitamins.

   The unraveling of the structure of DNA.

   The growth of family planning and contraception.

   THE BIRTH OF ANTIBIOTICS

   As far back as 2,500 years ago, there is evidence that molds were used to
treat certain infections. But the germ theory of disease -- that illnesses could
be caused by one-celled organisms called bacteria -- was not understood until
late last century, by famed French chemist Louis Pasteur.

   That started a frantic search for substances that could kill bacteria. But as
each one was tried by scientists, they either did not work or were too
dangerous. As things often happen in life, the debut of the first antibiotic
occurred by accident.

   British bacteriologist Sir Alexander Fleming noticed that a green mold in a
laboratory dish was killing bacteria in the dish. He identified the mold as
Penicillium notatum. Fleming immediately realized the potential of this finding,
but could not extract the active bacterial-killing substance from the mold.

   That ultimately fell to two other British scientists, Ernst B. Chain and
Howard W. Florey, who developed a method of extracting and purifying small
amounts of what was to be called penicillin. A British police officer who had
blood poisoning received the first doses in 1941. He survived.

   But it was not until 1943 that a method for efficient, large-scale extraction
of penicillin was developed, after which it came into widespread use.

   Interestingly, the first major antibacterial to come into widespread use was
not penicillin but sulfa drugs, more technically known as sulfonamide drugs.

   German bacteriologist Gerhard Domagk discovered the first sulfa drug, a
byproduct of a dye, in 1932. By 1939, it was being widely developed and was used
rather extensively during World War II -- unlike penicillin, which was used only
in the latter part of the war and in more limited ways.

   Domagk was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine for his work in 1939, while
Fleming, Chain and Florey received their Nobels in 1945.

   In 1943, after testing 10,000 soil samples, American scientist Selman A.
Waksman discovered a type of fungi, Streptomyces, which produced a potent
antibiotic eventually called streptomycin.

   By the 1950s, these antibiotics and anti-bacterials already had begun to
impact such major infections as meningitis, dysentery, pneumonia, rheumatic
fever and scarlet fever. There are now more than 60 antibiotics and antifungals
that regularly are used to treat bacterial infectious diseases.


   VITAMINS

   As health food stores boom, as Americans pop billions of vitamin pills, tons
of vitamin-fortified food and tankloads of nutrient elixirs at record levels, it
may be surprising for many to learn that the first vitamin was isolated only in
1913.

   There had been strong hints as far back as the 1740s that deficiencies in
diet could cause major medical problems. It was then that a Scottish scientist
figured out that limes and lemons could cure scurvy in sailors. One hundred and
forty years later, a Japanese scientist cured beriberi by adding meat and fresh
vegetables to the diet of sailors.

   In 1900, a Dutch scientist figured out that those who ate polished rice --
absent rice hulls and bran -- would get beriberi, but not those who ate
unpolished rice.

   Later a Polish scientist, attempting to extract the factor in unpolished rice
that could prevent beriberi, speculated that it belonged to a group of compounds
called amines and named it "vitamine" meaning "amine essential to life."

   The scientist, Casimir Funk, with British biochemist Frederick Hopkins,
further developed the idea that foods contain substances vital for growth and
development and eventually teased out the vitamin (the e was dropped) theory of
deficiency disease.

   Finally in 1913, American scientists Elmer McCollum and Marguerite Davis
isolated the fat soluble vitamin A.

   Since then, 13 vitamins have been isolated, including vitamin D in 1924 by
the University of Wisconsin's Henry Steenbock. Nine of the vitamins must be
derived by food; the others are produced by bacteria in our gut, or in the case
of vitamin D, from the action of sunlight on the skin.

   With the advent of vitamins, diseases related to vitamin deficiency from
scurvy to rickets virtually disappeared. Now there is a new appreciation that
vitamins -- E and C, for example -- can protect individuals to some degree from
such major disorders as heart disease.

   Most recently, science has discovered that folate, one of the B vitamins, can
reduce the risk of certain types of neurological birth defects, and more foods
now are being fortified with that vitamin.


   MYSTERY OF DNA

   DNA or deoxyribonucleic acid, the largest known molecule, contains the
genetic information and instruction that determines whether you will have blue
eyes or brown, are 6 feet tall or 5 feet tall or grow old with a head full of
hair or bald as a billiard ball. In short, it is the genetic master molecule,
the blueprint of what and how each of us will be.

   And although its existence has been known since 1869, its role in genetic
inheritance was not understood until 1943.

   But it was left to an American scientist, James Watson; and British scientist
Francis Crick to unlock the very structure of the molecule -- the now-famous
Double Helix -- that has opened the door to the brave new world of genetic
engineering, gene therapy and the soon-to-be accomplished road map of the entire
human genome.

   What Watson and Crick did was precisely describe the structure of DNA -- a
double spiral staircase whose banisters are sugar-phosphate chains and whose
steps connecting the banisters are pairs of nitrogen bases.

   But it wasn't just that they came up with a model. Even more critically
important, they described how the DNA could duplicate itself. That in turn led
to the understanding of how genes and whole chromosomes -- sequences of genes --
duplicate themselves.

   It was as if they had put together a model of an airplane for the first time,
and from the model also deduced how the airplane was able to fly.

   Although others have built on that foundation -- for example the discovery of
transcription enzymes, chemicals that can cut apart genes which led to the field
of genetic engineering -- the double helix remains the seminal genetic
achievement ushering in the genetic age.


   FAMILY PLANNING AND CONTRACEPTION

   One of the most contentious medical ethical issues of this century was -- and
is -- birth control, with its associated issues of family planning of all sorts
and abortion. The issue was joined by a New York obstetrics nurse determined to
alleviate the pain, suffering and deaths associated with unwanted pregnancies
she encountered while ministering to women on the lower East Side.

   Indeed, Margaret Sanger gave issue to the very term "birth control," which
previously had been referred to quaintly as "voluntary motherhood." Sanger's
advocacy for birth control was part of her growing feminist philosophy, that for
women to gain equality with men they needed to avoid unwanted pregnancy.

   Toward that end she began a magazine in 1914, later entitled Birth Control
Review, and in 1916 opened a birth control clinic -- at a time when birth
control devices were illegal in the United States. Both ventures got her
arrested (one case was dismissed; the other had her serving 30 days in the
"workhouse.")

   Later still, she founded the American Birth Control League, a parent
organization of what was to become the Birth Control Federation of America,
which eventually morphed into the current Planned Parenthood Federation of
America.

   Her views prevailed and fostered the development of the oral contraceptive
pill, which in turn led to the greater emancipation of women, the rise of
feminism in the U.S. and worldwide, and a new openness in the whole area of
sexuality. Family planning initiatives here and elsewhere clearly have stemmed
-- or at least slowed -- rampant population growth that threatened to outstrip
resources of food, water and shelter.

   But other segments of the population have decried the openness of sexuality
in this country, blaming it for a rise in teenage pregnancies and sexual
promiscuity among younger age groups.

   Sanger died in 1966, amid battles over birth control that continue as the
next millennium approaches.

GRAPHIC: Chart
JODY MITORI
Journal Sentinel, Journal Sentinel files

   Medical moments
From A - discovery of Vitamin A - to S - smallpox
 eradicated - the 20th century was an alphabet of medical milestones.
1900 - Sigmund Freud, Austrian founder of psychoanalysis, publishes
seminal work Interpretation of Dreams; Karl Landsteinger discovers first
three blood group;
1901 - Jokichi Takamine, Japanese-American isolates first hormone,
 adrenaline.
1906 - The Pure Food and Drug Act is passed, the forerunner of the
Food and Drug Administration; August Von Wasserman develops blood test
for syphilis which henceforth carries his name.
1910 - Marie Curie, French scientist, isolates pure radium ushering in
the age of radiation treatment of cancer; the Flexner Report on Medical
Education in the United States describes the quacks and charlatans and
leads to major reforms that transform the system into the world's finest.
1913 - Vitamin A is isolated.
 1915 - American Margaret Sanger founds the National Birth Control League,
 which becomes the foundation of family planning in United States; now known
 as Planned Parenthood.
1921 - Canadians Fredrick Banting and Charles H. Best discover insulin
for treatment of diabetes.
1928 - Sir Alexander Fleming discovers penicillin in green mold,
unleashing the era of antibiotics, although penicillin would not be
used clinically until the 1940s.
1935 - German Gerhard Domagk discovers the first sulfa drug, the first
antibiotic to be used clinically, in 1936; American Edward Kendall
isolates cortisone, ushering in the age of medical steroid use.
1936 - Vitamin pills become available for first time.
1937 - Michael De Bakey, suggests cigarette smoking is the cause
of lung cancer.
1943 - American Selman Waksman isolates streptomycin antibiotic
effective against tuberculosis.
1944 - Dutch-American Willem Kolff develops first kidney dialysis
machine.
1945 - American surgeon Alfred Blalock introduces first successful
operation for " blue babies," those born heart with defects causing
inadequate oxygenation of the blood; Grand Rapids, Mich., becomes
first community to fluoridate water.
1952 - American scientist Jonas Salk develops polio vaccine that
 becomes available in 1955.
1953 - American biologist James Watson and British biophysicist
Francis Crick unravel the famous "double helix" structure of DNA,
the genetic roadmap of all living things.
1954 - First successful kidney transplant performed by Harvard
medical team, beginning era of organ transplantation.
1955 - American biologist Gregory Pincus develops first birth
control pill, which receives FDA approval in 1960.
 1960 - First heart pacemaker implanted.
1961 - Scientists at Bell Laboratories develop first continuously
operating laser.
1964 - U.S. Surgeon General Luther Terry releases famous report
conclusively linking smoking with cancer and other ills.
1965 - Medicare and Medicaid established.
1969 - Denton Cooley, American heart surgeon, implants first
artificial heart.
1972 - British scientists describe the concept of Computerized Axial
Tomography or CAT scans, which will revolutionize radiology imaging like
 nothing since Roentgen's discovery of the X-ray in 1898.
1977 - So-called recombinant DNA technololgy used to make first human
protein, a brain hormone somatostatin. Insulin and other hormones would
soon follow; first invitro fertilization is performed in England by
Patrick Steptoe and R. G. Edwards resulting in birth of first "test tube"
baby, Louise Brown the next year.
1979 - Smallpox in the natural environment is wiped out.
1981 - AIDS identified for first time.
1988 - Prozac, the first of the so-called selective serotonin
ruptake inhibitors, for treatment of depression, anxiety disorders
and other related mental health illnesses, is introduced.
1990 - Gene therapy in humans is tried for the very first time. Photo 4

   (PILLS) Photo 5

   (PETRI DISH) Photo 6

   (DNA) Photo 7

   (FAMILY PLANNING EXHIBIT)

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1999


                             1372 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 6, 1999 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 918 words

HEADLINE: ASTHMA'S ATTACK SCIENTISTS ON MANY FRONTS SEEK ANSWERS TO THE / PUZZLE
OF ASTHMA, A DISEASE THAT DEFIES SIMPLE EXPLANATION.

BYLINE: Seth Borenstein, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS

BODY:

   The act of breathing is simple. You do it without thinking. But how asthma
chokes its victims is much more complicated, and it still mystifies doctors
after decades of research.

   On its face, asthma seems straightforward - a chronic inflammation of the
respiratory system that makes breathing difficult. A severe asthma attack so
starves the victim of air that hospitalization may be required.

   But its cause and the mechanisms underlying it still puzzle researchers.

   "In 1999 we don't know what asthma is," said Jeff Fredberg, Harvard School of
Public Health physiology program director. "It's a shocking state of affairs."

   Asthma used to be thought of as a disease caused by environmental factors.
But now researchers think allergens, smoke and dust - essentially dirty air -
are mere triggers.

   Instead of looking outside the body for what causes asthma, doctors are
looking within. Currently, the leading theory says asthma comes not from dirty
air, but from an antiseptic lifestyle that causes the immune system to create
its own enemies to fight. Other factors may be obesity and a too-sedentary
lifestyle, or irregular functioning of cells.

   But none of these explanations provides all the answers for the contradictory
questions asthma poses: Why in the United States, for instance, is it more
likely to hit the poor, while the opposite is true in much of the rest of the
world?

   Poorer, polluted eastern Germany has far fewer asthmatics than richer,
cleaner western Germany. In Africa, asthma is 56 times more prevalent in rich
areas of Zimbabwe than in poor areas.

   Many of the researchers trying to solve the riddle of asthma suspect it isn't
one disease, but a collection of similar ailments wrongly lumped together.

   "I'm virtually certain there are subcategories, but we can't define them,"
said Dean Sheppard, director of the Lung Biology Center at the University of
California at San Francisco, a conclusion echoed by other scientists. "If we
really understood this fully, there would have to be multiple diseases that
acted similarly."

   Doctors are certain what sends asthmatics of all sorts over the edge with a
serious attack. Usually it is something in the air or on the ground. Dust, dust
mites, mold, animal hair, cockroach parts or secondhand smoke can send an
asthmatic to the hospital or the morgue, experts said.

   And that's what much of the current government asthma research is aimed at -
environmental factors that trigger the asthma that's already there.

   The Environmental Protection Agency, for instance, is spending more than $7.6
million researching those triggers in both inner cities and rural Iowa, looking
for links between air quality and asthma attacks.

   Meanwhile, other scientists are looking at the body itself for a clue why
some people get asthma and others don't.

   The theory with the most scientific support at the moment is that cleanliness
and an unchallenged immune system are the root cause for the rise in asthma and
associated allergies.

   According to this hypothesis, modern antibiotics and hygienic living
eliminate many of the bugs, parasites and diseases around babies before and just
after birth, leaving the immune system with little to do. Some of the immune
system cells, called T helper-2 cells, get into trouble by reacting to simple
things in the environment.

   "It's like having a bunch of Marines sitting around in Camp LeJeune, North
Carolina," said Harvard asthmologist Jeffrey Drazen. "They're going to get in
trouble because they don't have anything to pick on."

   But this doesn't explain what's happening in America's inner cities and why
only certain people with allergies get asthma.

   Leading asthma researcher Thomas Platts-Mills of the University of Virginia
and others are attempting to link the disease to child obesity and inactivity
from TV and computer games. Physiologists have found that asthmatics' and obese
children's lungs don't stretch and react as well, thus don't operate normally.
They see that most of their severe asthmatics are overweight.

   A recent theory finds something amiss in the cells of asthmatics' airways.
They are sending out a false message - a protein, Stat1 - that makes the immune
system start swelling to fight a nonexistent virus. Cell biologist Michael
Holtzman at Washington University in St. Louis said asthmatics seem to have high
levels of Stat1 without any virus present.

   Between birth and 6 months, their airway cells get programmed to send out
Stat1, and it probably has something to do with the way they react to a
respiratory virus everyone gets, Holtzman said. But why only certain people's
airways get programmed to activate Stat1 this way when they first get the common
virus remains a mystery.

   If this theory is correct, genetic therapy is possible. Holtzman can modify a
protein so it inhibits Stat1 - at least in test tubes, and he is starting to
test it in mice. That could stop the wheezing process dead in its tracks.

   If the popular immune system theory is correct, there's hope for a cure of
sorts there, too.

   Patrick Holt, a prize-winning Australian asthma researcher, is starting
experiments with Swedish researchers on a nose spray that will trigger the
immune system to fight dummy diseases in children, which may stop them from
developing asthma and allergies.

   "This whole approach is a quantum leap in terms of our approach to this
problem," Holt said. "We're not there yet, but I genuinely believe that that is
where we're heading."

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1373 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                              September 6, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     September 6, 1999 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 2403 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL BREAKTHROUGHS IN TREATING BRAIN TUMORS;
WITH NUMBERS INCREASING, NEW PROCEDURES BRING HOPE

BYLINE: By JOAN RAYMOND

BODY:

   Dan Stinebring remembers "seeing stars," transient splashes of color and
light that would disturb his vision just for an instant.

   Thinking that overwork, lack of sleep and too much coffee were causing his
vision and depth-perception problems, the 46-year-old Oberlin College
astrophysics professor joked with his wife, Lynn, that maybe it was time to
relax a little more.

   When the symptoms persisted, Stinebring went to see an ophthalmologist, who
could find no physical cause for his vision problems. When his symptoms
intensified, he went to see his family physician, who immediately ordered an
MRI. "I was terrified," says Stinebring, the father of 12-year-old Anna-Claire
and 8-year-old Jesse.

   The scan revealed a walnut-sized tumor deep within the center brain. Nestled
in the enlarged space between the cerebellum and the medulla, the tumor, called
a subependymoma, was causing increased intracranial pressure.

   Although the tumor was benign, it would eventually damage the delicate
structures of the brain. "I kept thinking," says Stinebring, "what does this
mean for our future? What does this mean for my family?"

    Understanding brain tumors

   Last year, more than 100,000 Americans were diagnosed with brain tumors,
nearly double the number diagnosed just 10 years ago.

   The growing incidences of brain tumors can be traced to advances in
diagnoses, increases in the number of aged or immunosuppressed individuals, both
of whom are more prone to the development of brain tumors, and improvements in
cancer treatments that allow people to survive other cancers only to experience
brain metastases. Studies suggest, however, that something more is at work.

   Everything from cell phones to aspartame has been implicated in brain tumor
development, but the data is, at best, inconclusive. Brain tumors can be
primary, either benign or malignant, or secondary, caused, for example, by the
spread of cancer from other parts of the body, such as the breast or lung. About
half of all brain tumors are benign and potentially curable.

   Despite advances, malignant brain tumors remain particularly difficult to
treat. They are the second most common cause of cancer death in people ages 15
to 34, the fourth most common cause of cancer death in males ages 35 to 54, and
the second most common cause of cancer death in children under the age of 15.

   But even when the term "benign" is used to describe a brain mass, this
biological foe can still be deadly. Doctors prefer to describe tumors as
"low-grade" (typically slow-growing tumors with clearly defined borders) or
"high-grade" (aggressive tumors whose cells reproduce rapidly). To complicate
matters even more, some low-grade tumors, called gliomas, can actually become
high-grade over time.

   The diagnosis of a brain tumor, says Dr. Matt Likavec, director of the
division of neurosurgery at the MetroHealth Medical Center, is particularly
nightmarish for patients, despite reassurances they may indeed have a tumor that
is both benign and responsive to treatment.

   "The brain is the center of thoughts and feelings and knowledge," says
Likavec, an assistant professor of neurosurgery at Case Western Reserve
University.

   "With surgery, you're dealing with the fact that various parts of the brain
provide a specialized function. A patient can lose the ability to speak, lose
vision, experience memory loss. And that memory loss might be the senior prom or
the first kiss," he says.

    Surgical breakthroughs

   There's no doubt that those with benign tumors are reaping the greatest
rewards from recent treatment advances. But almost all brain tumor patients can
expect improvements in quality of life, less cognitive impairment and fewer
treatment-related side effects.

   After researching the options, Dan Stinebring's doctor referred him to
Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital, where he underwent a minimally invasive,
endoscopic surgical procedure to remove the tumor.

   Using pre-operative scans to help localize the tumor, surgeons now can use
openings about the size of a small coin to gain access to the skull. These small
openings (sometimes called keyhole approaches) make it difficult for the surgeon
to see, explains Dr. Alan Cohen, chief of pediatric neurosurgery at Rainbow and
associate professor of pediatrics at CWRU.

   The neuro-endoscope helps solve that problem by providing the surgeon with
light and visual access as it is inserted and directed to the tumor site.
Treatment is possible because exquisitely miniaturized surgical tools are
manipulated through the endoscope.

   The surgical team worked for six hours on Stinebring to remove the tumor that
was located perilously close to the brain's "memory bundles." The entire tumor,
which was benign, was removed. Yet, Cohen was concerned that his patient may
have some residual surgical side effects, loss of memory or function that may
impair his career as an astrophysicist.

   "Here was this extremely high-functioning guy, and we needed to find some
questions that would show us that he didn't have any deficits," explains Cohen,
who trains neurosurgeons from across the world in minimally invasive techniques.

   The team decided to ask Stinebring about the Fibonacci sequence, an order of
numbers obtained by adding the two preceding numbers together. The first 15
numbers of the Fibonacci sequence are: 0,1,1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55.
Stinebring passed the test.

   A new technique called intra-operative MRI helps surgeons differentiate
abnormal brain tissue from healthy brain tissue, says Dr. Warren Selman,
vice-chairman of University Hospitals' department of neurological surgery and
professor of neurological surgery at CWRU.

   This technology also allows the surgeon to assess the brain tumor
intra-operatively - in real time - with MRI guidance. Previously, surgeons would
try to localize brain tumors with images taken before the patient underwent
surgery. But once the skull is opened, the brain actually shifts position making
the images taken pre-operatively less than reliable.

   "In any type of tumor surgery if you can reduce the mass of the tumor, the
other therapies, like radiation, are more effective," says Selman. "With the
MRI, you've basically got an illuminated map."

   The specialized computer equipment, says Selman, updates scans throughout the
procedure, while storing previous data. A specially designed table gives the
surgeon easier access to the patient, and allows the physician to move the
patient "in to and out of the magnet" for updates - without the patient ever
having to be moved from the surgical suite.

   "Part of getting a patient cured," says Selman, "is trying to get all of the
tumor out. This technology makes a big difference."

    Harnessing power of radiation

   Developments in radiation therapy, often used either alone or in conjunction
with surgery, allow doctors to delivery dramatically stronger doses of treatment
directly to tumor cells without harming healthy brain tissue, says Cleveland
Clinic radiation oncologist Dr. John Suh.

   Technically known as stereotactic radiosurgery, some of the new technology
includes the Gamma Knife, the CyberKnife and the "Peacock" System.

   The Gamma Knife, which was introduced in the United States in 1987, has
revolutionized the treatment of vascular malformations, metastatic brain tumors,
benign tumors that were previously inaccessible to the surgeon and functional
disorders, such as Parkinson's disease, explains Suh.

   The system includes a helmetlike device for the patient, a stereotactic frame
and a series of cobalt-60 radiation sources. The head frame is affixed to the
patient and then the tumor is localized through a series of images. After dose
planning, the stereotactic frame is positioned in the helmet so that the focal
point of radiation is at the tumor site. The minimally invasive procedure lasts
15 to 40 minutes.

   The robotic "CyberKnife," recently approved by the Food and Drug
Administration, is a lightweight linear accelerator (a technology used to
deliver radiation treatment), mounted on a robotic arm. The entire system, says
Suh, is controlled using an image-guided computer.

   The CyberKnife incorporates two ceiling-mounted X-ray cameras that target the
anatomy around the tumor. A computer then analyzes those images, providing
information about the patient's features, such as the bone structure. The
computer also supplies data about any changes in the position of the patient
during treatment, allowing doctors to deliver radiation directly to the targeted
area.

   So far, the system has only been used on patients with benign or malignant
brain tumors, although doctors expect it will eventually be used for the lungs,
liver and other organs.

   Another new radiation technique is called intensity-modulated radiation
therapy or IMRT. And for 60-year-old John Joseph of Cleveland, the technology
was "as easy as pie."

   Diagnosed with a meningioma in May 1998, Joseph underwent surgery to remove
the tumor, which was pressing against his optic nerve. Fortunately, most of the
tumor was surgically removed.

   The remaining tumor, however, eventually began to grow and needed to be
treated. Further surgery was out the question since the remaining tumor was so
close to the optic nerve.

   But with IMRT, delivered through the "Peacock" system, so named because the
pattern of its thousands of tiny radiation beams resembles the bird's tail,
Joseph's tumor could be treated.

   For about six weeks, 20 minutes a day, five days a week, Joseph rested his
head on a table, his head anchored by a plastic mesh mask, while a computer
aligned the radiation beams to fit the exact shape of the remaining tumor.
Joseph had no pain or side effects from the procedure and was able to keep
working full-time.

   The Peacock system is valuable, says Suh, because it can focus radiation so
precisely and stronger doses can be given to patients while still avoiding
healthy tissue. While gamma knife technology, for example, allows precise
focusing of radiation on smaller head tumors, the Peacock system can treat
larger, more irregularly shaped tumors, including those in sensitive areas, such
as near the eye.

   Joseph will return to the Clinic in October to determine whether the
procedure destroyed the remaining tumor.

    New drug regimens

   For many patients with malignant brain tumors, the treatment-mix includes
chemotherapy although so far, its effectiveness has been somewhat limited. "The
blood-brain barrier [a network of cells that act as the brain's natural
protective shield] makes it very difficult to many drugs to reach the tumors,"
explains neuro-oncologist Dr. Stephen Sagar, of University Hospitals of
Cleveland.

   Although the life expectancy for patients with malignant brain tumors is the
same as it was a decade ago, survival times have increased and quality of life
has been improved.

   The FDA recently approved a new drug called Temodar for the treatment of
patients with anaplastic astrocytoma. About 2,000 to 3,000 new cases of this
tumor are diagnosed each year. Despite intensive treatment, patients usually
experience tumor recurrence, often within a year of completing therapy.

   "This drug seems to buy patients time," says Sagar, principal investigator of
the Temodar trial at University Hospitals' Ireland Cancer Center. "Whether it's
more effective than other therapies remains to be seen. ... What we do know is
this drug is not a cure for the disease."

   Temodar, however, is well-tolerated by patients, causing less fatigue than
other treatments.

    New hope for the future

   Neuroscientists are continuing their quest to find better treatments for
brain tumors. Some scientists are banking on a range of experimental therapies
designed to change the way tumor cells behave, or how the body's cells respond
to the tumor cells.

   With gene therapy, for example, scientists try to reprogram tumor cells by
transferring in genetic material that stops cell growth or increases the cells'
receptivity to certain treatments.

   Others are attempting to actually boost the body's immune response to tumors
with immunotherapy. Scientists isolate and cultivate naturally occurring immune
substances that attack cancer cells, and then inject them into the tumor. Or,
they use components of tumor cells that have been removed from the patient to
create a "tumor vaccine," which is then reinjected to elicit a powerful
immunologic response.

   Each experimental therapy, so far, has its own set of problems: methods of
delivery for gene therapy haven't been refined, immunologic responses have been
limited and too few patients have undergone these experimental procedures to
produce any meaningful statistics.

   "We obviously have to find some way of treating brain tumors beyond surgery,
chemotherapy and radiation," says Dr. Gene Barnett, vice chairman of
neurological surgery at the Cleveland Clinic. "In the lab, we can cure brain
tumors in mice and rats with great efficiency, so if you're a mouse or a rat,
it's a great time to have a brain tumor."

   Barnett is encouraged, however, by the sheer amount of research in the
neurosciences and the practical advances in treatment. And the near future holds
the promise of a number of new treatments, he says. "If we can get tumors into
remission for a period of one, two, maybe three years, we may then be able to
unleash a whole new armamentarium."

   Many people, like 26-year-old Josette Brown, of Amherst, know that time is
one of the most precious commodities. Her husband, Michael, also 26, died of a
glioblastoma, a vicious, rapidly growing tumor that peppered his brain with
malignant cells. Michael only lived eight months from the time of initial
diagnosis in June 1998.

   Traditional approaches offered no hope, says Brown, so the young couple went
to Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C., so Michael could undergo
experimental treatment. Neither chemotherapy nor radiation was effective, and
Michael was "too sick" to undergo immunotherapy trials.

   Brown describes her husband of 2 years, as strapping 6-foot-2-inch, 200
pound, "all-time gorgeous guy," whose initial symptoms resembled the "flu,"
rather than a brain tumor.

   This past May, Brown attended a rally in Washington, D.C., held to increase
brain tumor awareness. "No one thinks someone they love could develop a brain
tumor. That happens to other people," says Brown. "People need to know these
tumors exist, and they can be deadly."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (COLOR) BY: CHUCK CROW / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER; For six
weeks, 20 minutes a day, five days a week, John Joseph rested his head on a
table, his head anchored by a plastic mesh mask, while a computer aligned
radiation beams to fit the exact shape of a tumor behind his eye. The radiation
treatment, at the Cleveland Clinic, is delivered through what is called "Peacock
therapy" because the pattern of its thousands of tiny radiation beams resembles
the bird's tail.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1999


                             1374 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)



                    September 6, 1999, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS & FINANCE, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 830 words

HEADLINE: Diabetic finds freedom in pump;

BYLINE: Mike Stobbe;

BODY:


   Emmy Acton was at a Rotary Club luncheon recently when the man sitting beside
her noticed the  small, plastic box at her waist.

   He had heard a beep and assumed it was a beeper, perhaps not noticing the
spaghetti strand of  clear tubing that reached from the box into her waistband.

   "The guy says, "Boy, they're finding you everywhere, aren't they?' " recalled
Acton, the  Hillsborough County attorney.

   "I explained to him, "No, this is my insulin pump.' "

   Specifically, it's a MiniMed 507C, a $ 5,000 device that gives Acton - a
diabetic - a small, steady  flow of lifesaving insulin.

   The pump came on the market last year, and it's being touted as one of the
great advances in the  care of people with diabetes.

   Diabetics could use some good news because having the disease is a
frightening, often  exhausting, every-day-of-your-life struggle.

   Diabetes disrupts the body's ability to convert food into life-sustaining
energy. The problem  revolves around insulin, a hormone that grabs sugar in the
blood and gets it into cells for use as  energy.

   Diabetes comes in two forms.

   Roughly 16 million Americans have the adult-onset type, in which the body for
some reason is  resistant to insulin. Generally, scientists consider this to be
the less severe form because it  often is triggered by obesity and can be
controlled by healthy habits.

   Acton, unfortunately, has the other kind.

   She and 1 million other Americans have juvenile-onset diabetes, in which the
immune system  attacks insulin-producing cells in the pancreas, meaning the body
doesn't make enough insulin.

   Acton can't let her blood sugar get too low. That can lead to seizures and a
coma.

   She can't let her sugar get too high, either. In the long term, too much
glucose can clog  arteries, which explains why some some people with diabetes
lose eyesight, suffer heart disease or  lose feet to amputation.

   Acton worries about that.

   "I have several friends lined up who are going to read to me if I lose my
eyesight," she said.

   In the short term, too much blood sugar can also lead to a coma. That's how
she was first  diagnosed, when she was 13 and went into a coma at her home in
Bryn Athyn, Penn.

   At first they didn't know what to do with her. Not only did no one in her
family have diabetes,  no one in the town had it, she said.

   "I was told I couldn't play sports. So they hung a whistle around my neck and
made me a referee  in all the sports in high school," she said. "That was
totally the wrong thing to do. Exercise is  very important. But at that time,
they really hadn't figured a lot of that stuff out."

   For most of the last 31 years she gave herself shots daily. Early on it was
one injection a day  of a long-acting insulin, partly because the only way her
blood sugar could be checked was through  a urine test that wouldn't produce
results for four or five hours.

   These days she can check her blood sugar instantly by pricking her finger and
dabbing blood onto  a monitor. But she still has to check everything she eats,
counting carbohydrates and calculating  their impact on her blood sugar.

   Stress, exercise and other things also affect the balance.

   "It's all very exact. A lot of math, which is a problem because I'm an
English major," she said.

   In recent years, she gave herself insulin shots several times a day, based on
her finger-prick  readings and those calculations.

   In July she got the pump, which contains a syringe in a compartment that
otherwise might hold AA  batteries. The syringe, pushed by a mechanical arm,
sends a fast-acting form of insulin through the  tube into a catheter in her
abdomen at whatever rate she dictates.

   It allows much more control over her blood sugar, she said. "I feel
healthier."

   Acton is not alone in singing the pump's praises.

   Miss America Nicole Johnson also is a fan. She wore her pump during all
phases of the pageant  except the swimsuit competition. Since winning, she has
been a spokeswoman for improved awareness  and treatment of diabetes. She talks
about her pump often.

   "It changed my life!" she said in a news release used by  MiniMed, the
California company that has sold about 50,000 of the pumps.

   An electromechanical pump hardly seems a cure, and scientists haven't given
up on a better  solution.

   Some are working on transplanting insulin-producing beta cells from a healthy
pancreas into a  diabetic's body. Others are pursuing gene therapy work that
might lead to a diabetes-preventing  vaccine.

   But those aren't expected to materialize in the near future. The pump is the
best thing going.

   "I feel very, very lucky that I'm able to use this at this point," said
Acton, in the dry,  matter-of-fact manner that has seen her through legal and
political fights.

   She can handle the stress.

   "I've got the blood sugar to prove it," she said.  Mike Stobbe covers health
care and can be reached at (813) 259-7562 or mstobbe@tampatrib.com

GRAPHIC: SIGNATURE

NOTES: GENERAL PRACTICE

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1999


                             1375 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 5, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words

HEADLINE: Ideas & Trends: Eek!;
The Hidden Traps In Fooling Mother Nature

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   NOW that researchers have shown that mice can be made smarter, a whole world
of opportunities opens up. Those long-neglected inventors of smarter mousetraps
will at last get their calls returned. Smarter cats will be needed. And everyone
will have a list of humans who might benefit, starting perhaps with the baseball
umpires or, in the case of most evolutionists, with the Kansas Board of
Education.

   Pleasant as it may be to contemplate a smarter world, there are serious
quandaries in enhancing human abilities, as well as in trying to raise the
intelligence of animals, possibilities raised last week by the Princeton
biologist Joe Z. Tsien and his colleagues when they announced they had developed
a genetically smarter strain of mice.

    In mice, monkeys and probably humans, nature has engineered a deliberate
fading of memory with age. The brain cell receptor that helps associate two
events -- the basic mechanism of memory -- is made of components that change
over a life span, making the receptor less efficient in older animals. It is
this process that was counteracted in Dr. Tsien's mice. He genetically
engineered the mice so that their brain cells produced more copies of the
youthful component of the memory receptor, thus enhancing its performance.

   The receptor was souped up in brain cells throughout the mice's forebrain and
hippocampus, a brain module that helps mice remember places (and humans to
recall places and faces). The altered mice did better than normal mice on six
standard tests of rodent intellectual performance, like remembering where to
find a hidden platform when dropped into a bucket of murky water, or recognizing
new objects. Because the improvement was consistent in all the tests, for which
the mice had to use many different areas of the brain, Dr. Tsien concluded that
in improving the basic mechanism of memory he had also enhanced the mice's
learning ability and general intelligence.

   Dr. Tsien and other scientists are far from sure that tweaking the memory
receptor would be similarly helpful in the more complicated human brain. After
all, with too retentive a memory you might clutter up your mind with all kinds
of things you'd be better off forgetting. Still, scientists agree that the
receptor is a promising place for intelligence enhancement to start.

   But would the improvement of human acumen dangerously flout nature's wisdom?
After all, intelligence is so precious for survival that surely nature makes
every animal as smart as possible without transgressing some pivotal balance.

   This doesn't seem to be the case, however, at least with laboratory mice. Dr.
Tsien's strains are smarter than their normal cousins, without any visible
drawback. And behaviorally, modern man is so new a species -- 50,000 years is
the blink of an eye in evolutionary time -- that perhaps the forces of natural
selection have scarcely had the chance to make the most of the human brain's
capacities.

   Still, genetic engineers must surely pause at the fact that nature has
designed memory to become less retentive with age. The danger of tampering with
this system is that the brain's memory storage room could quickly be overwhelmed
if learning were to continue at the same rate in adult life as in youth,
suggests Dr. Charles Stevens, a neurobiologist at the Salk Institute in La
Jolla, Calif. He believes the brain's capacity, vast as it is, must have limits.
The human brain has 100 billion neurons, and each neuron makes about 1,000
connections with other neurons, giving a potential 100 trillion units of memory.
"So there is enormous storage capacity, but we don't know how much we need," Dr.
Stevens said.

   Even if the limit of that storage capacity is never reached in a human
lifetime, the increasing access time needed to scan a growing store of knowledge
may be one reason why nature arranges for information to be acquired more slowly
once the youthful thirst for knowledge has passed. What a powerful threat to
deploy against one's children -- learn it or lose it.

   Despite the risk of running out of space on one's mental hard drive, the
temptation to try to enhance intelligence by promoting the youthful form of the
memory receptor will doubtless prove irresistible. Drugs might be developed to
target the nerve cell system that Dr. Tsien altered by genetic means. Gene
therapy could one day supply smart genes to an embryo -- or even to adults,
since the hippocampus is one of the few areas of the brain that generates new
cells throughout adult life.

   Three categories of people might benefit: the medically ill, the elderly and
everybody else. Ethicists see no problem in trying to treat memory deficits in
patients with brain diseases, which would be no different from any other medical
intervention. Helping older people remember better is also likely to be
uncontroversial, "because in our culture we see old age as something like a
disease rather than as natural life process," said Dr. Victoria Sharpe, a
bioethicist at the Hastings Center in Garrison, N.Y.

   ADRUG to enhance the intelligence of healthy individuals sounds great for job
interviews or quiz programs. But if the smart pill were costly, it could worsen
social inequities. And such a drug could easily be abused by parents. "I think
we will have to think through our social policies very carefully so we don't get
into an enhancement race among parents and don't in effect develop a new kind of
child abuse," said Dr. Leroy Walters, director of the Kennedy Institute of
Ethics at Georgetown University.

   Dr. Walters said it would be "a plausible and morally justifiable application
of genetic techniques" to raise the intelligence of a child with very low I.Q.
scores, because that could be regarded as remedial, but enhancing the I.Q. of
someone at or above the mean would be much more controversial, in his view.

   The ethical implications extend beyond humans. Well before anyone tries to
increase human intelligence, the technique will be tested in monkeys or
chimpanzees. A smarter chimp might help answer the enduring question of whether
animals are conscious or whether consciousness is only attained by brains with
the capacity for language. But how much smarter can chimpanzees get before they
merit, or even demand, special rights?

   "Say we produce a chimp that is more intelligent than people," said Dr.
Sharpe. "I think we would probably just try to enslave it rather than welcome it
into the human community. It may be a cynical view but I don't think we are very
good at according moral status to non-humans."

   Pioneers like Dr. Tsien are eager to explore the new possibilities created by
genetic engineering. Nature may be wise, but it often doesn't act in the
individual's best interest, he notes. The body's cells don't have to rust and
wear out like cars: they could renew themselves indefinitely. Since nature lets
us die, Dr. Tsien believes, it may also have neglected to make humans as smart
as they can be .

   He finds it hard to understand the recent flurry of apprehension about human
cloning, because a clone, being an exact genetic copy, adds nothing new to the
world. But making an individual more intelligent would be novel and interesting.
"Everyone wants to be smart," he said.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (George Booth)

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1999


                             1376 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 4, 1999, Saturday ,City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 156 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme in gene-therapy pact;
BUSINESS BRIEFS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp., whose flagship product, Cerezyme, is used to treat Gaucher's
disease, said it has retained privately held Genovo Inc. of Sharon Hill, Pa., to
develop a single-gene therapy product for both Gaucher's and the 39 other rare
genetic diseases known as lysosomal storage disorders. The agreement, which also
includes a Genzyme equity investment in Genovo, will enable researchers at the
Cambridge biotech company to work with Dr. James Wilson, an international gene
therapy expert, along with scientists at the University of Pennsylvania's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy. In addition, Genovo will receive product
development milestone payments and royalties while Genzyme will get a worldwide
license to certain Genovo patents and technology. Terms of the Genzyme-Genovo
agreement, which is one of several Genzyme-sponsored gene therapy research
agreements on lysosomal storage disorders, were not disclosed.

LOAD-DATE: September 08, 1999


                             1377 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                          September 4, 1999, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: GENE-THERAPY VOLUNTEER TAKING A RISK TO HELP OTHERS DONAVON DECKER
DOESN'T EXPECT THE OSU TREATMENT TO CURE HIS MUSCULARDYSTROPHY.

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   Donavon Decker didn't travel to Ohio State University Medical Center three
times this summer from South Dakota expecting to be cured of muscular dystrophy.

   But the 36-year-old air-traffic controller from Huron, S.D., is hoping to
help others.

   Decker has a relatively mild form of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, but the
disease has made it difficult for him to walk, requiring occasional use of a
wheelchair. Four of his seven siblings have the disease, which affects tens of
thousands of Americans.

   Decker has been coming to OSU since June, waiting for an experimental
injection of a virus-borne gene that produces a protein necessary for muscle
strength. After a two- month regulatory delay, the injection was administered in
one of his foot muscles Thursday, the first time the technique has been tried
with a muscular-dystrophy patient.

   "It was no worse than getting a flu shot,'' Decker said yesterday during a
round of news conferences at OSU.

   Doctors won't know about the safety and effectiveness of the procedure until
a muscle biopsy in 60 days.

   Decker said he hopes that researchers will find protein production and cell
growth in his foot, "But I'm not expecting to see any improvement in my
condition,'' which has worsened in recent years.

   He said he participated in the experiment in the hope it eventually will help
others.

   The virus should be harmless, but there's a danger that it could cause an
immune response that could further damage the foot muscle, said Dr. Hansell
Stedman of the University of Pennsylvania, a member of the inter-university team
that developed the technique.

   "The worst case is,'' Decker said, "that it might put me (permanently) in a
wheelchair three months earlier than otherwise.''

   That, he said, is an acceptable risk given the potential benefit of the
research.

   Eventually, the injections will be administered in the arm and leg muscles of
six to 12 other patients with the same condition at OSU and the University of
Pennsylvania. If the virus can deliver the gene to the defective muscle cells
without triggering an immune response, the work has great promise not only for
those with muscular dystrophy but for others with genetically based diseases,
said Dr. Jerry Mendell, OSU chairman of neurology.

   Mendell and Dr. Leon Charash of the Muscular Dystrophy Association said
yesterday's announcement was not timed to benefit this weekend's MDA telethon.

   Decker was to have received the injection July 1, but the procedure was
delayed because of lack of approval by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of
the National Institutes of Health, Mendell said. NIH, along with the Muscular
Dystrophy Association, is sponsoring the trial.

   Approval was delayed, according to an NIH spokesman, because the committee
meets only quarterly.

   Mendell called this week "the culmination of 30 years of work.''

   The sarcoglycan protein that Decker lacks clusters around the muscle cell and
is thought to protect the muscle-cell membrane during muscle contraction and
expansion.

   The gene that controls this protein was discovered in 1986, but it took 12
years to find a way to make it function within muscle cells without being
destroyed by the body's defensive immune system.

   The virus now being used has been modified to deliver and reproduce the gene
inside muscle cells without danger to the patient. It's also a very small virus,
Stedman said, "able to fly below the radar of the immune system.''

   Much work needs to be done before the therapy can be declared a success and
moved into clinical use.

   "We're climbing to the top of Mount Everest, and this is only a new base
camp,'' Charash said.

   "But this first study will tell us whether we're on the right track to climb
some more,'' added Mendell.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Donavon Decker

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1999


                             1378 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                              September 4, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 4, 1999 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: MD PATIENT RISKS INJECTION FOR CURE

BYLINE: By CHARLEY GILLESPIE; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: COLUMBUS

BODY:

   The first recipient of a gene therapy injection to test the safety of a
possible new treatment of muscular dystrophy says he's willing to take the risk
that the treatment could worsen his condition.

   "Any risk is worth the potential gains," Donavon Decker said yesterday.

   Decker, 36, who cannot walk long distances, said he is expected to require a
wheelchair full time in five or six years. The procedure could shorten that to
three years.

   The air traffic controller received an injection in his foot that would
provide a needed muscle protein that is missing because of a genetic flaw.

   Dr. Jerry Mendell, chairman of the Department of Neurology at the Ohio State
University Medical Center, performed the hourlong procedure at the hospital
Thursday night.

   "Donavon represents one form of MD, but implications from this trial could
affect all of the genetic diseases that afflict our patients," Mendell said
yesterday.

   Decker, of Huron, S.D., suffers from limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, a
disease that he has had for more than 20 years.

   Researchers want to know if the injection is safe and whether it warrants
further study before it would be used as a treatment of muscular dystrophy.

   Decker is the first of an expected six participants to receive the injection
in a multicenter study funded by the Multiple Dystrophy Association. Ohio State
and the University of Pennsylvania are leading the test.

   "Medical history was made here in Columbus," Dr. Leon Charash, chairman of
the Muscular Dystrophy Association Medical Advisory Committee said yesterday. "A
live virus carrying a missing piece of DNA was used for the first time in a
human to fight disease."

   The virus used to carry the genes could cause further deterioration of
Decker's muscles if his immune system fights it off, Dr. Hansell H. Stedman, a
University of Pennsylvania surgeon, said yesterday.

   Gene therapy is the insertion of a working gene to compensate for genetic
flaws like those that lead to muscular dystrophy, a progressive disease that
causes muscle weakness. It often is debilitating and often fatal.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1999


                             1379 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 4, 1999, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF

BODY:


   Haitians Protest Treatment


   MIAMI--Scores of Haitians protested what they said is the unfair treatment of
their countrymen compared to the way U.S. officials treat immigrants from other
nations, particularly Cuba.

   Holding signs reading, "Freedom yes, deportation no," and chanting and
singing, about 150 people demonstrated yesterday outside a detention center,
seeking the immediate release of two Haitians who have been in Immigration and
Naturalization Service custody for months, as well as the release of others held
across the country.

   They also demanded repeal of a tough 1996 U.S. law requiring deportation of
immigrants who commit crimes, even years after they complete their sentences,
saying it is applied differently to different groups.

   "We are . . . asking for the 1996 law to be repealed because it is unfair to
blacks and to Haitians," Marleine Bastien, president of Haitian Women of Miami
and an organizer of the demonstration, said. "It is practically refugee
cleansing."



   Woman Donates Kidney


   MINNEAPOLIS--A woman donated a kidney to a complete stranger, undergoing
surgery and a battery of physical and psychological tests simply because she
knew there was a long waiting list for organs.

   Experts said that transplants in which neither donor nor recipient knows the
other person were almost unheard of until a few years ago.

   In this case, the 50-year-old donor was "purely motivated by altruism," said
Cheryl Jacobs, a social worker who took part in the psychological screening of
the woman.

   The donor and the recipient both asked to keep their identities secret, even
from each other. The transplant took place early last month but was not
disclosed until Thursday, after the patients had left the hospital at the
University of Minnesota.

   Transplanted kidneys generally come from a cadaver or a living relative.
Transplant programs have been reluctant to accept kidney donations from living
strangers for several reasons, including concern about exposing the donor to the
risks of surgery.

   The 42,000 people on the nation's kidney transplant waiting list generally
will have to wait three to five years for a new organ.

   In 1998, there were 11,990 kidney transplants in the United States, and just
over 4,000 came from living donors. Of those, 163 were unrelated to the
recipients, according to the United Network on Organ Sharing.


   Muscular Dystrophy Therapy


   COLUMBUS, Ohio--A 36-year-old traffic controller received a gene therapy
injection for muscular dystrophy to test the safety of a possible treatment for
the debilitating disease.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association said Donavon Decker of Huron, S.D., is the
first person to receive the injection. A muscle on the top of one of his feet
was injected with genes for a missing muscle protein. The other foot received a
placebo injection in the one-hour hospital procedure Thursday night.

   Researchers will take biopsies to compare the muscles in six weeks while also
monitoring Decker for any adverse reactions.


   Addenda


   * WEST PALM BEACH, Fla.--A twin-engine Beechcraft King Air BE-90 clipped a
building and crashed while trying to make an emergency landing in the dark,
killing the eight people aboard. The victims were pilot George Rivera;
Constantine Peter Chambers, 64, who founded the Chambers Hair Institute; Andrea
Coolidge, 31; Shawn Meckelburg, 19; Erica Jones, 22; Mindy Marino, 17; Peter
Passaris; and Alan Steven Rivera, 19. All were from Florida.


   * WHITE PLAINS, N.Y.--John A. "Junior" Gotti was sentenced to nearly 6 1/2
years in federal prison and fined $ 1 million for following his father as boss
of the Gambino crime family. He pleaded guilty in April to bribery, extortion
and other charges and has until Oct. 18 to report to prison.


   * HUNTINGTON BEACH, Calif.--Seven of the eight miles of famed "Surf City,
USA" beach along the Southern California coast reopened Thursday after fecal
bacteria that forced them closed this summer all but disappeared. Health
officials said they believed urban runoff in storm drains--rather than a sewage
leak--may have caused the beach fouling.


   * CLEVELAND--One woman was killed and more than three dozen people were
injured after a dense fog led to accidents involving 70 cars and trucks along a
32-mile stretch of the Ohio Turnpike, officials said.



LOAD-DATE: September 04, 1999


                             1380 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1999 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    September 3, 1999, Friday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 262 words

HEADLINE: DYSTROPHY PATIENT GETS GENE INJECTION IN TEST

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, OHIO

BODY:


   A 36-year-old traffic controller has received a gene therapy injection for
muscular dystrophy, testing the safety of a possible treatment for the
debilitating disease.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association said Donovan Decker of Huron, S.D., is the
first person to receive the injection.

   Dr. Jerry Mendell, chairman of the department of neurology at the Ohio State
University Medical Center, injected the genes into a muscle on the top of
Decker's foot. The one-hour hospital procedure, involving genes for a needed
muscle protein missing because of a genetic flaw, was performed Thursday night.

   Decker suffers from limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, which he has had for more
than 20 years, said Jim Brown, a spokesman for the Muscular Dystrophy
Association. He is the first of an expected six participants to receive the
injection in the trial, funded by the association.

   "We're cautiously optimistic about what this may mean," Brown said.

   In gene therapy, a working gene is inserted to compensate for genetic flaws
such as those that lead to muscular dystrophy, a progressive muscle disease that
causes weakness. It is often fatal.

   Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, one of about 40 types of the disease, mostly
damages muscles that stabilize the hips and shoulders, and often leads to
wheelchair use by middle age.

   One of Decker's foot muscles received the therapeutic genes, while the same
muscle of the other foot was injected with a placebo. In six weeks, researchers
will do biopsies to compare the muscles and monitor Decker for any adverse
reactions.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1999


                             1381 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           September 3, 1999, Friday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: OSU GETS FIRST SHOT AT GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   The first patient to undergo gene therapy for muscular dystrophy received an
injection last night at Ohio State University Medical Center as part of a
multicenter study.

   Donovan Decker, 36, of Huron, S.D., was given an injection of working genes
in a muscle on top of his foot to replace a protein missing because of a genetic
defect.

   Decker is the first of an expected six patients to participate in a study to
determine the safety of gene therapy. The study is sponsored by the Muscular
Dystrophy Association.

   Dr. Jerry Mendell, chairman of neurology at OSU Medical Center, is directing
the study here. He couldn't be reached for comment last night.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration authorized the study.

   Ohio State and the University of Pennsylvania are leading the test, which
also will be conducted at Emory University in Atlanta, the University of Iowa,
the University of Rochester in New York, Vanderbilt University in Nashville and
Washington University in St. Louis.

   Decker has limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, a slow, progressive form of the
disease that mostly damages the muscles that stabilize the hips and shoulders.

   It can be fatal if heart and respiratory muscles are affected.

   Gene therapy involves inserting working genes to compensate for genetic
defects. The therapy Decker received involves the genes for a particular
protein, known as the sarcoglycan protein, that cluster in healthy muscle-cell
membranes.

   The genes were injected into Decker using a modified virus that will not
replicate in the body.

   One of Decker's foot muscles received the genes and the same muscle in his
other foot was injected with a placebo.

   Researchers will conduct biopsies on each muscle after six weeks to compare
therapies.

   They'll check whether the genes reached the cell's center, whether the
protein was produced from the genes and whether that protein and others
associated with it ended up in the right place.

   If this phase of the study goes well, researchers will examine how well the
therapy works.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Donovan Decker

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1999


                             1382 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            September 3, 1999 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1204 words

HEADLINE: The mouse that caused an uproar: MIT claims share

BYLINE: Kevin Coughlin, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   When Princeton's Joe Tsien unveiled a "smart" mouse this week, his mentor at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology smelled a rat.

    In a dispute that offers an extraordinary glimpse into the supercompetitive
world of high-stakes research, a Nobel laureate who directs MIT's Center for
Learning and Memory contends Tsien created his first strain of mice there as a
postdoctoral fellow - entitling MIT to share Princeton patents that could be
worth megabucks if the research leads to drugs for Alzheimer's disease.

    "This project started while he was here. . . . MIT has at least partial
ownership. What is made in the lab usually belongs in the lab," said Susumu
Tonegawa. Still smarting over the smart rodents, Tonegawa even accused his protg
of breaking lab rules by hustling all his notes and key genetic materials off to
Princeton two years ago.

   Tsien did not return calls yesterday. But a Princeton spokesman yesterday
dismissed Tonegawa's claims as Ivory Tower sour grapes, and said the pending
patent would remain in Tiger orange.

   "The heart and soul of the project, the meat of it, was here at Princeton,"
said Justin Harmon.

   That project, reported yesterday in the journal Nature, has made
international media stars of the 37-year-old Tsien and his "Doogie" mice, named
for TV's precocious "Doogie Howser, M.D."

    By genetically boosting production of a protein called NR2B in the brains of
mice, Tsien's team created a strain that demonstrated superior ability to learn
and remember. It was heralded as the first time such attributes have been
enhanced through genetic wizardry.

    Colleagues of both men yesterday suggested the dispute was more about egos
than money, a clash between a renowned molecular biologist from Japan and a
young assistant professor from China striving to cement his reputation in the
cutthroat halls of elite academia.

    Yet there is a chance that Tsien's findings could lead to medications or
genetic therapies worth considerable royalties to himself and Princeton. For
instance, there are 4 million Alzheimer's patients in the United States and only
two approved drugs, neither very effective, said Sergio Traversa, a
pharmaceuticals analyst for Mehta Partners in New York. Tsien's work offers a
new approach toward trying to treat the disease.

    "Anybody who can come on the market with something more effective will have
a chance to make $1 billion-plus in profits," said Traversa.

    So far, finding molecules easily absorbed by the brain without side effects
has proven daunting, said Mehta Partners' Dave Batter. As for the Princeton
accomplishment, which involved giving mice extra copies of a gene, "it's a long
way from where they are to a drug," he said.

    A use patent would require a drug company to pay a licensing fee to use the
gene for the purpose, and in a manner, described by the patent, explained
Jeffrey Standley, a patent lawyer who represents Ohio State University. It's no
lock: Companies can beat patents by figuring new ways to achieve the same
result.

   Even so, the rewards can be great. "MIT, Stanford and Berkeley make
substantial amounts of money licensing their technology," the lawyer said.

    Tonegawa won't rule out a possible gold mine.

    "It's a genetically engineered mouse. Potentially it's useful. Yes, it's
certainly worth patenting," said Tonegawa, winner of the 1987 Nobel Prize for
genetic work in immunology.

    "Whether it brings millions of dollars as the source of a new drug, that's
hard to say. It has potential," he added. "It could have major commercial use.
Most of the fundamental research we do won't yield anything potentially
commercially useful. This one is."

    Tonegawa said he wrote Nature about his concerns two months ago but never
heard back. Attempts to reach Nature editors for comment yesterday were
unsuccessful.

    The MIT neurobiologist said he spoke briefly with Tsien by phone Wednesday
and was told the two schools' patent offices should work things out. Tonegawa
said he asked MIT's technology licensing office to do just that. Lita Nelson,
director of that office, said she intends to contact Princeton.

    "I don't know the facts yet. I'm sure when they are established it will be
worked out happily," said Nelson, downplaying the financial stakes.

    About 1 percent of MIT's $1 billion budget comes from licensing fees,
according to Nelson.

   She characterized smart mice as brilliant science. "But in terms of
commercial potential for something like this, it's too far off to know. We're
not jumping up and down and saying this will make us rich," she said.

    MIT is a pit bull in licensing deals, according to Vanu Bose, himself
embroiled in a bitter fight with MIT over commercialization of digital radio
technology he developed there. "They look for home run deals. If they can get a
lot from someone, they'll do it," said Bose, the son of loudspeaker innovator
Amar Bose.

    In the mouse case, Tonegawa and Tsien agree on some matters. Tsien's
research at MIT focused on brain development, not learning and memory. MIT
scientists studied the effects of knocking out genes; Tsien's Princeton work
involved adding a gene. With Tonegawa's supervision, Tsien authored a paper for
MIT on gene-knockout research in the journal Cell in December 1996.

    But Tonegawa said Tsien has continued using an MIT technique for injecting
DNA into mouse embryos. And he said Tsien worked at MIT on a "plasmid," the
genetic cocktail Tonegawa believes was used to produce the strain of smart mice
- the first of which he claims were born at MIT. Tonegawa said it's hard to be
sure: Tsien's notes and plasmids can't be found.

    "I'm trying to get information. I found out these plasmids are not even in
central storage in the lab. He also took the lab notebooks, so we can't trace it
appropriately," said Tonegawa.

    He praised Tsien as efficient and ambitious, then added: "Many young
students his age are under lots of pressure to prove themselves. So some are not
particularly mature enough to have good collegial relationships with their
peers.

    "I couldn't say he is one of the most collegial or cooperative persons."

    Princeton's Harmon at first called Tonegawa's claims unrealistic and
unreasonable. Later, he asserted such disagreements sometimes arise when labs
break up and researchers move on.

    But Harmon said he refused to "dignify" charges of purloined plasmids and
missing notebooks with a response. "It's not worth Tsien's time or the
university's time," he said.

    Earlier this week, Tsien cracked jokes and said he preferred jogging around
rural, laid-back Princeton to the "tense" atmosphere of MIT.

    At a news conference Wednesday, and in the Nature article, Tsien shared
credit with researchers from MIT and Washington University in St. Louis. The
lead participant from Washington University, Min Zhou, said yesterday his
school's contribution didn't merit patent consideration.

    Zhou studied with Tsien at Columbia University several years ago, and
defended his friend.

    "He's very aggressive, very smart, technically very good. That's why we're
really happy to work with him. That's why he got the job at Princeton," he said.

    Added Zhou: "It doesn't matter whose idea it was. The (Nature) paper is so
beautiful. . . . I think he's pretty good. He deserves credit."

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1383 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    September 3, 1999, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 319 words

HEADLINE: Patient gets first muscular dystrophy gene therapy

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   Scientists performed the first gene therapy experiment for muscular
dystrophy Thursday on a 36-year-old South Dakota man, ushering
in a new era of hope for thousands of children and adults born
with the often-fatal disease.

   The experiment involved an injection of billions of healthy genes
into a foot muscle of Donavon Decker, a Huron, S.D., air traffic
controller who was born with a milder form of the muscle-weakening
disease known as limb girdle muscular dystrophy.

   This initial experiment is not intended as a cure, but it will
show whether the gene delivery is safe and what happens to the
genes once they are inside Decker's muscle cells.


   The ultimate goal of gene therapy is to replace the defective
genes in a person's cells with normal genes that can correct the
problem. Neurologist Jerry Mendell gave the injection at about
7 p.m. ET at the Ohio State University Medical Center in Columbus.

   The 30-minute procedure "went like clockwork," Mendell told
USA TODAY.

   For years, Mendell said, "we had only supportive care for the
patients, and this is the first time there has been a major breakthrough."

   Surgeon Hansell Stedman, whose two brothers were born with muscular
dystrophy, developed the approach at the Institute for Human Gene
Therapy (IHGT) at the University of Pennsylvania. He is advising
Mendell, who will biopsy Decker's foot muscle in six weeks.

   If the gene delivery is successful, the trial will be expanded
to patients with the same type of muscular dystrophy. Muscles
of patients' shoulders, arms or legs are likely to be the focus
of the next series of gene therapy experiments, said James Wilson,
IHGT director.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association is financing the research.
It will show a film of Decker and perhaps the procedure during
the MDA Jerry Lewis Telethon this weekend.

   "This is a dream come true," Lewis said.



GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, Jay LaPrete, Muscular Dystrophy Association; 'Like
clockwork': The patient, Donavon Decker, with physicians Jerry Mendell, right,
and Hansell Stedman in Columbus, Ohio

LOAD-DATE: September 03, 1999


                             1384 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       September 2, 1999, Thursday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,4A

LENGTH: 658 words

HEADLINE: Gene manipulation creates a smarter strain of mice; Research
implications could counter memory loss in humans, raise IQ levels

SOURCE: NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:

   In a major test of how learning works at the level of nerve cells, a
scientist has created a smarter strain of mice by manipulating a gene involved
in memory formation.

    He believes his work lays the basis for eventually doing the same in people,
whether in helping patients with memory deficits, counteracting the loss of
memory in older people, and even in making healthy individuals smarter.

    Other experts, while praising the technical quality of the work, see its
first application as lying in treating patients with memory deficits rather than
in enhancing intelligence.

    Also, they say, although there are reasons to believe mice and humans are
similar in this respect, the applicability of the work to people remains to be
established.

    The mice were created in an experiment designed to assess how memories are
formed in the mammalian brain. The animals performed better than normal mice in
six different tests, a strong indication that the altered gene is indeed
involved in learning and memory formation.

    The finding, reported in today's issue of Nature, also explains why young
animals learn better than older ones, because the manipulated gene is one whose
activity is known to fade with age in mice, monkeys and probably people, too.

    The smarter mice were created by a team of researchers led by Dr. Joe Z.
Tsien, a neurobiologist at Princeton University. Dr. Eric R. Kandel, a leading
brain expert at Columbia University, praised the quality of Tsien's work, saying
his new research "seems really reliable and is very nicely done."

    For scientists, the importance of Tsien's paper is that it goes a
considerable way toward proving a long-standing idea, known as Hebbs rule, about
how the brain forms the neural associations that are the basis of memory.

    "This paper takes a big step forward to showing people had been on the right
track," said Dr. Charles Stevens, a neurobiologist at the Salk Institute.

    For others, the interest of Tsien's work lies in its possible application to
people.

    Though no one yet knows whether the same manipulation would make people
smarter, Tsien said, the DNA sequence of the gene he manipulated is 98 percent
identical in mice and humans, suggesting that altering it by drugs or gene
therapy might also make people smarter.

    "It is not a hypothetical question. It is time for people and the public to
begin to discuss these issues," he said.

    In all tests, the genetically engineered mice performed consistently better
than normal mice, giving Tsien his basis for believing the animals have enhanced
intelligence as well as better memory.

    Kandel notes that Tsien was not restoring the learning ability of old mice
but doing something even more interesting, that of enhancing the natural
abilities of young mice.

    The experiment thus raises the question of "whether intelligence is
optimized by the brain or could you push it even further? That you can improve a
young animal's performance is interesting," Kandel said.

    Tsien's experiment brings home the fact that the blueprint for the brain is
written in the genes and that, probably well before society is ready to assess
the full implications, biologists now stand on the threshold of being able to
change fundamental aspects of the brain's architecture.

    "Our results suggest that genetic enhancement of mental and cognitive
attributes such as intelligence and memory in mammals is feasible," Tsien and
colleagues declare in their Nature article.

    Other experts do not disagree with this assessment but put greater emphasis
on the complications that lie ahead.

    " One has to move with great caution and the realization that these are very
complicated processes," Kandel said. "Our understanding of memory processes is
quite shallow -- this is the beginning of the beginning.

    "What the bad consequences or limitations are we don't really understand.
But by and large the thinking is probably on the right track."


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1999


                             1385 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1999 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                     September 2, 1999 Thursday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 775 words

HEADLINE: From rodent to Rodin, via genes Change boosts mice's learning ability,
spurs concerns about ethics

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss, The Washington Post

BODY:

   For the first time, scientists have created significantly smarter mice by
adding a single gene to mouse embryos, showing that a seemingly minor genetic
alteration can improve performance on a wide range of learning and memory tasks.

   Researchers said their creation of "Doogie" mice - named after the precocious
television character Doogie Howser, M.D. - could speed development of medicines
for various disorders in people, including age-related memory loss and
Alzheimer's disease.

   But the finding also brings immediacy to a long-simmering debate about the
ethics of making "designer babies" and the appropriateness of offering genetic
enhancements that would not simply correct abnormalities but would increase
human physical or mental capacities above those deemed normal.

   The work, which involves a gene that helps the brain recognize patterns of
cause and effect, could also help scientists create pets, farm animals or other
creatures with unusual capacities to learn and remember, raising novel issues in
the animal-rights arena.

   "We're in an era when breakthroughs in biology and intelligence are outpacing
the culture's capacity to deal with the ethics," said Joe Tsien, the Princeton
molecular biologist who led the new effort. "There will be issues of access and
who can afford it. Whether the social wealthy class will have the intellectual
advantage over poor people, these are real questions coming down the road."

   Others, however, warned against interpreting the work to mean that
intelligence is a purely genetic trait. Especially in people, they said,
intellect is an extremely complex phenomenon, and countless social and
environmental experiences influence the way a brain assimilates and organizes
information.

   "There are lots of kinds of intelligence," said Charles Stevens, a Howard
Hughes investigator at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "The kinds of
intelligence that make people good basketball players may not be the kinds that
make a good symphony conductor or a good citizen."

   The new research, described in today's issue of the journal Nature, lends
support to a prominent but still unproven theory about how the brain creates
memories and then uses those memories to learn from experience. The work
suggests that many different kinds of cognitive skills, such as recognizing
something new in a room full of familiar objects or remembering where something
is stored, rely on a single underlying molecular mechanism in the brain.

   That mechanism, called long-term potentiation, entails the strengthening of
key connections among the 100 billion neurons that reside in the three-pound
human brain. Intelligence is much more than the ability to create memory
pathways with long-term potentiation, said Larry Squire, a professor of
psychiatry and neuroscience at the University of California at San Diego and the
San Diego VA Medical Center.

   Indeed, injury or disease can destroy certain memory skills without
compromising intelligence. "But in the real world," Squire said, "memory and
intelligence are closely linked."

   In the new experiments, researchers inserted into mouse embryos extra copies
of a gene that enhances long-term potentiation in the brain. The gene, called
NMDA receptor 2B, or NR2B, is present in all mammals, including people. It
directs production of a nerve protein that helps the brain recognize that two
things are linked, such as the ringing of a bell and the delivery of food.

   The NR2B gene normally becomes less active in middle age in humans and other
animals, as memory and learning capacity declines. But Doogie mice have extra
copies of the gene, and those copies have been programmed to remain active in
old age. The enhancement is permanent and is passed on to offspring.

   Human gene therapy has so far been tried only on adults, and may soon be
tried in fetuses, but has never been attempted in embryos and has never been
used for anything other than the treatment of a disease. But researchers
predicted that with NR2B's role in learning now verified, drug companies will
quickly discover medicinal compounds that enhance the gene's activity in the
brain, which could then be given to adults.

   "This is what pharmaceutical companies do best," Tsien said. "NR2 is a very
good target."

   Such interventions may come with a price, however. The NR2B gene enhances
memory by increasing the flow of calcium into neurons, and high calcium levels
increase the risk of brain seizures, such as those seen in epilepsy. Calcium can
also worsen brain damage following a stroke. Although Doogie mice seem healthy,
no one knows whether they are poised to develop problems later on.

GRAPHIC:  KRT Learning more about memory

LOAD-DATE: September 02, 1999


                             1386 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                   September 2, 1999, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1165 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS CREATE SMARTER MICE BY ADDING GENE

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   By adding a single gene to fertilized eggs, Princeton University researchers
have been able to create smarter mice, a feat that could lead to the development
of more intelligent animals and that hints at the feasibility of producing
so-called designer babies with enhanced intelligence.

   The accomplishment demonstrates for the first time that a complex trait like
intelligence can be genetically manipulated in mammals. It also reveals a common
biochemical mechanism at the root of all learning, a discovery that could
eventually be translated into new drugs and treatments for the prevention of
memory loss in the elderly, they said.

   The added gene enabled the otherwise ordinary mice to learn new tasks more
quickly and to remember them longer, a team from Princeton, MIT and Washington
University in St. Louis reports in today's Nature.

   It also made the brains of older mice perform more like those of juveniles,
which generally are better at grasping large amounts of new information.

   This "is interesting and fundamental work," said neuroscientist Ira Black of
Rutgers University. "It's very exciting and holds the hope of not only making
animals smarter, but also, ultimately, of having a gene therapy for use in areas
such as dementia."

   Still, experts cautioned that it will be many years before it can be put to
any practical use in humans.

   "To jump from this very elegant molecular work in a mouse model to humans is
a very, very big jump," said psychiatrist Robert Malenka of the Stanford
University School of Medicine. "Nevertheless, it is a jump we can make and will
make eventually."

   But geneticist Stuart Newman of New York Medical College, a board member of
the Council for Responsible Genetics, argued that "mouse intelligence is not
that comparable to human intelligence. Only in the most crude sense would you
infer that such changes are feasible in humans from this experiment."

   The attention surrounds a gene called NR2B, which biologists believe is a key
switch that controls the brain's ability to associate one event with
another--the core feature of learning. Neurobiologist Joe Z. Tsien and his
colleagues at Princeton previously had produced genetically engineered mice
lacking the NR2B gene and found that they had impaired learning and memory.
Adding new or improved function, however, is a harder task and a more rigorous
test of the gene's function.

   Using a long, thin needle, Tsien inserted extra copies of the NR2B gene into
the nuclei of fertilized mouse eggs, which were then allowed to grow into adult
animals. Tsien named the new strain of mice Doogie after the intellectually
precocious hero of the television series "Doogie Howser, M.D.," and studied
their intelligence in a variety of ways.

   Learning and Memory Tests

   One such experiment tested the mice's ability to remember an object. Tsien
put the mice into a space with two Lego-like objects and let them explore the
objects for five minutes. Several days later, one object was changed and the
mice returned to the space. Normal mice, which didn't remember their previous
experience, spent equal time on both objects. But the Doogie mice concentrated
on the new object, indicating they remembered the old one.

   By repeating the experiment at various intervals, the team found that the
Doogie mice remembered objects four to five times longer than their normal
counterparts.

   Several other tests of learning and memory showed similar results. "They're
learning things much better and remembering longer," Tsien said. "They are
smarter."

   Furthermore, neuroscientist Guosong Liu of MIT used newly developed
techniques to show that the brain cells of the mice had increased numbers of a
receptor called NMDA, which is the product of the NR2B gene. The team was thus
able to associate the increased intelligence with a specific biological
activity.

   Tsien not only gave the mice extra copies of the gene, but he modified the
gene so that it produced more NMDA protein as the animals aged, counteracting
the decline in activity of the naturally occurring gene. He then found that the
adult brains retained physical features that usually characterize juvenile
animals. In particular, they had an unusually high level of "plasticity," the
ability to form long-term connections between neurons.

   NMDA, which is present in all mammals, including humans, is like a double
lock on a door. It needs two keys--two signals--before it opens. For this
reason, it is an effective tool for creating memory, a process that
fundamentally consists of associating two events.

   A brain cell might receive one signal that a paw, or finger, has touched an
electrical grid. The second signal would be that it caused pain, and the
receptor would form a strong bond between two cells. In this way, an animal or
human would learn not to touch the grid again.

   That theoretical process is called long-term potentiation, and some
researchers have argued that it is not necessary for learning. But Tsien's work,
said neuroscientist Charles Stevens of the Salk Institute in La Jolla, "is one
of the best pieces of evidence so far" that long-term potentiation plays a key
role, because activating the NMDA receptor clearly leads to such potentiation.

   Potential Ethical Dilemmas

   The insertion of the gene may one day give scientists the ability to increase
human intelligence, Tsien said. But the desirability of making such alterations
had been a subject of great contention. Some researchers have suggested that
such modification may be desirable to block the transmission of genetic defects,
but critics fear that such efforts may lead to unsuspected side effects.

   Perhaps nowhere are those fears greater than in schemes that propose using
genetic engineering to alter babies' innate characteristics--to make them
stronger, better looking or more intelligent.

   Although today's report suggests that such modifications may be possible,
most everyone agrees that the risks are still too great. "Would you want your
child to have this gene?" Newman asked.

   Ethicist Art Caplan of the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center added,
"All of this is extremely hypothetical, but we need to start talking about it
now, or in 10 years some doctor will hang out his shingle and start advertising
enhanced babies."

   Although proponents and critics have focused on the potential applications in
humans, "what might be more unnerving is using it to change animals," Caplan
said.

   Caplan argues that early uses of the technology might be to create, for
example, more intelligent guide dogs, monkeys that are smart enough to be
household helpers, or dolphins that could retrieve enemy weapons.

   "That's disturbing because our relationships with animals are driven by how
smart we think they are, whether they are a pet or in a lab, zoo or rodeo,"
Caplan said. "This is going to change our ability to identify and empathize with
animal thoughts and emotions. It could set off a lot of debate."

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1999


                             1387 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1586 words

HEADLINE: Smarter Mouse Is Created In Hope of Helping People

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   In a major test of the brain's most basic mechanism of learning, a scientist
has created a smarter strain of mice by manipulating a gene involved in memory
formation. He believes his work lays the basis for eventually doing the same in
people, whether in helping patients with memory loss, in counteracting the
fading of memory in the elderly, or even in making healthy individuals smarter.

   Other experts, while praising the technical quality of the work, see its
first application as in treating patients rather than in enhancing intelligence.
Also, they say, although there are reasons to believe that mice and humans are
similar in this respect, the applicability of the work to people remains to be
established.

    The mice were created in an experiment designed to assess how memories are
formed in the mammalian brain. The animals performed better than normal mice in
six different tests, a strong indication that the altered gene is indeed
involved in learning and memory formation.

   The finding, reported in today's issue of Nature, also explains why young
animals learn better than older ones, because the manipulated gene is one whose
activity is known to fade with age in mice, monkeys and probably people, too.

   The smarter mice were created by a team of researchers led by Dr. Joe Z.
Tsien, a neurobiologist at Princeton University.

   Dr. Eric R. Kandel, a leading brain expert at Columbia University, praised
the quality of Dr. Tsien's work, saying his new research "seems really reliable
and is very nicely done."

   For scientists, the importance of Dr. Tsien's paper is that it goes a
considerable way toward proving a longstanding idea, known as Hebbs's rule,
about how the brain forms the neural associations that are the basis of memory.

   "This paper takes a big step forward to showing people had been on the right
track," said Dr. Charles Stevens, a neurobiologist at the Salk Institute.

   For others, the interest of Dr. Tsien's work lies in its possible application
to people. Though no one yet knows whether the same manipulation would make
people smarter, Dr. Tsien said, the DNA sequence of the mouse gene he
manipulated is 98 percent identical to that of humans, suggesting that altering
it by drugs or gene therapy might also make people smarter.

   "It is not a hypothetical question," he said. "It is time for people and the
public to begin to discuss these issues."

   Dr. Tsien's work builds on the work of many other biologists and used known
techniques for manipulating the genes of mice. The gene that he and his team
altered is one that makes part of a feature known as the NMDA receptor. This
structure is embedded in a nerve cell's membrane and serves as a sort of
biological antenna to pick up signals from other nerve cells.

   In seeking to understand the basic mechanism of memory, the forming of an
association between two events, biologists have long focused on the NMDA
receptor because it needs two separate signals to be triggered into action.

   To prove the role of the gene in learning, Dr. Tsien decided to enhance its
function by exploiting a natural change that occurs over a mouse's life span.

   The NMDA receptor is composed of a variety of subunits. One such component,
known as the NR2B subunit, is common in the young while another kind, known as
the NR2A subunit, predominates later in life.  The juvenile form of subunit
produces a much stronger effect in the nerve cell, and this is believed to be
the reason why younger animals learn more easily than older ones.

   Working with colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and at
Washington University in St. Louis, Dr. Tsien created strains of mice that had
extra copies of the gene that is the blueprint for making the NR2B subunit. He
also inserted a DNA sequence just in front of the extra genes that causes them
to be active only in the appropriate tissues, notably the forebrain and the
hippocampus, a brain module associated with spatial and other kinds of memory.

   Having generated these genetically altered mice, Dr. Tsien's team first
extracted neurons from the hippocampus and showed that the electrical change to
be expected from having extra copies of the NR2B subunit -- a flow of calcium
ions into the neuron -- was indeed taking place.

   The biologists then performed six different types of standard learning tests
on the mice, which exercised different association areas of the brain. One test
required remembering the location of a submerged platform hidden in milky water,
another the ability to recognize novel objects.

   In all these tests the genetically engineered mice performed consistently
better than normal mice, Dr. Tsien said, giving him reason to believe the
animals had enhanced intelligence as well as better memory.

   Dr. Kandel notes that Dr. Tsien was not restoring the learning ability of old
mice but doing something even more interesting: enhancing the natural abilities
of young mice. The experiment thus raises the question of "whether intelligence
is optimized by the brain or could you push it even further," Dr. Kandel said,
adding, "That you can improve a young animal's performance is interesting."

   Dr. Tsien has named the new strain of mice Doogie after the precocious
character in the television show, "Doogie Howser, M.D."

   His experiment brings home that the blueprint for the brain is written in the
genes and that, probably well before society is ready to assess the full
implications, biologists believe they now stand on the threshold of being able
to change fundamental aspects of the brain's architecture.

   "Our results suggest that genetic enhancement of mental and cognitive
attributes such as intelligence and memory in mammals is feasible," Dr. Tsien
and colleagues declared in their Nature article.

   Other experts do not disagree with this assessment but put greater emphasis
on the complications that lie ahead.

   "One has to move with great caution and the realization that these are very
complicated processes," Dr. Kandel said. "Our understanding of memory processes
is quite shallow -- this is the beginning of the beginning. What the bad
consequences or limitations are we don't really understand. But by and large the
thinking is probably on the right track."
 In principle, human intelligence could be enhanced by altering people's genes,
when reliable methods of gene therapy are developed, or more simply by
developing drugs that would change the activity of the memory association gene,
Dr. Tsien said.

   But none of these possibilities could be explored, in his view, without wide
public discussion and the establishment of guidelines.

   A more reserved approach was taken by Dr. Kandel, who said the first
applications of Dr. Tsien's work should be in the medical context of helping
those with memory loss. Dr. Kandel described as "neurobiological cosmetics" the
notion of enhancing normal intelligence, and also emphasized that intelligence
was far from being the only mental attribute of importance.

   Enhancing human intelligence, Dr. Kandel said, "is a very slippery turf from
a moral point of view," putting his thoughts this way:

   "It's one thing to improve memory in people with a memory deficit. But to
begin to mess around with normal memory is tricky. I don't think we want to
emphasize in society that intelligence is the only factor that counts, because
whatever allows someone to be creative and effective is probably not determined
by the activity of the NMDA receptor in the hippocampus alone.

   "I wouldn't want to come across with some simplistic view that 'Take this
pill' and we could produce a superior race."

   Psychologists agree that both genetics and a person's environment are
important in shaping intelligence, though they differ, often in politically
polarized ways, on the relative importance of each.

   Like Dr. Kandel, other brain biologists noted the problems in applying Dr.
Tsien's work to people. Dr. Timothy Tully, a biologist at the Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory on Long Island, who has genetically enhanced the memory of fruit
flies, said the altered receptor unit was a reasonable target for new drugs but
that these could fail to enhance human intelligence for many reasons. "Maybe the
juvenile brain needs to be maximally plastic but as the animal matures you don't
want the brain to be so plastic," Dr. Tully said.

   Nature might have deliberately arranged the tapering off of learning ability
with age, said Dr. Stevens of the Salk Institute, so as to prevent the brain's
memory capacity from becoming overloaded.

   "It may be that learning things too well is bad," Dr. Stevens said. "We could
be stuck learning things we didn't want to learn and our hard disks would be
full of too much information."

   The difficulty that older people have in recalling things may be due in part
to the complexity of accessing an increasing store of information, he suggested.

   Dr. Tsien, however, is skeptical of the natural wisdom argument, noting that
nature does many things that are not in the individual's best interest, such as
letting people's bodies run down and die. He believes that improving people's
intelligence, whether by drugs or genetic alteration, could have profound
effects throughout society.

   "Civilization is based on our extraordinary human intelligence," Dr. Tsien
said. "That is why our society evolves and civilization evolves, and if there is
a way to enhance intelligence then it may not be surprising to see a change in
the evolution of society."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A smarter strain of mice has been created. This mouse proved its
intelligence by exploring a new object instead of one it already knew.
(Reuters)(pg. A24)

Chart: "Smarter Mice"
Brain cells learn -- associate two events -- by means of a receptor that reacts
when two signals arrive simultaneously. The receptor removes a block and lets
calcium ions into the cell, altering its responsiveness. Scientists have created
smarter mice by altering a gene and making the receptor more efficient. Diagram
highlights this process. (pg. A24)

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1999


                             1388 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     SEPTEMBER 2, 1999 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 945 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTIST FINDS GENE MADE MICE 'SMARTER' / THE DEVELOPMENT RAISES
HOPES FOR BETTER DRUGS / TO TREAT DEMENTIA DISEASES SUCH AS ALZHEIMER'S.

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In a finding that revolutionizes scientists' understanding of the brain and
raises questions about enhancing human intelligence, a Princeton researcher
yesterday announced that he had figured out a way to create "smarter" mice.

   Mouse embryos that were given a gene linked to the formation of new memories
grew up better able to run mazes, recognize objects, and perform in other
standard tests of mouse memory.

   Excited by the achievement of Princeton neurobiologist Joe Tsien, brain
researchers speculated that the work could lead to better drugs for Alzheimer's
disease and other types of dementia, but they discounted the possibility that
the technique could ever boost the intelligence of healthy people.

   "The science really is important. . . . But it will not make people smarter,"
said Charles Stevens, a neuroscientist at the Salk Institute in California.

   Tsien, too, emphasized applications that would help severely impaired people,
rather than make healthy people smarter.

   "It really points to a promising strategy for treatment of memory disorders,"
he said. Already, he is planning to start searching for drugs that mimic the
effects of the genetic change he induced in his mice. He also suggests a more
futuristic possibility - using gene therapy to insert these genes into cells of
people with Alzheimer's disease or other memory deficits.

   "Our purpose is not to create a super-smart race," he said.

   Tsien and collaborator Ha-Ping Tang created their smart mice by adding extra
copies of a gene, called NR2B, that mice already carry. They inserted the extra
copies into early mouse embryos.

   Humans carry an almost identical gene, which - in both mice and humans -
stimulates production of part of a brain chemical, the NMDA receptor. That
receptor is essential for neurons to make new connections.

   By so clearly demonstrating the link between genetics, brain chemistry and
memory, Tsien's work backs up scientists' most current theory about the way the
brain learns and remembers.

   According to that theory, the brain stores new information by changing the
relative strengths of the synapses that channel signals between neurons.

   "Memories are formed by patterns of synapses becoming stronger or weaker,"
Stevens said. Those patterns can persist for minutes, days or a lifetime.

   Neurobiologist Ira Black of Rutgers University considers Tsien's work part of
a greater revolution in understanding the brain. "We're now at the point we can
begin articulating the physical basis of some of the most mysterious brain
functions that exist . . . learning, memory and emotion," he said.

   "We're at a point where we can move miraculously from molecule to mind," he
said.

   In earlier attempts to test this physical basis for memory, scientists
created mutant mice in which the synapse process was impaired. "We've created
dozens of dumb mice," said Salk's Stevens. But to really test the theory,
scientists needed to create mice in which this neural process was enhanced and
then see whether it improved any of the animals' cognitive abilities.

   Tsien's work, published in today's issue of Nature, is that accomplishment.

   Sleeping peacefully in their cages in Tsien's basement laboratory, the smart
mice, brown and furry, look perfectly ordinary. The Princeton scientists had
dubbed them "doogie," after the television character Doogie Howser.

   These mice haven't done anything ordinary mice can't do, but they outpace
other mice in some standard tests.

   In one, Tsien put the mice in a Jacuzzi-sized tub of water, made opaque with
milk. Hidden slightly under the surface near one edge is a small platform, just
big enough for a mouse to stand. The scientists measure how fast the mice learn
to find the platform and how well they remember its location.

   He also tested the way the mice learned to associate an electric shock with a
specific box. And, to test visual memory, he gave them pairs of colorful blocks
of different shapes and noted their tendency to explore a new block when an old
one was replaced.

   Tang, his associate, points out that the superiority of the smart mice was
subtle and could only be determined statistically. While the average smart mouse
performed better, some of the ordinary mice still tested higher than some of the
smart mice.

   As for using this technique on people, Art Caplan, an ethicist at the
University of Pennsylvania, said he saw no problem with the notion of trying to
make people smarter. But - as with cloning - genetic manipulation of the brain,
he said, is too little understood and potentially dangerous to try on humans.

   Besides, he and others say there are technical reasons that this experiment
wouldn't work to endow humans with genius intelligence.

   "It's easy to infer from this mouse experiment that there's this intelligence
gene you can tweak," Caplan said.

   But scientists can't even define intelligence, let alone connect it to a
gene.

   While scientists can test rats and mice by sending them through mazes, many
don't believe human intelligence can even be accurately measured by IQ tests,
which measure abilities far more complex than recognizing shapes or running
mazes.

   "You have Einstein, you have a great cook, or a great basketball player,"
Stevens said. All those people have extraordinary intelligence, but the essence
of their ability remains elusive.

   To make matters more complicated, new research is showing that one's
experiences can cause physical changes in the brain.

   "The brain is indeed changing all the time," said Black, of Rutgers.
"Experience changes what we are and what we do," he said. "We're not slavishly
shackled to our genes."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2002


                             1389 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                  September 2, 1999, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: COUPLE TEST FAITH, RILE NEIGHBORS BY TAKING SEX OFFENDER INTO HOME;
KENTUCKY'S VERSION OF MEGAN'S LAW COST NATE SIMS HIS NEW JOB AND MADE HIM AN;
OUTCAST IN DANVILLE.;
SCIENTISTS BUILD A SMARTER MOUSE;
GENETIC SHIFT IMPROVES PERFORMANCE; COULD AID ALZHEIMER'S TREATMENT

BYLINE: ALLEN G. BREED, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS; RICK WEISS, THE WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   For the first time, scientists have created significantly smarter mice by
adding a single gene to mice embryos, showing that a seemingly minor genetic
alteration can improve performance on a wide range of learning and memory tasks.

   Researchers said their creation of "Doogie" mice - named after the precocious
television character Doogie Howser, M.D. - could speed development of medicines
for various cognitive disorders in people, including age-related memory loss and
Alzheimer's disease.

   But the finding also brings immediacy to a long-simmering debate about the
ethics of making "designer babies," and the appropriateness of offering genetic
enhancements that would not simply correct abnormalities but would increase
human physical or mental capacities.

   The work, which involves a gene that helps the brain recognize patterns of
cause and effect, could also help scientists create pets, farm animals or other
creatures with unusual capacities to learn and remember, raising novel issues in
the animal rights arena.

   "We're in an era when breakthroughs in biology and intelligence are outpacing
the culture's capacity to deal with the ethics," said Joe Tsien, the Princeton
University molecular biologist who led the new effort. "There will be issues of
access and who can afford it.  Others, however, warned against interpreting the
work to mean that intelligence is a purely genetic trait. Especially in people,
they said, intellect is an extremely complex phenomenon, and countless social
and environmental experiences influence the way a brain assimilates and
organizes information.

   "There are lots of kinds of intelligence," said Charles Stevens, a Howard
Hughes investigator at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "The kinds of
intelligence that make people good basketball players may not be the kinds that
make a good symphony conductor or a good citizen."

   The new research, described in today's issue of the journal Nature, lends
support to a prominent but still unproven theory about how the brain creates
memories and then uses those memories to learn from experience. The work
suggests that many different kinds of cognitive skills, such as recognizing
something new in a room full of familiar objects or remembering where something
is stored, rely on a single underlying molecular mechanism in the brain.

   That mechanism, called long-term potentiation, entails the strengthening of
key connections among the 100 billion neurons that reside in the human brain.
Intelligence is much more than the ability to create neuronal memory pathways
with long-term potentiation, said Larry Squire, a professor of psychiatry and
neuroscience at the University of California at San Diego and the San Diego VA
Medical Center. "But in the real world," Squire said, "memory and intelligence
are closely linked."

   In the new experiments, researchers inserted into mouse embryos extra copies
of a gene that enhances long-term potentiation in the brain. The gene, called
NMDA receptor 2B, or NR2B, is present in all mammals, including people.

   The NR2B gene normally becomes less active in middle age in humans and other
animals, as memory and learning capacity declines. But Doogie mice have extra
copies of the gene, and those copies have been programmed to remain active in
old age. The enhancement is permanent and is passed on to offspring.

   The researchers tested the mice to assess various kinds of intellectual
prowess.

   "They are quantitatively smarter, but they are not Einsteins," said Tim
Bliss, chief of neuro-physiology at the National Institute for Medical Research
in Mill Hill, London.

   Nonetheless, the finding that such a minor manipulation might make a
measurable difference in even a subset of intelligence raised immediate
speculation about its potential medical use-and abuse.

   Human gene therapy has so far been tried only on adults, and may soon be
tried in fetuses, but has never been attempted in embryos and has never been
used for anything other than the treatment of a disease. But researchers
predicted that with NR2B's role in learning now verified, drug companies will
quickly discover medicinal compounds that enhance the gene's activity in the
brain, which could then be given to adults.

   "This is what pharmaceutical companies do best," Tsien said. "NR2 is a very
good target."

   Such interventions may come with a price, however.

   Although Doogie mice seem healthy, no one knows whether they are poised to
develop problems.

   "There's a lot one would want to know about before one took the step of doing
this in people," said Squire. "We don't know if this improvement comes for free
or not."

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Judy Treible/Nature
Magazine; Lee; Hultering/KRT Graphics: (Learning more about memory)

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1999


                             1390 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                              September 2, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 2, 1999 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 735 words

HEADLINE: A SMARTER MOUSE;
EXTRA GENE BOOSTS IQ, RAISES FEARS OF 'DESIGNER BABIES'

BYLINE: By RICH WEISS; WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   For the first time, scientists have created significantly smarter mice by
adding a single gene to rodent embryos, showing that a seemingly minor genetic
alteration can improve performance on a wide range of learning and memory tasks.

   Researchers said their creation of "Doogie" mice - named after the precocious
television character Doogie Howser, M.D. - could speed development of medicines
for various cognitive disorders in people, including age-related memory loss and
Alzheimer's disease.

   But the finding also brings immediacy to a long-simmering debate about the
ethics of making "designer babies," and the appropriateness of offering genetic
enhancements that would not simply correct abnormalities but would increase
human physical or mental capacities above those currently deemed normal.

   The work, which involves a gene that helps the brain recognize patterns of
cause and effect, could also help scientists create pets, farm animals or other
creatures with unusual capacities to learn and remember, raising novel issues in
the animal rights arena.

   "We're in an era when breakthroughs in biology and intelligence are outpacing
the culture's capacity to deal with the ethics," said Joe Tsien, the Princeton
University molecular biologist who led the new effort.

   "There will be issues of access and who can afford it. Whether the social
wealthy class will have the intellectual advantage over poor people, these are
real questions coming down the road."

   Others, however, warned against interpreting the work to mean that
intelligence is a purely genetic trait. Especially in people, they said,
intellect is an extremely complex phenomenon, and countless social and
environmental experiences influence the way a brain assimilates and organizes
information.

   "There are lots of kinds of intelligence," said Charles Stevens, a Howard
Hughes investigator at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "The kinds of
intelligence that make people good basketball players may not be the kinds that
make a good symphony conductor or a good citizen."

   The new research, described in today's issue of the journal Nature, lends
support to a prominent but still unproven theory about how the brain creates
memories and then uses those memories to learn from experience. The work
suggests that many different kinds of cognitive skills, such as recognizing
something new in a room full of familiar objects or remembering where something
is stored, rely on a single underlying molecular mechanism in the brain.

   That mechanism involves strengthening of key connections among the 100
billion neurons that reside in the three-pound human brain. Intelligence is much
more than the ability to create neuronal memory pathways with long-term
potentiation, said Larry Squire, a professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at
the University of California at San Diego and the San Diego VA Medical Center.
Indeed, injury or disease can destroy certain memory skills without compromising
intelligence. "But in the real world," Squire said, "memory and intelligence are
closely linked."

   In the new experiments, researchers inserted into mouse embryos extra copies
of a gene that enhances long-term potentiation in the brain. The gene, called
NMDA receptor 2B, or NR2B, is present in all mammals, including people. It
directs production of a nerve protein that helps the brain recognize that two
things are linked, such as the ringing of a bell and the delivery of food.

   The NR2B gene normally becomes less active in middle age in humans and other
animals, as memory and learning capacity declines. But Doogie mice have extra
copies of the gene, and those copies have been programmed to remain active in
old age. The enhancement is permanent and is passed on to offspring.

   Human gene therapy has so far been tried only on adults, and may soon be
tried in fetuses, but has never been attempted in embryos and has never been
used for anything other than the treatment of a disease. But researchers
predicted that with NR2B's role in learning now verified, drug companies will
quickly discover medicinal compounds that enhance the gene's activity in the
brain, which could then be given to adults.

   Such interventions may come with a price, however. The NR2B gene enhances
memory by increasing the flow of calcium into neurons, and high calcium levels
increase the risk of brain seizures, such as those seen in epilepsy.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1999


                             1391 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1999 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           September 2, 1999 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1047 words

HEADLINE: SMART ENOUGH TO AID SCIENCE

BYLINE: Kevin Coughlin, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   For all inventors tinkering with better mousetraps, some bad news:
Princeton University has invented a smarter mouse.

    Scientists have given mice extra copies of a gene that makes them learn
faster and remember objects longer than their counterparts do. The research may
be a first step toward drugs or genetic therapies to reverse the ravages of
Alzheimer's disease or boost intelligence in people, experts say.

    The new strain of mouse has proven a quick study when it comes to figuring
out mazes. These furry Poindexters take note of things and sounds around them,
and even as they mature they retain their youthful ability to grasp new
information, according to findings published today in the journal Nature.

    "A lot of people have produced stupid mice. For the first time, we did the
opposite," said Claire Rampon, a French neurobiologist and member of the
research team that has worked with Princeton neurobiologist Joe Tsien for almost
two years. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Washington University
also participated in the project.

   Tsien, a wry and whimsical fellow, said his goal was merely to understand the
brain - not create a mental Mighty Mouse or super-race of human brainiacs.

    "The bottom line is, what we learn and remember defines what we are and who
we are," said the 37-year-old assistant professor of biology.

    Although Alzheimer's medications are expected to become a mega-business as
America turns increasingly gray, pharmaceutical companies have encountered
numerous setbacks with experimental drugs. Pfizer Inc., maker of Viagra, is
testing a memory pill in Europe.

    Princeton's genetic approach breaks new ground, said Dr. Ira Black, chairman
of neuroscience and cell biology at Robert Wood Johnson Medical School.

    "This is different than the simple administration of a drug. This is
introducing machinery that appears to be central to aspects of learning and
memory," said Black, former president of the international Society for
Neuroscience. "Far in the future, this could open the way for gene therapy in
mental and neurologic illness."

    Tsien's group injected a gene into mice embryos to create this new strain,
named Doogie for the precocious character in the former TV series "Doogie
Howser, M.D."

    This gene churned out a superabundance of the protein NR2B in the
hippocampus, a region of the brain vital for memory. NR2B acts as a switch
controlling the brain's ability to associate events - the essence of learning.

    Princeton's experiments showed that NR2B is a crucial building block of
NMDA, a receptor for chemical signals in the brain. NMDA is like a lock that
needs two keys, or signals, to open.

    Back in 1949, Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb theorized that a memory is
made when two signals simultaneously trigger such a receptor. For instance, when
a view of a lit match arrives along with a feeling of pain, the brain learns not
to play with fire.

    In young animals, memories appear to form even when pairs of signals don't
arrive in lock step. At adolescence, the NMDA receptor seems to lose
responsiveness, impeding learning - a phenomenon seen in numerous species.
Children learn languages much more easily than their parents, for example.

   But the transgenic mice were programmed to crank out extra NR2B as they
matured. Test subjects were aged 3-6 months, equivalent to 25 to 45 years old in
humans.

    The extra NR2B ensured continuing "plasticity" - a knack for forging lasting
connections between neurons. Tsien said the protein seems to prolong the opening
of the channel between neurons - perhaps allowing passage of more chemical
information to forge enduring associations.

    Why does the learning process throttle back as people and animals grow
older? "That part is a mystery," said Guosong Liu, an assistant professor at
MIT's Center for Learning and Memory. Liu and colleague Gilles Dube developed
techniques for pinpointing and measuring the NR2B in the mice brains.

   Liu said further studies will track transgenic mice into their dotage - 2
years old - for signs of any adverse long-term effects. (He said such studies
would be impossible on primates, which live much longer. "You can't run 60-year
tests," said Liu.)

    Tsien said future experiments also may explore the biochemistry of amnesia,
addiction and chronic pain.

    His team, which included researchers Ya-Ping Tang and Eiji Shimizu, devised
several tests to gauge mouse intelligence.

    One involved the ability of mice to recognize an object. Two mice were
allowed to explore two plastic objects for five minutes. Days later, one object
was replaced and the mice were returned. The natural mouse remained equally
curious of both objects. The genetically modified mouse remembered the unchanged
object and focused on the new one.

    Various versions of this test showed the transgenic mice remembered objects
four to five times longer, according to the Princeton scientists.

    Next, emotional memory was tested. Mice were placed in a chamber and given
mild electric shocks; sometimes the shocks were preceded by an audible tone.
Days later, the transgenic mice showed more fear when they were returned to
these chambers, and when the tone was played. When the shocks and tones were
stopped, however, the modified mice learned to resume their normal behavior much
faster. Finally, mice were put in a milky pool with a submerged platform leading
out of the water-maze. The transgenic mice found the hidden platform twice as
fast as the control rodents did.

    Of course, it's a long climb from a mouse pool to an Alzheimer patient's
bedside. Although he considers the Nature report exciting, Black cautioned that
many hurdles remain before this sort of genetic therapy could be contemplated in
humans.

    While the basic biochemical mechanisms are similar, it's uncertain if NR2B
would behave the same way in people or affect more than their brain functions.

    Princeton's team had injected mice embryos to create an experimental strain.
"How do we get the gene into the brain of an Alzheimer's patient? That's very
different than treating embryos," said Black.

   Still, Princeton's Tang has dreamed of solving Alzheimer's, "a very sad
disease," since his days as a medical doctor in his native China.

    "If we can find a way to fight such a disease, it would be very wonderful,"
he said.

GRAPHIC: 1. Princeton University neurobiologist Joe Tsien presents one of
teacher's pets, a mouse with extra genes for better memory and calculation
speed. The feat presents a new approach to combating Alzheimer's disease.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                             1392 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1999 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 2, 1999, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1271 words

HEADLINE: Mighty Smart Mice; Scientists Add a Gene, and Intelligence Soars

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   For the first time, scientists have created significantly smarter mice by
adding a single gene to rodent embryos, showing that a seemingly minor genetic
alteration can improve performance on a wide range of learning and memory tasks.

   Researchers said their creation of "Doogie" mice -- named after the
precocious television character Doogie Howser, M.D. -- could speed development
of medicines for various cognitive disorders in people, including age-related
memory loss and Alzheimer's disease.

   But the finding also brings immediacy to a long-simmering debate about the
ethics of making "designer babies" and the appropriateness of offering genetic
enhancements that would not simply correct abnormalities but would increase
human physical or mental capacities above those currently deemed normal.

   The work, which involves a gene that helps the brain recognize patterns of
cause and effect, also could help scientists create pets, farm animals or other
creatures with unusual capacities to learn and remember, raising novel issues in
the animal rights arena.

   "We're in an era when breakthroughs in biology and intelligence are outpacing
the culture's capacity to deal with the ethics," said Joe Tsien, the Princeton
University molecular biologist who led the new effort. "There will be issues of
access and who can afford it. Whether the social wealthy class will have the
intellectual advantage over poor people, these are real questions coming down
the road."

   Others, however, warned against interpreting the work to mean that
intelligence is a purely genetic trait. Especially in people, they said,
intellect is an extremely complex phenomenon, and countless social and
environmental experiences influence the way a brain assimilates and organizes
information.

   "There are lots of kinds of intelligence," said Charles Stevens, a Howard
Hughes investigator at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "The kinds of
intelligence that make people good basketball players may not be the kinds that
make a good symphony conductor or a good citizen."

   The new research, described in today's issue of the journal Nature, lends
support to a prominent theory about how the brain creates memories and then uses
those memories to learn from experience. The work suggests that many different
kinds of cognitive skills, such as recognizing something new in a room full of
familiar objects or remembering where something is stored, rely on a single
underlying molecular mechanism in the brain.

   That mechanism, called long-term potentiation, entails the strengthening of
key connections among the 100 billion neurons in the three-pound human brain.
Intelligence is much more than the ability to create neuronal memory pathways
with long-term potentiation, said Larry Squire, a professor of psychiatry and
neuroscience at the University of California at San Diego and the San Diego
Veterans Affairs Medical Center. Indeed, injury or disease can destroy certain
memory skills without compromising intelligence. "But in the real world," Squire
said, "memory and intelligence are closely linked."

   In the new experiments, researchers inserted into mouse embryos extra copies
of a gene that enhances long-term potentiation. The gene, called NMDA receptor
2B, or NR2B, is present in all mammals, including people. It directs production
of a nerve protein that helps the brain recognize that two things are linked,
such as the ringing of a bell and the delivery of food.

   The NR2B gene normally becomes less active in middle age in humans and other
animals, as memory and learning capacities decline. But Doogie mice have extra
copies of the gene, and those copies have been programmed to remain active in
old age. The enhancement is permanent and is passed on to offspring.

   The researchers tested the mice to assess various kinds of intellectual
prowess. In one test, they allowed the mice to explore two objects for a few
minutes and later placed the mice in a box with one of those objects and a new
object. In general, mice that remember an old object will spend more time with
the novel object, and Doogie mice were far more likely to do so than were their
non-engineered litter mates one day and three days after their original session
-- an indication of better long-term memory.

   In a second test, mice received foot shocks whenever a tone was sounded. Up
to 10 days later, Doogie mice were significantly more likely to freeze in
anticipation of pain when just the tone was sounded, compared with control mice.
Doogie mice also were quicker to disassociate the tone and the pain -- or
"unlearn" the link -- when taught to do so.

   In another test, mice were placed in a tank of milky water and had to learn
the location of a submerged platform on which they could rest. Compared with
normal mice, Doogie mice were quicker to remember the platform's location once
found and were more likely to swim immediately to that part of the tank in
subsequent trials.

   Scientists emphasized that the genetic change had not turned the mice into
geniuses, whatever a rodent genius might be. In the first test, for example,
even Doogie mice devoted equal attention to novel objects and old objects a week
after becoming familiar with the old objects, indicating that the week-long
memory of the old objects had been lost.

   "They are quantitatively smarter, but they are not Einsteins," said Tim
Bliss, chief of neurophysiology at the National Institute for Medical Research
in London.

   Nonetheless, the finding that such a minor manipulation might make a
measurable difference in even a subset of intelligence raised immediate
speculation about its potential medical use -- and abuse.

   Human gene therapy so far has been tried only on adults, and soon may be
tried in fetuses, but it has never been attempted in embryos and has never been
used for anything other than the treatment of disease. But researchers predicted
that with NR2B's role in learning now verified, drug companies will quickly
discover medicinal compounds that enhance the gene's activity in the brain,
which could then be given to adults.

   "This is what pharmaceutical companies do best," Tsien said. "NR2 is a very
good target."

   Such interventions may come with a price, however. The NR2B gene enhances
memory by increasing the flow of calcium into neurons, and high calcium levels
increase the risk of brain seizures, such as those seen in epilepsy. Calcium
also can exacerbate brain damage after a stroke. Although Doogie mice seem
healthy, no one knows whether they will develop problems later.

   "There's a lot one would want to know about before one took the step of doing
this in people," said Squire. "We don't know if this improvement comes for free
or not."

   The prospect of engineering smart genes into babies also raises societal
concerns, said Thomas Murray, president of the Hastings Center, a bioethics
think tank in Garrison, N.Y.

   "Perfectableism," or the belief that people should strive endlessly to be
perfect, is a seemingly high-minded worldview with potentially large
psychological and cultural downsides, Murray said. Constantly rising
expectations can become a big burden, especially for children whose braininess
has been "ordered up" from scratch.

   The more imminent prospect of scientists genetically engineering greater
intelligence into animals also raises profound questions, Murray said. "I don't
know that upregulating this gene in chimps is going to get them to start
reciting Shakespeare," he said. "But it might make them smarter, and we may have
to revisit the question of what makes us different."



LOAD-DATE: September 02, 1999


                             1393 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1999 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.The Plain Dealer,
                              September 1, 1999
                       The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 1, 1999 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC DEFECT IN RATS PERMANENTLY CURED WITH GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By MAURA LERNER; MINNEAPOLIS-ST.PAUL STAR TRIBUNE

BODY:

   Scientists say that for the first time they have successfully used a form of
gene therapy to repair permanently a genetic disease in animals.

   The researchers corrected a genetic defect in lab rats that causes a liver
disease known as Crigler-Najjar syndrome.

   And, although the disease is extremely rare in humans, the findings raise
hope for repairing other genetic defects that cause diseases such as cystic
fibrosis, sickle cell anemia and hemophilia, said Dr. Clifford Steer, the study
leader and professor of medicine and cell biology at the University of
Minnesota.

   "This is a powerful technique that offers great potential for future
treatment of numerous genetic diseases in humans," he said.

   Although scientists have been experimenting with gene therapy to treat
everything from heart disease to leukemia and Parkinson's disease, there has
been only limited success. In some cases, they have attempted to cure diseases
by replacing the defective genes with healthy ones, only to find that the genes
ended up in the wrong place, or their effects didn't last.

   But in this case, the scientists found a way to help the rats' cells correct
their own genetic defects. They developed a drug, made of synthetic DNA and RNA,
that resembles the rat's own gene, but without the mutation that causes the
disease.

   When injected into the animal, the drug tracked down the defective genes and
activated their own repair systems, converting them into normal genes, the
scientists said. The repairs lasted up to two years, leading researchers to
conclude that the fix was permanent.

   "This is the first time where a disease is being treated by this method,"
said Dr. Jayanta Roy-Chowdhury, a professor of molecular genetics at Albert
Einstein College of Medicine in New York City who collaborated on the study. "I
think it's a very important step."

   Experts had predicted this kind of treatment, known as "site-directed gene
repair," wouldn't be possible for another decade, Steer said. "We did it nine
years early."

   Scientists hope to begin the first human experiments next spring, if approved
by the Food and Drug Administration. Only about 500 people worldwide are known
to have Crigler-Najjar syndrome, a deadly condition that leaves its victims
without the necessary enzyme to dispose of bilirubin, a toxic byproduct of
processing blood cells in the liver.

   They plan to test the treatment on volunteers from the Amish and Mennonite
communities in western Pennsylvania, who share the same genetic mutation.

   Theoretically, the researchers say, the same technique could be used to
develop drugs to fix other defective genes.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1999


                             1394 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1999 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    August 31, 1999, Tuesday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: 'U' team finds way to fix genetic mutation;
Findings could help tackle diseases such as cystic fibrosis, sickle cell

BYLINE: Maura Lerner; Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists in Minnesota and New York say they have, for the first time,
successfully used a form of gene therapy to permanently repair a genetic disease
in animals.

       The researchers   corrected a genetic defect in lab rats that causes a
liver disease known as Crigler-Najjar syndrome.

        And although the disease is extremely rare in humans, the findings raise
hope for repairing other genetic defects that cause diseases such as cystic
fibrosis, sickle cell anemia and hemophilia, said Dr. Clifford Steer, the study
leader and a professor of medicine and cell biology at the University of
Minnesota.

         "This is a powerful technique that offers great potential for future
treatment of numerous genetic diseases in humans," he said.

        Although scientists have been experimenting with gene therapy to treat
everything from heart disease to leukemia and Parkinson's disease, they've had
limited success. In some cases, they have attempted to cure diseases by
replacing the defective genes with healthy ones, only to find that the genes
ended up in the wrong place, or their effects didn't last.

        But in this case, the scientists found a way to help the rats' cells
correct their own genetic defects. They developed a drug, made of synthetic DNA
and RNA, that resembles the rat's own gene, only without the mutation that
causes the disease.

         When injected into the animal, the drug tracked down the defective
genes and activated their own repair systems, converting them into normal genes,
the scientists said. The repairs lasted up to two years, leading researchers to
conclude that the fix was permanent.

          "This is the first time where a disease is being treated by this
method," said Dr. Jayanta Roy-Chowdhury, a professor of molecular genetics at
Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City who collaborated on the
study. "I think it's a very important step."

        As recently as 1 years   ago, experts predicted this kind of treatment,
known as "site-directed gene repair," wouldn't be possible for another decade,
Steer said. "We did it nine years early."

    Scientists hope to begin the first human experiments next spring, if
approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Only about 500 people worldwide
are known to have Crigler-Najjar syndrome, a deadly condition that leaves its
victims without the necessary enzyme to dispose of bilirubin, a toxic byproduct
of processing blood cells in the liver.

         They plan to test the treatment on volunteers from the Amish and
Mennonite communities in western Pennsylvania, who share the same genetic
mutation.

        Theoretically, the researchers say, the same technique could be used to
develop drugs to fix other defective genes.

    "I really hope that this will not only be a great theoretical triumph, but
it also is going to be of great use to humanity," said Roy-Chowdhury.

         He and his colleagues decided to study Crigler-Najjar syndrome, even
though it's so rare, because it's caused by a single genetic defect. He said it
would be more difficult to gauge the treatment's effect on a disease with
multiple causes.

        The study is being published today in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science.


LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1999


                             1395 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 31, 1999, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 390 words

HEADLINE: Genetic defect repaired with synthetic code Technique could
permanently correct disorders such as hemophilia in humans

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   Scientists report they have for the first time permanently repaired
a genetic disease in animals with a single drug infusion. They
will test the treatment in humans next year.

   The achievement, detailed in today's Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, holds implications for disorders from
inherited single-gene defects, such as hemophilia, sickle cell
anemia and thalassemia (chronic anemia), experts say.


   "To my knowledge, this is the first permanent correction of a
mutation and heretofore only fantasized about," says Clifford
Steer of the University of Minnesota Medical Center in Minneapolis.

   Steer and co-researcher Jayanta Roy-Chowdhury, at Albert Einstein
College of Medicine in New York, conducted their study on rats
that have a version of a rare human disease, Crigler-Najjar syndrome.
The disease is caused by one missing piece of genetic code in
the instructions of a gene in liver cells that aids the breakdown
of bilirubin, a red blood cell byproduct.

   The disease affects Amish children and causes fatal brain damage.
Children must be treated by exposure to blue lights up to 14 hours
a day to break down the bilirubin.

   The genetic defect in rats was fixed with small pieces of synthetic
genetic codes. These man-made codes get into a liver cell's nucleus
and attach to segments of the gene where the defect occurs. The
attachment triggers a natural DNA repair system in the cells that
corrects the error. The correction is passed on to new liver cells
and becomes permanent.

   The synthetic codes are packaged in fat molecules that target
liver cells. When injected into rats' tails, 95% of the molecules
hit the liver.

   The first human study of the genetic fix is being developed for
Amish children with Crigler-Najjar syndrome, says Gerald Messerschmidt
of Kimeragen Inc. in Newton, Pa. The company owns patents and
licenses to the technology. It will apply to the Food and Drug
Administration in January to do studies in children. The technology
also may be useful for studying gene function.

   Eric Kamiec of Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia developed
the idea for the gene repair technology.

   Gene repair differs from gene therapy, in which disabled viruses
usually are used to deliver genes into cells to replace defective
ones.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1999


                             1396 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           August 29, 1999 Sunday All

SECTION: Cue Pg. 11

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: Lengthy 'Experiment' a little hard to swallow

BYLINE: BILL CAMPBELL

SOURCE: Special to the Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   The Experiment. By John Darnton. Dutton. 368 pages. $24.95.

   You've heard the story: a guy is picked up in a bar by a gorgeous woman,
passes out in her hotel room, wakes up later in a bathtub full of ice with a
large, fresh incision where one of his kidneys has been removed.

   Scary. Fortunately, it's an urban myth.

   That scary idea is the germ of "The Experiment."

   The novel opens on an island off the coast of Georgia, where a group of evil
scientists maintains a colony of clones of themselves and their loved ones.
Whenever one of them needs a kidney, an eye, a heart, they take it from the
clone -- an involuntary donor.

   One of these clones escapes and finds his prototype, who turns out to be the
lost child of one of the original scientists and -- surprise! -- an
investigative reporter. They have various adventures together involving the FBI,
a girl-prototype with whom they both fall in love, secret laboratories, gene
therapy, and so on.

   At the heart of it all is a truly mind-boggling conspiracy of scientists and
rich folks who will pay almost anything for longer life.

   The author of this pot-boiler is John Darnton, an excellent reporter for the
New York Times for more than 30 years.

   He won a Pulitzer Prize for a series of stories smuggled out of Poland during
the struggles of the early 1980s. Today he serves as cultural news editor.

   As a novelist, Darnton makes a good reporter.

   "The Experiment" is sound on the science of cloning, gene therapy and the
biological factors which contribute to long life. It's rich in evocative detail
about several interesting locations: the sea islands of Georgia, mining country
in Arizona, a secret lab in rural New York.

   When the hero and heroine are trapped in a mine by the bad guys, it's almost
frightening.

   But the plot is driven by unlikely coincidences and the characters are mostly
made of wood. There is a neat and unforeseen twist at the end, but the rest of
it is all too predictable. And unbelievable.

   This book is long, close to 400 pages. At half that length, it would be a
good-enough airplane or beach read.

   But the way it is? Leave it for devotees of urban myths.  ------------ Bill
Campbell is director of grants and research at the University of Wisconsin-River
Falls.

GRAPHIC: Photo

   (BOOKCOVER)

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1999


                             1397 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section 3;Page 1;Column 1;Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3319 words

HEADLINE: The Race to Cash In On the Genetic Code

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, Md.

BODY:

   BEFORE there was an Internet bubble, before biotechnology left a bad taste in
money managers' mouths, capital was ventured and shares were sold in a group of
companies that aimed to leapfrog the Government's multibillion-dollar effort to
map the human genome. By sequencing and patenting genes ahead of the publicly
financed laboratories, the investors thought, these companies would control the
next era of health care -- and make their founders and shareholders rich.

   But now, as the international race to spell out the precise sequence of the
three billion letters in the human genetic code sprints to the finish line, the
markets are demanding that the gene merchants deliver the goods. Investors are
starting to demand not just science, but a viable business model, too.

    To the victors will belong an asset of almost unfathomable value: the source
code of life itself. By sequencing the DNA in all 100,000 genes in the human
body -- that is, by divining the order of the four chemicals that make up the
genes -- scientists hope to treat diseases in much the same way that software
engineers fix faulty computer programs: by isolating flaws in the code.

   If the effort is successful, health care will shift from a paradigm of detect
and treat, typically with toxic drugs that sometimes do no more than mask
symptoms, to predict and prevent, with therapies of exquisite specificity aimed
at the causes of disease. By identifying the genetic roots of illnesses like
cancer and heart disease, some experts say, the science of the genome, or
genomics, may make it possible for a child born today to live to 150 -- or, some
say, much longer.

   "Death is a series of preventable diseases," said Dr. William A. Haseltine,
chairman and chief executive of Human Genome Sciences here, declaring the
philosophy behind the industry he is helping to invent.

   Other genomics leaders have less trouble with that assertion than with Dr.
Haseltine's contention that his company already has sequences for 95 percent of
the human genes and is amassing a patent portfolio that will make it the
gatekeeper for the entire biopharmaceuticals industry.

   Assertions like that have always irritated Dr. Francis S. Collins, the
director of the Human Genome Project at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md. For some of the companies, he said, "financial viability appears
to be tied to claims of exclusivity," while the Government's goal is to sequence
all the human genes and place them in the public domain for the common good.

   Indeed, the whole concept of patenting the bits of biochemical information
known as genes offends many, from religious leaders to scientists, including
James Watson, a co-discoverer of DNA, who resigned as the original head of the
Human Genome Project over this issue. While the Patent Office has established
rules meant to clarify what kind of genetic discoveries can be patented, the
issue is by no means resolved.

   The genomics companies have filed patents by the thousands, but only a few
hundred have been published, fewer still issued and none of those yet defended
in court. So any claims of strong patent positions remain unproven.

   But genomics is all about big claims. Last year, Dr. J. Craig Venter, a
former N.I.H. researcher, shook up the field when he started a new company, now
called Celera Genomics Group, a separately traded subsidiary of the PE
Corporation, which he said would complete the sequencing of the human genome in
2001, about two years ahead of the public labs.

   Dr. Venter's announcement was greeted with considerable skepticism, but it
prompted Dr. Collins to move up his goal for completion, too; he now expects a
rough draft of the human genome by next spring and a complete genome a year
later.

   The acceleration of the public and private efforts has already led to a rough
winnowing of the genomics field, with some companies disappearing in mergers and
others trading at such low share prices that their ability to raise capital and
remain independent is doubtful.

   A couple of broad strategies have emerged, meanwhile, among the
best-capitalized companies.

   Human Genome Sciences and Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Cambridge,
Mass., intend to sell drugs, developed with capital raised in a few high-value
deals with pharmaceutical companies. Two others, Incyte Pharmaceuticals Inc., of
Palo Alto, Calif., and Celera, in Rockville, sell only data that others use to
identify potential drug targets.

   Shares in Human Genome and Millennium have soared this year, while Incyte,
once the market leader, has fallen, primarily because of the perceived threat
from Celera, which has deep pockets and a similar business model.

   "The human genome is going to be sequenced, with absolute certainty, within
the next two years," said Dr. Eric Lander, director of the federally financed
Whitehead/M.I.T. Center for Genomic Research in Cambridge and a founding
scientist at Millennium. "The game has moved on. Now it's: How do you add value
to the genome?"

The Code as a Cure

   Perhaps the most obvious way to add value to the genome is to turn genetic
discoveries into drugs, but so far Human Genome Sciences is the only company
that has done so. The stainless-steel fermentation vats at its
80,000-square-foot manufacturing plant here in Rockville would be a common site
at a traditional biotechnology company, like Amgen or Genentech, but they are
unique among the genomics players.

   These vats produce the proteins that are Human Genome's first two drugs. One,
intended to protect blood-forming cells from the toxic effects of chemotherapy,
is being tested in women with breast and ovarian cancer. The other is being
tested as a wound-healing agent. Both are in the second of three phases of
trials typically required of new drugs by the Food and Drug Administration; that
means that they are at least two or three years away from the market.

   But it is Human Genome's third drug candidate that provides a glimpse of the
real promise of genomics. Using a gene injected directly into a diseased area,
it prompts the body to grow new blood vessels. The drug is being tested as an
alternative to bypass surgery for treating blocked arteries in the heart and
limbs.

   "At this point, we are the only company to create genomics assets and to use
those assets to move drugs into the clinic," said Dr. Haseltine, who did
pioneering work in sequencing the genome of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, as
a scientist at Harvard's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.

   But these three drugs, and three others that Human Genome hopes to begin
testing next year, are only the tip of a very large iceberg. Dr. Haseltine said
the company has discovered -- and, more importantly, filed patents on -- a vast
data base of genes.

   "Any company that wants to be in the business of using genes, proteins or
antibodies as drugs has a very high probability of running afoul of our
patents," Dr. Haseltine said. "From a commercial point of view, they are
severely constrained -- and far more than they realize."

   Some drug industry executives dismiss this is as self-promotion, though as
Human Genome's patents begin to be published, it is clear that the company is
assembling an arsenal of intellectual property.

   Still, Human Genome is itself constrained by the terms of a deal it struck in
1993 with SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the British pharmaceuticals giant. For $125
million, then the largest biotechnology deal ever, SmithKline obtained exclusive
rights to use Human Genome's gene discoveries to produce so-called
small-molecule drugs, the kind that can be taken in pill form. The agreement
expires in June 2001.

   The deal left Human Genome free to develop drugs based on proteins -- the
easiest kind to take quickly to the clinic. But such drugs are commercially
problematic, because they must be injected, and few patients want to take a shot
if a pill is available. The company can also develop gene therapies, like its
heart drug. But gene therapy has yet to produce an approved drug for anyone.

   Nonetheless, Dr. Haseltine said the SmithKline deal was worthwhile, because
it gave Human Genome the resources to grab a big lead in genomics. And when it
expires, he will be free to strike new partnerships based on the same data base
of genes. "Two years from now, we have a big opportunity to remonetize our asset
and still have plenty of intellectual property to ourselves," he said.

Partners in the Marketplace

   For now, however, the undisputed champion of deal making is Millennium, which
has raked in over $1 billion in financing from partners like Roche Holding A.G.,
Eli Lilly & Company, Monsanto and Bayer A.G.

   The arrangements are exclusive only for specific diseases (or, in Monsanto's
case, for use in agricultural products), so Millennium remains free to pursue
its own small-molecule drugs. It has also created subsidiaries for biotechnology
drugs and for predictive medicine, like tests to identify genetic conditions
showing a predisposition to diseases or adverse drug reactions.

   Millennium's executives don't claim a lock on the intellectual property of
the human genome, but their deal-making shows the value that drug makers see in
the company's work.

   A year ago, for example, Bayer agreed to pay Millennium up to $460 million
over five years for 225 of what the industry calls validated genetic targets --
that is, genes plus the accompanying biological data to show their relevance in
areas like cardiovascular disease, cancer, osteoporosis, pain, liver fibrosis
and viral infections. Targets that Bayer doesn't choose for drug development
revert to Millennium.

   "We did a huge search before we went with Millennium," said Wolfgang Hartwig,
Bayer's executive vice president of pharmaceutical research. He said Bayer was
attracted to Millennium's continual refreshing of its technology and to its
freedom from the encumbrances of exclusive deals.

   Millennium sprawls around Cambridge in leased space, most of it near the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In its early days, the company made much
of its connection to Dr. Lander and M.I.T.'s genome center. But today, Dr.
Lander's role is more clearly advisory. The personalities who define the company
are those of its chief executive, Mark Levin, a soft-spoken former venture
capitalist, and his head deal maker and chief business officer, Steven H.
Holtzman, a Rhodes Scholar with a degree in philosophy.

   Mr. Levin tends not to make big claims, but he is building a big company,
drawing on experiences early in his career at Genentech, the biotechnology
pioneer, where he worked in process engineering in the mid-1980's.

   "Genentech put in place the largest molecular biology lab in the world at the
time," he said. "We've gone out and put together the largest critical mass in
biotech today."

   Later this year, Roche is expected to seek permission to begin trials of an
anti-obesity drug developed from a genetic target supplied by Millennium. Becton
Dickinson & Company in Franklin Lakes, N.J., will soon offer a melanoma test
using technology from Millennium's predictive medicine unit.

   But for all the depth and breadth of its science and technology, Millennium
is conspicuously lacking a drug of its own in clinical trials.

   "We're developing genes and targets and leads," Mr. Levin said. "By the end
of 1999, going into 2000, you will see us make additional acquisitions, and
these acquisitions will take us into the clinic."

   Analysts note that while Millennium has the cash and high-value shares to
acquire a drug -- and many struggling biotech companies have drugs for sale --
the best drug prospects attract multiple bids, and there are many far larger
companies out shopping.

The Knowledge Merchants

   If Millennium and Human Genome aim to be the next Genentech and Amgen, Incyte
and Celera have a different role model in mind: Bloomberg L.P. Just as Bloomberg
sells information to the securities industry but isn't in the brokerage
business, these companies sell data bases of genetic information to drug
companies but never intend to produce drugs.

   Incyte is based in Palo Alto, Calif., deep in Silicon Valley, and it is no
coincidence that the heart of its headquarters is a vast, glass-enclosed room
full of powerful computers.  "At the end of the day, it's the information that
matters," said Randy Scott, the president and chief scientific officer. "We are
all about the application of Moore's Law to biology," he said -- a reference to
the observation that computer processing power doubles every 18 months. Applying
that exponential growth to genomics should produce similar gains for drug
discovery, Dr. Scott said.

   Until recently, Incyte had something unique among genomics companies:
operating income from sales of its products. Instead of signing huge deals to
bankroll its own drug programs, Incyte sold subscriptions to Lifeseq, its
genomic data base. Some 25 companies subscribed, including most of the leading
pharmaceutical and biotechnology concerns, and Incyte showed steady earnings
growth without big outlays on drug development.

   But the creation last year of Celera -- cash-rich and in no hurry to show a
profit -- put Incyte on the spot. While Incyte's data base offered gene
fragments that point the way to full-length genes, Celera said it would provide
whole genomes at a competitive price.

   At the same time, the Government's Human Genome Project, now on an
accelerated timetable, was placing thousands of genes in the public domain. And
companies like Pangea Systems of Oakland, Calif., were supplying software tools
to analyze this data, at a fraction of the cost of a Lifeseq subscription.

   Facing a classic squeeze, Incyte management moved rapidly to improve its
product, adding data from the Government's work, cutting the price and
introducing new data bases. But the moves cost money, and as the company began
reporting losses, investors fled, cutting the share price in half.

   "I've been hearing this story -- that Lifeseq's dead, it's all in the public
domain -- and maybe we even started to believe it ourselves," said Roy
Whitfield, Incyte's chairman and chief executive. "But it's just not true." No
customer has failed to renew its subscription, he said, and he predicted that
profits -- and investors -- would return in the second half of next year.

   Celera is the spoiler in genomics, or intends to be. The company plans to
sequence the entire human genome and offer the data to subscribers. Other
genomes of interest to scientists -- like that of drosophila, a fruit fly used
in many experiments -- will be offered in a similar fashion. Dr. Venter's
critics say Celera's hurry-up human genome will be full of gaps and errors, but
the company has attracted three blue-chip subscribers: Novartis A.G., Amgen and
Pharmacia & Upjohn.

   As a sibling of PE Biosystems Group, also part of the PE Corporation, Celera
received first access to PE Biosystems' latest automated gene-sequencing
machines. (The two companies were created this spring in a reorganization of the
old Perkin-Elmer Corporation.) Celera now has 300 of these $300,000 devices,
some arrayed in neat rows, some lining the hallways still in their wooden
shipping crates, some piled in elevators. The largest public genome center, Dr.
Lander's lab at M.I.T. has 120 such machines, and most genomics companies have
just a handful.

   Combining the powerful equipment with an army of robots and vast amounts of
computing power makes it practical and cost-effective to sequence whole genomes,
Dr. Venter said.

   The idea is that subscribers will pay Celera for partial genetic information
as it becomes available, just as they have paid Incyte -- but with the kicker
that the company will ultimately supply complete genomes for many organisms.
Companies can use this information royalty-free, except where it involves a gene
sequence patented by Celera. Dr. Venter said he ultimately expects a mixture of
revenues -- from subscriptions, royalties on drug sales and even individual
researchers paying to use the Celera Web site.

   "They say I'm going to be the Bill Gates of biology; I'm not sure that's
meant to be flattering," he said. Still, "the upside to this business is very,
very large, and different from what anybody else is doing."

Many Eager Competitors

   Wall Street loves to anoint winners, and given the impact of capital flow,
these prophecies can become self-fulfilling. Despite talk that Celera or Human
Genome may achieve a Microsoft-like dominance of biological information, many
smaller companies are also pursuing opportunities.

   The first real product of genomics was a diagnostic kit developed by Myriad
Genetics Inc. of Salt Lake City, drawing on its discovery of two genes
responsible for hereditary breast cancer. Genome Therapeutics Inc. of Waltham,
Mass., has built a subscription business based on bacterial genomes. Genset S.A.
of Paris has signed up two partners for what is called pharmacogenomics -- the
enterprise of applying genetic data to existing drugs to screen out people more
likely to have side effects.

   There are many more, and their continued proliferation suggests that genomics
remains a fertile field.

   "The current effort is rather like building the periodic table," said Dr.
Collins, head of the Government's project, comparing the work to the fundamental
plow work of chemistry.

   "The real challenge of genomics -- the real fun, the real payoff -- is being
able to take the periodic table and figure out how it works," he said. "All of
that will be poorly understood and will be grist for research for decades to
come."

A Vitalizing Gene, Straight to the Heart

   Born with a genetic defect that caused his body to overproduce cholesterol,
the Rev. Charles Wilson started having heart problems when he was 27. Over the
next 30 years, he suffered a heart attack and had surgery many times. But by
last summer, the blood supply to his heart was so reduced by atherosclerosis
that he could barely get out of bed without severe chest pains.

   "My doctor said to me, 'Charles, there's nothing else we can do; you've just
got to sit still until technology catches up with you,' " said Mr. Wilson, 57, a
Presbyterian minister who lives in Charlotte, N.C.

   One day, though, he read a newspaper article about research on coronary gene
therapy.

   "I went looking on the Internet to find the actual report," Mr. Wilson said.
"From that, I found the name of the doctor and the hospital."

   He got in touch with Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, chief of cardiovascular research
at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center of Boston, and ultimately entered one of the
first clinical trials of a drug developed through genomics.

   Physicians in Boston made an incision in Mr. Wilson's chest and injected --
directly into his heart -- a gene that prompts the creation of new blood
vessels. (Subsequently, the gene has been administered through a catheter.)

   Although his recovery was slow at first, Mr. Wilson gradually gained
strength.

   "On the 42d day, as I was walking through the mall with my wife, when we had
walked about a quarter-mile, I said, 'Honey, I haven't had any discomfort
today,' " he said. "From that point on, I've been able to walk increasingly
longer distances, faster and without pain." He now walks a mile and a half a
day.

   The gene he receives, VEGF-2, is being tested as a drug by Human Genome
Sciences Inc. and is a product of Vascular Genetics Inc., which is a joint
venture of Human Genome, Dr. Isner, St. Elizabeth's and Cato Holdings, a
contract research organization. The drug is at least three to five years away
from the market.

   Although Mr. Wilson still has scar tissue and will have to take a variety of
medications for the rest of his life, electronic scans of his heart show that it
has grown new blood vessels in about 60 percent of the area that was previously
blocked.   LAWRENCE M. FISHER


   http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: September 5, 1999, Sunday

CORRECTION:

   Two picture captions last Sunday with an article about competition in the
genomics industry reversed the photographers' credits. The picture of Dr. J.
Craig Venter, founder of Celera Genomics Group, was by Marty Katz for The New
York Times; the picture of three executives of Millenium Pharmaceuticals was by
Rick Friedman for The New York Times.


GRAPHIC: Photos: The Rev. Charles Wilson received a genetic treatment in a
clinical trial. (Donna Bise for The New York Times); Two companies working to
make profitable use of the decoding of human DNA are Millennium Pharmaceuticals,
led by, from left above (Marty Katz for The New York Times), Steven H. Holtzman,
Mark Levin and Dr. Eric Lander, and Celera Genomics Group, whose founder is Dr.
J. Craig Venter, at right. (Rick Friedman for The New York Times)(pg. 12)

Chart: Rival Strategies
The leading genomics companies have contrasting business models: two aim to
develop drugs; two aim to sell data about genes.

MILLENNIUM PHARMACEUTICALS
HEADQUARTERS: Cambridge, Mass.
BUSINESS: Provides genetic targets for partners' drug discovery and agricultural
programs. Develops small-molecule drugs; proteins and antibodies; gene-based
diagnostic tests.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Partnerships with Bayer, Monsanto, Pfizer, Eli Lilly, American
Home Products, Astra and Roche.
MARKET CAPITALIZATION: $2.15 billion
'98 REVENUE: $134 million
'98 OPERATING INCOME: -$8 million

INCYTE PHARMACEUTICALS
HEADQUARTERS: Palo Alto, Calif.
BUSINESS: Provides data bases of gene sequences and related analytical software
by subscription. Manufactures and sells drug discovery tools.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS: More than 25 major pharmaceutical and biotechnology
subscribers. First genome company to report earnings from operations.
MARKET CAPITALIZATION: $713 million
'98 REVENUE: $135 million
'98 OPERATING INCOME: $12 million

HUMAN GENOME SCIENCES
HEADQUARTERS: Rockville, Md.
BUSINESS: Provides genetic targets for partners' drug discovery programs.
Develops proprietary proteins, antibodies and gene therapy drugs.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Established first major genomic partnership, receiving $125
million from SmithKline Beecham. Has three drugs in clinical trials.
MARKET CAPITALIZATION: $1.55 billion
'98 REVENUE: $30 million
'98 OPERATING INCOME: -$32 million

CELERA GENOMICS GROUP
HEADQUARTERS: Rockville, Md.
BUSINESS: Provides genomic and biological information. Plans to offer complete
genomes of human and other species, plus analytical software.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Partnerships with Novartis, Pharmacia & Upjohn and Amgen.
MARKET CAPITALIZATION: $650 million
'98 REVENUE*: $6 million
'98 OPERATING INCOME*: -$16 million

*Six months ended Dec. 31.

(The New York Times/Illustration by Chris Gould)

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1999


                             1398 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 1999 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    August 28, 1999 Saturday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 885 words

HEADLINE: RUNNING DOWN THE MOUNTAIN THE ROAD WARRIORS

SOURCE: KATY MULDOON - The Oregonian

DATELINE: TIMBERLINE

BODY:

   Summary: 17,400 Hood to Coast participants are en route to Seaside

   Friday morning dawned Oregon fresh -- all peaceful and dewy and sweet
smelling.

   And that was the end of that.

   Before noon:

   * Stinky, sweat-drenched runners gushed like snowmelt down the flanks of
Mount Hood.

   * Perspiring pedestrians powered through Portland.

   * A minivan caravan -- each of the approximately 2,900 vehicles jammed
thigh-to-thigh with bare-legged grown-ups eager to spend 24 hours in one
another's close company -- rolled west.

   The world's largest relay race had landed.

   Combined, the Hood to Coast Relay, Portland to Coast Relay and Portland to
Coast High School Challenge put 17,400 runners and walkers on the roads of
Northwestern Oregon in what has become, in its 18th year, one of the state's
most outrageous and energetic summer events.

   Those who survive the heat, muscle cramps, blisters, togetherness and eau
d'exertion will cross the finish line today in Seaside, where as many as 65,000
athletes and onlookers are expected to dip their toes in the sand during the
state's biggest beach party.

   Friends, relatives, co-workers, strangers and more than 4,000 volunteers
watched Friday as the endorphin-driven parade passed through such towns as
Zigzag, Welches, Linnton and Warren along the route from Timberline Lodge on
Mount Hood to Seaside on the northern Oregon coast. This morning, they will
muscle their way through Mist, Birkenfeld, Jewell and Olney before they feel the
breeze off the Pacific Ocean.

   For most of the 1,450 12-member teams, the trek takes about 24 hours; elite
runners and race walkers, however, will pass far more swiftly. For instance, the
gazelle-like men's elite running teams are expected to complete the 195-mile
Hood to Coast course in about 16 hours and 40 minutes.

   Depending on the distance of the segments they run or walk, each athlete
covers 10 to 20 miles during the relay, with just enough time in between for
legs to grow stiff and sore. They're up all night, or catch catnaps using a
teammate's shoulder for a pillow. They snack from coolers jammed behind their
van seats. Out of necessity, they stand in long lines just for the joy of using
portable toilets.

   The relay -- which filled up fast and turned away 1,000 teams this year --
engenders a spirit of camaraderie rarely found in road races, participants say.
It was evident at 9:30 a.m. Friday, when the first runners bolted across the
starting line in the Timberline Lodge parking lot. Their teammates lined the
course and chanted along with clock-watcher and race announcer John Hammarley:
"Eight. Seven. Six. Five. Four. Three. Two. One."

   The whoops and hollers were so loud no one could hear Hammarley say "Go!"

   It didn't matter.

   They were off -- some for fun, some for fitness, some for the benefit of
their egos and some for good causes large and small.

   "Ego is not the right word," said Jack Saling, 68, of Troutdale, who leads
the Gold's Gym Super Seniors team of 11 men and one woman. "It's a feel-good
thing for us to do it, and we seem to be a source of inspiration for others on
the course."

   Last year, one of Saling's teammates showed his aging mettle: Al Nakata, 76,
finished the relay even though his pacemaker malfunctioned. He has a new one for
this year's relay.

   Early out of the starting gate Friday were the Road Goddesses, a women's team
from Eugene, which hoped to raise awareness and $12,000 for the Fanconi Anemia
Research Fund.

   The Goddesses, most of them teachers, feel a strong emotional tie to Amy
Frohnmayer, daughter of Lynn and Dave Frohnmayer, president of University of
Oregon. The Frohnmayers have lost two children to Fanconi anemia, a rare genetic
disorder.

   Sharon Schuman, Amy's violin teacher, stood at the starting line Friday under
a hot, hazy sky and showed off the glittery letters that stretched from her
thigh to her ankle: "4 Amy, Fight Fanconi Anemia," they said.

   "For us," Schuman said, "this race is a race against time. Amy's healthy now,
so she's an ideal candidate for gene therapy. But we need money for research. If
we don't learn more now, she could die."

   Four teams of breast cancer survivors hit the course Friday -- one running
team and three walking teams collectively called Christine's Dream, in honor of
Christine Workentine of Albany, who founded the team several years ago.
Workentine, whose breast cancer has spread, is too ill this year to participate,
but the teams said they will keep her in their thoughts as they travel toward
the coast.

   The runners among the survivors' group call themselves Peg's Legs, in honor
of their friend and fellow runner, Peggy Taylor, who ran Hood to Coast with them
for a couple of years before her cancer grew too debilitating. Taylor, who lived
in Corvallis, died this spring.

   Hood to Coast proves a powerful event for the survivors, said Cyndi Levine,
team captain.

   "We share stories, we share sorrows, we share fears -- and some pretty trashy
jokes," Levine said. "We show each other our battle wounds, our scars. It's a
lot of hours to spend together, and we get very, very close. We're very
compassionate toward one another. . . . It feels like we're a bunch of warrior
women heading out."

   You can reach Katy Muldoon at 503-221-8526 or by e-mail at
katymuldoon@news.oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Color Photo by DOUG BEGHTEL of The Oregonian staff; Graphic -- Map by
The Oregonian -- HOOD TO COAST RELAY - The course for the 15th annual Hood to
Coast Relay...  [Northwest edition only]

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000


                             1399 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1999 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 27, 1999, Friday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: HOUSTON; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: Eder nurturing newest production

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: MAXINE MESINGER

BODY:

   FRIDAY flashes: It's a boy, their first image, for Broadway and recording
star Linda Eder and her husband, composer Frank Wildhorn. Their son was born
Monday night in Putnam, N.Y. The Alley's Gregory Boyd was among the first to
hear the news and has been happily spreading the word to their Houston chums.
They named him Jake Ryan, because Frank's first son, Justin (by another
marriage), said, "No matter what you name him, I'll still call him Jake." When
Jake arrived, Linda had just completed recording her latest solo album, "It's No
Secret Anymore," for which she was doing promotional appearances just last week.
Atlantic Records will release the album at the end of September. It even
includes a special lullaby for the new baby, "Anything Can Happen." Meanwhile,
Wildhorn still has "Jekyll & Hyde" running on Broadway, which he co-composed
with Leslie Bricusse, who first brought Wildhorn to Houston and the Alley.
Wildhorn's "Scarlet Pimpernel" has left Broadway and is touring; the tour kicked
off in Houston last week. And a tour for his "Civil War," which also had a
Broadway run, is in the planning stages. Eder starred in "Jekyll & Hyde" and had
a role in "Civil War." . . .


   Michael Bentley, an exec with the Ritz Hotel in London, will be in town Sept.
8 along with the Ritz's managing director, Giles Shepherd, and his wife, Peter.
Bentley, having been in the hotel biz in London for years, has myriad friends in
Houston, most of whom travel to London at least once a year. Among them are
Harry and Rose Cullen. While Bentley and Giles Shepherd are in town, they'll
host a cocktail party for Rose Sept. 9 in the Cullens' River Oaks home. The
party also will salute committee workers for the upcoming Assistance Fund Gala,
"All About Rose," honoring Rose Cullen. And among other festivities, Sarah Jane
Eads will host a small cocktail party Sept. 10 for Bentley and the Shepherds.
Incidentally, the Ritz, a venerable old hotel that opened in 1906, has had a
major face lift recently and looks grand. If you saw Julia Roberts and Hugh
Grant's recent movie, "Notting Hill," you got a look at the Ritz; much of it was
shot on location at the hotel.  . . .


   Methodist Hospital will host a reception Sept. 20 for the Adult Stem Cell
Transplant Unit of the newly opened International Center for Cell and Gene
Therapy. Methodist, Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children's are
collaborating to treat cancer and other genetic diseases through the formation
of the center, which is the first in the world to combine basic science and
clinical research with pediatric and adult cell-and-gene-therapy transplant
units. Dr. Malcolm Brenner is on the staff of all three institutions and is the
director of the Center.  . . .  Jonathan Heffron and Laura Mudd tied the knot
recently at the Princeville Resort in Kauai, Hawaii, then honeymooned at the
posh Four Seasons Hotel in Maui. They held off on the wedding reception until
they got home, then had a swingin' soiree at the new Memorial-area abode of
Melissa and Marc Deer of M.L. Deer Construction Co. The groom is exec veep and
COO of Bank United Corp., and the bride is a personnel consultant.  . . .


   Former Houston actor Ray Stricklyn's autobiography, "Angels & Demons," has
been released by Belle Publishing and is getting as much attention for his
revelations about being gay and his lifestyle as about the struggles and
relationships that have been part of his life in theater and film since the
1950s. Critic Rex Reed says, "Every stage-struck innocent embarking on an acting
career should be required to read this book." . . .  Stricklyn was very active
at the Alley here some years ago, and he used to keep in touch with me. But as
his interest here flagged and he got caught up in Hollywood, our communications
faded away. It's fun to read the book, which also includes quite a bit of gossip
about well-known people in the Hollywood scene.  . . .


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1999


                             1400 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1999 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           August 25, 1999, Wednesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT , Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 318 words

HEADLINE: ANNUAL TELETHON IS VITAL TO CONTINUING THE FIGHT

BODY:


   As Labor Day approaches, I remind the people of Columbus that the holiday
weekend will be much more than a final vacation opportunity before the summer
draws to a close. It will be the weekend when, for the 34th consecutive year,
some 75 million Americans will tune in to support the Jerry Lewis Muscular
Dystrophy Association Telethon.

   Tens of thousands more will participate in special Labor Day weekend events
in Columbus and around the country -- all to help "my kids.'' I encourage
readers of The Dispatch to participate in local events orchestrated by dedicated
volunteers and to watch the telethon on WSYX (Channel 6), beginning on Sept. 5
or 6 (check local listings).

   With readers' and viewers' support, the association can continue to provide
unparalleled help: clinics, wheelchairs and braces, support groups and summer
camps for kids with neuromuscular diseases. The association also will be able to
accelerate its research seeking treatments and cures for 40 neuromuscular
disorders, including the world's first human gene-therapy trials for a
muscle-wasting disease.

   The help of the great people of Columbus makes this progress possible. Thanks
and God bless you.

   Jerry Lewis, national chairman

   Muscular Dystrophy Association

   Tucson, Ariz.

   'Dispatch' urged votes for two judicial activists

   It is with amusement that I read last Wednesday's Dispatch editorial that
decries the Ohio Supreme Court's 4-3 decision to strike down the tort-reform law
enacted by the General Assembly.

   The editorial charged the Supreme Court with hijacking the legislative
process and the constitutional form of state government. This outcome, however,
should come as no surprise to The Dispatch, in view of its glowing editorial
endorsement in the fall of the re-election of Justices Francis E. Sweeney and
Paul E. Pfeifer, two unabashed judicial activists.

   Blake Kellum

   Marion, Ohio

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1999
