
                             401 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               March 27, 1995, MONDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: Prostate Cancer Is Next Target of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: BY TIM FRIEND

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS

BODY:

   The first study of gene therapy for prostate cancer was announced Sunday.

   The research will focus on men whose prostate glands have been removed by
surgery and whose cancer has spread, said Dr. Jonathan Simons of Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine in Baltimore. Studies on 30 to 40 men will begin
there in three to four weeks.

   The therapy involves inserting genes that make a potent immune system booster
called GM-CSF into a patient's cancer cells that have been removed from the
body. This creates a genetically engineered tumor vaccine, which is then
injected into the patient.

   "The vaccine stimulates the patient's body to make T cells to go out on a
search-and-destroy mission and eradicate any prostate cancer left in the body,"
Simons said. Animal studies found the vaccine cured prostate cancer in rats.

   Simons expects to have results within 2 1/2 years. If successful, he said, at
least 40 percent to 50 percent of men undergoing surgery could get the vaccine.
An estimated 104,000 men underwent radical prostatectomy in 1994.

   Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death, behind lung
cancer, for men, killing 40,000 a year.

   A similar gene therapy study has just been completed with kidney cancer
patients. "In general, we've been very pleased" with the results, Simons said.

GRAPHIC: GANNETT NEWS SERVICE

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1995


                             402 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             March 27, 1995, Monday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: TECHNOLOGY MAY MAKE COLONOSCOPIES EASIER

BYLINE: Laurie Loscocco, Dispatch Medical Reporter

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS

BODY:


   Using Hollywood technology to take a virtual trip through the colon may make
screening for colorectal cancer a less uncomfortable reality, a North Carolina
radiologist said.

   The technique known as ''virtual colonoscopy'' has been tested on about 20
patients at the Bowman Gray School of Medicine at Wake Forest University in
Winston-Salem, N.C.

   If certain kinks can be worked out, the imaging technology may be of use to
the estimated 50 million Americans eligible for colonscopies, said Dr. David J.
Vining, assistant professor in the department of radiology at Bowman Gray.

   Most people who should get colonoscopies (because of a family history of
colon polyps or colorectal cancer) do not get screened because of the discomfort
and inconvenience of the standard measures - barium enemas and colonoscopies,
Vining said.

   Many colorectal cancers arise from polyps, and removing them can save lives,
he said.

   Vining developed a system that combines so-called ''helical'' computed
tomography with virtual reality computer technology, such as that used in the
movie industry. In helical computed tomography, a patient's abdomen is scanned
by a machine that rotates around the patient for 30 seconds. The process
generates a rapid sequence of three-dimensional images of the colon.

   Virtual colonoscopy allows doctors to visualize three-dimensional images of
the colon as if they were traveling through it, Vining said. He described the
technique yesterday at an American Cancer Society science writers meeting.

   In early results, the technique was as effective as colonoscopy in detecting
polyps or cancers.

   However, it also had a 20 percent false-positive rate, meaning it detected
cancer or polyps when none was present. That was because retained fecal material
in the colon can mimic polyps.

   Vining said efforts are aimed at developing a contrast agent that would
distinguish between feces and soft tissue masses, such as polyps.

   Development of that agent is about a year away, Vining predicted.

   ''This may not succeed,'' but it has the potential to make cancer screening
less unpleasant and less costly, Vining said. The cost of virtual colonoscopy is
about $ 450 to $ 650, compared with about $ 900 to $ 1,800 for colonoscopy,
Vining said.

   Also at yesterday's meeting, a doctor from the Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine said the first human gene therapy experiment for prostate
cancer should begin in about four weeks.

   The study will be carried out in men who have undergone surgery for prostate
cancer to try to prevent the disease from returning, said Dr. Jonathan Simons,
assistant professor in oncology and urology.

   The therapy involves injecting a gene that has been programmed for a ''search
and destroy mission'' aimed at cancer cells, Simons said.

   In this case, a gene that rallies the immune system will be incorporated into
a tumor ''vaccine'' that is injected into the skin.  The hope is the inserted
genetic material will enable the immune system to destroy cancer cells.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1995


                             403 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          March 27, 1995 Monday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 493 words

HEADLINE: PROSTATE CANCER RISK HIGHER FOR BLACK MEN

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   While two scientists talked optimistically Sunday about high-tech methods of
fighting prostate cancer, a third weighed in with news from the front: This form
of cancer strikes and kills black men about twice as often as white men.

   In a recent study, black men with prostate cancer were younger and their
cancer was more advanced when it was diagnosed, said Dr. Arnold Bullock, a
urologist at Washington University in St. Louis. About 600 of the 21,000 men in
the study were black.

   Bullock, a Xavier University graduate, spoke at a science writers' seminar in
New Orleans sponsored by the American Cancer Society.

   Poor men in the study were much less likely to undergo follow-up treatment,
he said. Poverty, lack of access to health care and apprehension about treatment
were among the reasons he cited for the low number of black men seeking further
help for their cancer.

   Education about the importance of early treatment is the only way to improve
black men's survival, Bullock said.

   With 244,000 new cases expected this year, prostate cancer is the most
prevalent cancer among American men. The cancer society expects it to kill
40,000 men this year - more victims than any other form except lung cancer.  The
lifetime odds of developing the disease are 1 in 8.

   If the disease has not spread beyond the prostate, the chances of five-year
survival are 94 percent, the society said.

   The prostate, which secretes a fluid that helps transport sperm, is a
walnut-shaped gland beneath the bladder that encircles the uretha.

   Removal and radiation therapy are two cures. Two others discussed Sunday are
cryotherapy - killing the cancer cells by injecting them with liquid nitrogen -
and gene therapy, which uses genetic engineering to stimulate the immune system
to make more cancer-fighting cells.

   Another project involving genetic engineering adds diphtheria toxin - a
highly potent poison - to cells that seek out cancer cells and bond to them.
The diphtheria toxin then invades the cell, killing the cancer, said John
Murphy, chief of biomolecular medicine at Boston University Medical Center
Hospital.

   So far, he said, these altered cells have been safe and well-tolerated.

   The most futuristic presentation came from Dr. David Vining, a radiologist at
Bowman Gray School of Medicine in Winston-Salem, N.C., who discussed a spiral CT
scan that provides a quick, comprehensive cross-section of the abdomen to let
doctors look for polyps and gastrointestinal cancer. The method is designed to
supplant the longer, much more painful colonoscopy.

   Using the same technology that created the dinosaurs in "Jurassic Park,"
Vining showed a swooping video tour of the colon to the accompaniment of Richard
Wagner's "Flight of the Valkyries."

   Everyone laughed loudly. When the lights were turned back on, Dr. Vincent
DeVita Jr., Yale Cancer Center's director, offered this assessment: "I'm sure
Wagner would be horrified."

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1995


                             404 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 27, 1995, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 210 words

HEADLINE: Doctors to try gene therapy in prostate cancer fight

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS

BODY:

    Forty years of failure to effectively treat prostate cancer that has spread
has prompted researchers to launch the first study of gene therapy for the
disease.

   The research, announced Sunday, will focus on men whose prostates have been
removed and whose cancer has spread elsewhere, says Dr. Jonathan Simons of Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore.

   Studies on 30 to 40 men begin there in 3 to 4 weeks.

   The therapy involves inserting genes that make a potent immune system booster
called GM-CSF into cancer cells that have been removed.

   That creates a genetically engineered tumor vaccine that is then injected
into the patient.

   "The vaccine stimulates the patient's body to make T cells to go out on a
search-and-destroy mission and eradicate" any cancer left, Simons says.

   Studies showed the vaccine cured prostate cancer in rats.

   Simons expects to have results within 2 1/2 years.

   If successful, at least 40% to 50% of men undergoing surgery could get the
vaccine. About 104,000 men underwent radical prostatectomy in 1994.

   Prostate cancer is the second leading cancer killer of men, claiming 40,000 a
year.

   Simons says, "We've been very pleased" with a similar gene study just
completed with kidney cancer patients.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1995


                             405 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 27, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 1674 words

HEADLINE: Experimental Journey; Biotech Firms Face an Uphill Struggle for
Funding, Findings and Survival

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Dotting the landscape of suburban Maryland's Interstate 270 "technology
corridor," the companies are the kinds of places where executives work in
flannel shirts and jeans, knotting on neckties only when an important visitor
drops by. The hours are long, the stress level high and the challenge enormous:
to unlock genetic codes and use them to fashion new drugs, foods and materials.

   As many as 4,000 people make their living in Maryland's biotechnology
companies. They are mostly clustered along I-270 -- from Bethesda through
Rockville, Gaithersburg -- and others are near Columbia and Baltimore. Like
their colleagues in other biotech centers of the country, many can't be sure
these days just how long the paychecks will last.

   Launched over the past two decades with predictions of miracle cures, big
profit and rapid expansion, the U.S. biotechnology industry has yet to fulfill
those grand expectations. Product delays, outright failures, regulatory hurdles
and the sheer complexity of understanding hereditary material have made most
biotech companies money-losing operations year after year. Basing a business on
the chemical sequences of life, it turns out, is more complicated than anyone
had imagined.

   "Cash has always been a problem," said Meirav Chovav, a biotech analyst for
Salomon Brothers Inc., an investment banking firm in New York. "Now even more
so. The problems the industry faces are interrelated. They all come back to
money."

   Many investors have fled from the industry's 1,300 companies, causing stock
prices to fall 16 percent on average in 1994. At smaller firms, the drop tended
to be even higher. The flight has made the struggling industry poorer yet,
driving some of its members out of business and forcing others to merge or
accept being taken over by giants in the traditional pharmaceutical industry.

   Maryland's biotech industry is a microcosm of the national trend. Many
analysts believe an industry shakeout could severely trim the number of biotech
companies -- and jobs -- in Maryland, which ranks as the nation's third-largest
biotech center, behind Massachusetts and California.

   The National Institutes of Health in Bethesda and academic institutions such
as Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore continue to draw venture capitalists
and scientists to the state -- albeit more slowly than five years ago -- but
Maryland's 100-plus biotech firms are likely to follow national trends and
shrink in number in the next few years, they say.

   "There's an economic winnowing that's inevitable in an immature, young
industry like ours," said James Barrett, chief executive of Genetic Therapy
Inc., a Gaithersburg biotech firm, and a director on the Suburban Maryland
Montgomery County Technology Council. "How many car companies are around today
compared to the early 1900s?"

   And yet Maryland faces competition for its biotech firms. The state is
campaigning to keep them from being wooed away by other states hoping to
reinvigorate their industrial base with biotechnology. It has helped fund a
testing laboratory, and it has created, through the University of Maryland, five
research centers whose discoveries local firms can draw upon.

   "The trick is whether Maryland is being more favorable relative to other
states" that are competing for the shrinking pool of companies, Barrett said.
Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, North Carolina and California have policies that on
a purely financial basis may be more favorable than Maryland's, he said. But
Maryland still has many other lures, including its proximity to the cultural and
scientific organizations clustered around the nation's capital.

   The fact that states fight for the companies, of course, indicates that the
industry's record is far from all bad. Today it has 27 drugs -- including human
insulin, a blood clot buster and a cancer drug for AIDS patients -- on the
market, as well as 1,300 diagnostic products that include home pregnancy tests
and DNA fingerprinting.

   Another 270 drugs are in various stages of human trials, the last step before
a company can seek approval from the Food and Drug Administration.

   More than 100 genetically modified plants, including pest-resistant cotton
and a flavor-enhanced tomato, are being sold. Eight were approved by federal
regulators last year alone.

   The biotech industry's revenue in the year that ended July 1, 1993, totaled $
7.7 billion, a 10 percent increase from the previous 12-month period, according
to Ernst & Young, an accounting firm. Here and there are large companies with
established businesses, such as Genetech Inc. and Amgen Inc.

   But the more typical company is the type found along I-270 -- a small,
struggling operation in a drab industrial park. Inside, people work on
shoestring budgets in unremarkable settings to reach the frontiers of medicine
-- and hope that the money doesn't run out before they get there.

   Here are the major challenges facing the industry:

   * Failed tests.  Regulators from the FDA threw Medimmune Inc. of Gaithersburg
a curveball in December 1993 when they denied approval for a drug to prevent a
respiratory infection that kills 4,500 infants a year. Expectations that the FDA
would approve the drug had run the company's stock up to more than $ 36 a share
in November 1993. It went crashing down to the $ 3- to $ 4-a-share range,
stunning company executives.

   The drug, RespiGam, was denied approval on grounds that the company made
serious errors in its human trials. The company, which has counted on the drug
as a breakthrough product, is racing to redo the trials and is expected to have
the new results by late summer.

   Medimmune's chairman and chief executive, Wayne T. Hockmeyer, is mum about
where the company stands in the new tests, wary of offending the FDA officials
who hold the future of his company in their hands.

   Failures such as these are wrenching financially for small biotech firms, but
for big established drug companies with many products they are hardly a blip on
the radar screen. In January, for example, Burroughs-Wellcome Co. failed to win
FDA approval to sell its over-the-counter prescription drug, acyclovir, to treat
genital herpes. It was a disappointment, but hardly life-threatening for the
company.

   * Lawsuits.  Many companies use up precious funds launching or defending
themselves against patent lawsuits. Xoma Corp. of Berkeley, Calif., and Centocor
Inc. of Malvern, Pa., spent what analysts estimate to be millions of dollars
suing each other over patents for blood infection drugs that, in the end, didn't
work.

   And Gaithersburg-based Medimmune has spent a small fortune fending off
shareholder suits claiming the company was at fault for its stock plunge in late
1993.

   * Big ideas, impatient investors.  Houston Biotechnology Inc. in Texas was
started in 1986 with a promising technology to prevent secondary cataracts,
which blur vision after an artificial lens implant. By late last year, it still
wasn't a product.

   So the company pared costs to reduce its "burn rate," as Wall Street calls it
-- the speed at which cash reserves are depleted -- that for Houston
Biotechnology are $ 1.9 million. It cut its work force in half, down to 20, and
slowed work on the cataract product by such steps as temporarily halting efforts
to describe in very specific chemical detail how the product works.

   The company still needs about $ 40 million in R&D expenses, said Chief
Executive J. Russell Denson, but Wall Street won't provide it. So he's looking
for a corporate partner, which he says would be more likely to take the risk
because it would have more direct control of how the money was spent. "Partners
know you don't have many alternatives, so partners can be tougher on you," said
Denson, who calculates he needs to find new funding by midsummer.

   * Single-product blues.  Companies now realize how risky it is to rely on one
or two products for success. Crop Genetics International Corp. of Columbia
agreed in December to be sold to Biosys Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif. Though both
are agriculture biotech firms, the reasoning behind the merger is one that
analysts say biotech drug firms take to heart: By combining resources, they can
eliminate duplication and develop a wider set of products at lower cost.

   That should make the merged company more attractive to investors, said Crop
Genetics chief executive Joe Kelly, who arranged the merger and will be out of a
job when it is completed this spring. He says it's a lesson he tried to teach
his students when he taught a course on the economics of biotechnology at Johns
Hopkins last year. The merger brought Maryland good news: Biosys will move its
headquarters to Columbia from California.

   Oncologix Inc. of Gaithersburg, which is developing cancer drugs, is merging
too, but this deal will cost Maryland jobs. It is joining up with two Texas
biotech firms, Argus Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Triplex Pharmaceutical Corp. of
the Woodlands, and essentially will move there, taking about 50 jobs with it.

   * Getting the word out.  Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Baltimore was
founded in July 1993 to develop products to prevent and treat diseases of the
central nervous system. Its lead product, Gliadel, meant to go on sale next
year, delivers to brain tumors a separate chemotherapy drug that already is on
the market.

   The company plans to do the research, development and manufacturing of that
drug, but is seeking a larger company with an established marketing and
distribution system to sell it.

   "We're willing to share the rewards from the product for that," said
Guilford's chief financial officer, Andy Jordan. "But for a company our size, we
don't think it's appropriate to spend our resources building a sales force for
one product."

   "It's a paradigm many companies are taking to heart," Jordan said. "Most
companies don't have the illusion anymore that they'll become fully integrated,
stand-alone pharmaceutical companies that can do everything. . . . Money is
scarce out there." *


GRAPHIC: Photo, tom allen;ph,,craig herndon;ph, Medimmune Inc. Chairman and CEO
Wayne T. Hockmeyer, right, won't talk about new tests of his company's RespiGam
after a disappointment in 1993. At far right, Diemchi Vu and John O'Grady of
Medimmune check lab results in Gaithersburg.  Don Weaver analyzes a protein a
Crop Genetics International.  Marcia Black, right, of Crop Genetics examines
insect cells.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1995


                             406 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 27, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

NAME: James Barrett

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F19

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: NIH Was the Catalyst For Lab Beginnings

BODY:


   Ask business executives who is the resident historian for the area's
biotechnology industry and one name pops up again and again -- James Barrett,
chief executive of Genetic Therapy Inc., the Gaithersburg company that made
headlines last week when it won rights to a patent covering an innovative
technique for altering the genetic code of human cells.

   Barrett has lived and worked in suburban Maryland since 1982, when he moved
here from his job in Philadelphia running the clinical laboratory for drug giant
SmithKline Beecham.

   He came to join Bethesda Research Labs Inc., which was founded in 1976 and
was, as best as anyone can tell, the first biotechnology company in the area.
Known today as Life Technologies Inc., the company used a technology developed
at Johns Hopkins University to make enzymes that let scientists cut and
rearrange strips of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, the chemical building blocks
of genes.

   It opened shop in Bethesda to be near "the perfect customer," the National
Institutes of Health, where much of the pioneering work in genetic engineering
was being done, Barrett says. Now Life Technologies is the largest biotech
company in the state, supplying the tools and materials for the biotech industry
worldwide.

   A handful of other area companies began about the same time, mostly doing
special projects for NIH or other area research facilities.

   One notable exception was Genex Corp. of Gaithersburg, an industrial biotech
firm that was geared to serving a private sector need all along and became one
of biotech's high flyers on Wall Street in the early 1980s. Genex Corp. made a
chemical that was a key component in the process of making the sugar substitute
aspartame. It was sold to a New Jersey company in 1991.

   In 1986, Congress passed the Technology Transfer Act, which for the first
time made it commercially appealing for high-tech companies to form partnerships
with NIH and other government agencies to research and develop new technology.
That spurred the creation of dozens of area biotech firms, most of them devoted
to developing new pharmaceuticals.

   Among the most notable were three formed in 1987 -- Genetic Therapy,
Medimmune Inc. and Oncologix Inc., based in Gaithersburg. They were started with
seed money from HealthCare Investment Corp. of Edison, N.J., one of the largest
venture capital firms specializing in health care.

   In the next few years HealthCare Investment founded several more companies,
including Human Genome Sciences Inc., a Rockville-based company that has gained
national attention in its attempt to use a technique developed at NIH to
catalogue the chemical sequence of human genes.

   Of the 100 or so biotech companies in the Washington region, most are less
than a decade old.  *

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1995


                             407 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 26, 1995, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 146 words

HEADLINE: Using the partner principle

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   GeneMedicine does not expect to have any products on the
market until 2001.  It doesn't even plan to start clinical trials on
humans until 1996 on its lead products - a treatment for hemophilia
and a growth factor to rehabilitate wasting muscles.

   But the company has been relatively successful in raising
money, even in today's dismal financial market.  Gene therapy is a
hot area of biotech research.

   Last month, for example, GeneMedicine announced that a
German pharmaceutical company had paid $ 2.1 million just for an
exclusive option lasting until June 30 to negotiate a corporate
alliance to develop gene medicines for cancer.

   ""This company does not intend to develop products itself and
take them to market,'' said Eric Tomlinson, chief executive
officer.  ""The strategy is to partner all projects and all
applications as early as possible. ''

GRAPHIC: Graph: Gene Medicine (bar graph)

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1995


                             408 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 9;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

HEADLINE: Cells and Salesmanship

BYLINE: By Daniel J. Kevles;   Daniel J. Kevles is the editor, with Leroy Hood,
of "The Code of Codes: Scientific and Social Issues in the Human Genome
Project." He is writing a history of the engineering and ownership of nonhuman
life.

BODY:


   ALTERED FATES
Gene Therapy and the Retooling of Human Life.
By Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner.
636 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. $27.50.

   ON Sept. 14, 1990, Dr. W. French Anderson, a pediatrician and molecular
geneticist at the National Cancer Institute, accomplished a medical first -- the
legal infusion of genetically altered cells into a human being. The patient was
a young girl suffering from a deficiency of the enzyme ADA, a genetic disease
that deprives people of a functioning immune system. The infused cells were
immune cells containing the normal gene, which, it was hoped, would produce
enough of the enzyme to permit them to survive and wage war against infections.
Several months later, Dr. Steven Rosenberg, the chief of surgery at the cancer
institute and an ally of Dr. Anderson's, introduced into a terminally ill cancer
patient a type of cell called a tumor-infiltrating leukocyte, which had been
genetically modified to attack malignant growths.

   The two experiments opened the era of human genetic therapy. Although
scientists had been predicting its advent at least since the beginning of the
molecular biological revolution in the 1950's, gene therapy had proved
problematic, not only scientifically but legally. The insertion of foreign genes
into human subjects had faced thorny regulatory barriers, particularly from the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (known as the RAC) of the cancer institute's
overarching agency, the National Institutes of Health.

   The story of how Dr. Anderson and Dr. Rosenberg's procedures came to be
conceived and realized, and how the two researchers managed the regulatory
struggle, forms the first half of the informative and absorbing "Altered Fates."
The authors, Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner, are reporters for The Chicago Tribune
who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1987 for a series on the promise of genetic therapy.
The second half -- really a second book -- provides up-to-date accounts of
current genetic research into a number of human afflictions, including Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, manic depression
and alcoholism. It is a useful, though uncritical, report on activities and
speculations on the research front. Mr. Lyon and Mr. Gorner indulge in
gee-whizzeries (experiments qualify as "almost cosmic"; results are
"mind-boggling"; with the first infusion of genes "the course of medicine was
changed forever"). They straight-facedly report improbable claims -- for
instance, the prediction of David Comings, the director of medical genetics at
the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, Calif., that 10 to 15 genes
might "account for most mental disorders." Nevertheless, Mr. Lyon and Mr. Gorner
are highly knowledgeable about the state of human and medical genetics, and
their treatment of both the science and its practitioners is vivid, accessible
and, in the gene therapy half of the book, gripping.

   Dr. Anderson, who like Dr. Rosenberg is hard-driving and ambitious, had long
been a proselytizer for gene therapy, sometimes suggesting that he was God's
instrument in making it a reality. Dr. Rosenberg, who says that he wants to cure
cancer in his lifetime, is an aggressive advocate of the idea that the body's
own immune system can be mobilized to beat the disease. While several
collaborators contributed to the scientific packages of the two gene therapy
experiments, Dr. Anderson and Dr. Rosenberg maneuvered the recombinant DNA
committee into approving them despite the opposition of several scientists on
its Human Gene Therapy Subcommittee.

   "Altered Fates" is particularly eye-opening in its account of how the two
doctors managed that trick. The skeptics on the subcommittee doubted both the
safety and the scientific reliability of what they were proposing. But while, as
physicians, Dr. Anderson and Dr. Rosenberg were concerned with minimizing
hazards to their patients, their attentiveness to safety could be overridden by
the demands of treating desperately ill people. As clinicians, they tended to be
less rigorous than bench scientists might have been in building their cases for
the genetic therapies they intended to attempt. When rejected or slowed by the
RAC subcommittee, Dr. Anderson and Dr. Rosenberg successfully deployed clinical
imperatives to prevail over scientific objections, playing what Dr. Anderson
later termed "our 'dying cancer patients' card" -- that is, intoning that
patients were failing while the committee fiddled.

   The scientific and even the clinical value of both Dr. Anderson's and Dr.
Rosenberg's first gene therapy procedures remain obscure. Still, more than 60
gene therapy efforts are now under way in the United States alone. As Mr. Lyon
and Mr. Gorner rightly note, Dr. Anderson's precedent-setting experiment "was
less about treatment than about the making of history."

GRAPHIC: Drawing

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1995


                             409 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     March 26, 1995, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; Pg. X01

LENGTH: 1043 words

HEADLINE: Tinkering With Pieces of the Human Puzzles

BODY:


   ALTERED FATES

   Gene Therapy and the

   Retooling of Human Life

   By Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner

   Norton. 636 pp. $ 27.50

   ON ONE LEVEL, Altered Fates is about science and the doing of well-financed,
high-profile biomedical science -- a story about those who are in the business
of locating, identifying and manipulating pieces of human DNA in a high-stakes
race to be the first practitioners of "gene therapy." On another level, however,
Altered Fates is something else: a study of attitudes and values, about what we
think of each other, about our visions of humanness. And on both levels it is a
troubling book.

   Focusing at the start, often unflatteringly, on W. French Anderson and the
genetically "doomed" whom he is racing to rescue, this account of the quest to
win first prize in the gene-therapy race is a fast-paced page-turner, a
compelling "Who'll-do-it?" The co-authors, Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner --
Pulitzer prize-winning reporters for the Chicago Tribune -- clearly and
skillfully explain biochemistry, molecular biology, cellular anatomy and other
rarified domains, sugar-coating the science with dramatic details about sick
children and desperate families and offering juicy insights into the private
conflicts and personal conquests of the genetic researchers.

   This is science as derring-do -- heroes racing full-speed to rescue suffering
humans. It is predominately male science (only about six women are visible as
anything other than wives, members of review committees, mothers, etc.), which
may inadvertently demonstrate why so many women find the scientific world
inhospitable: The personality traits associated here with "successful"
scientists are not likely to be valued in women.

   Undoubtedly, focusing on the drama makes for an absorbing and technically
informative book. Paradoxically, though, it is this very strength that renders
the book so troubling. It is too tempting to allow ourselves to be swept off our
feet by these tales of potential miracle cures, when what thoughtful readers
should be doing is looking past the hype and the hope about genetic
manipulation. It is this necessary scrutiny that Altered Fates sadly lacks; too
much is either left unsaid or insufficiently analyzed.

   Genetic manipulation is not just biomedicine of the future. It is a
manifestation of a process I have defined as "geneticization," in which
differenc es between people -- including definitions of normality and
abnormality, of acceptable and unacceptable -- and the medical and scientific
responses to those differences are increasingly presented as genetic questions.
This is a social, political, economic and cultural process with the potential
for a boundless impact on how we think of ourselves and behave toward each
other.

   Using the face of illness to frame our view of genetic
engineering/manipulation is misleading, if not dangerous, and even itself
manipulative. Of course we want to help. But we also want to ask: Help whom?
When? From what? And with what? When Lyon and Gorner conflate the multiple
technologies they describe as "genetic engineering" and label them generically
as "gene therapy" to cure disease and spare us from our genetic fates, they
preclude their own and readers' nuanced critique. Thus, even the so-called
"ELSI" concerns -- the ethical, legal and social issues integral to the
applications of genetics to humans -- get almost no attention in Altered Fates
until the last dozen pages (proportionately far less even than they are allotted
in the overall N.I.H. budget for human genome research). And then they are
treated quite superficially.

   The book's readable style and "save-a-child" approach will make it difficult
to resist. Yet resistance is required -- and not just because many of these
rescues-from-the-jaws-of-death could have been achieved at far less cost and
risk by some method other than a genetic fix. There is need to resist, or at
least question seriously, because eugenic presumptions and economic motivations
along with scientific reductionism and determinism underlie these rescues. What
we call disease, disorder or disability is subject to sociopolitical whim. The
conditions in people to which we assign these labels change over time and place.
Geneticization gives great elasticity to the concept of "genetic" disease,
stretching the notion of illness from such things as cystic fibrosis and
Huntington disease to aging and sunburn. More subtly, it reduces our tolerance
of differences. Thus it is imperative that, unlike Lyon and Gorner, we neither
accept these labels automatically nor take for granted the presumption that
humans are machines to be tinkered with.

   Altered Fates should prompt us to ask why we seem so ready to rescue each
frail, hurting or disadvantaged individual with a genetic fix when we
unhesitatingly turn our backs on whole groups of hurting and disadvantaged
people. We should ask, too, why such characteristics as short stature are framed
as medical (genetic) problems, when they are more obviously social ones. Should
we allow pharmaceutical companies to make millions by marketing genetically
developed growth hormones to children whom teachers tag as shorter than average?
Some children always will be shorter than average, no matter where the average
lies, and environmental engineering -- lowering the hoops on basketball courts,
for example -- could remove many of the disadvantages we inflict on those who
are short. Clearly these are complex questions, and the prospect of genetic
engineering/manipulation demands participatory discussion of them. The issues
are too important to be left to "experts," too far-reaching to be anywhere but
front and center when reading a book like Altered Fates.

   New reports suggest that the Human Genome Project's goal of sequencing all
the base pairs in our 23 pairs of chromosomes may well be reached sooner than
initially predicted. Our ability to comprehend what this means is lagging far
behind. There is much catching up to do, and Altered Fates at least gives some
idea of the issues that need to be addressed.

   Abby Lippman is a professor, Faculty of Medicine, at McGill University and
chair of the Human Genetics Committee of the Council for Responsible Genetics.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1995


                             410 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 24, 1995 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 301 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO and CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Qualcomm Inc. said it signed a multimillion-dollar contract with Miller
Transporters Inc. for more than 350 units of the local company's OmniTracs
satellite-based messaging and tracking system.

   Also yesterday, four major companies, including BellSouth and Pacific Bell,
said they will use a competing technology for their respective wireless personal
communications services networks instead of Qualcomm's technology.

   Nonetheless, the company's stock yesterday closed up $1.38 at $34.25. Pfizer
Inc. announced four deals yesterday with biotechnology companies, including one
based in La Jolla, that will effectively double Pfizer's investment in outside
research.

   Pfizer plans a five-year program with Immusol, a private company in La Jolla,
to develop gene therapy to inhibit the growth of viruses, particularly for
patients with HIV. Pfizer also is investing in Cambridge, Mass.-based Myco and
Britain's AEA Technology and Oxford Asymmetry. NeuWorld Financial and
International Securities Group have formed two joint ventures, University
Capital Management and The Apollo Small Cap Stock Report.

   The report will attempt to make advanced computer technology available to
small investors. Beeba's Creations Inc. said yesterday it has retained Wedbush
Morgan Securities as its financial adviser in identifying potential acquisition
or merger candidates and the possible sale of all or a part of the company's
assets or stock.

   The company said it has no other announcements. Signs and Glassworks Inc. of
Vista said Summit Ventures III, a Boston investment partnership, acquired a
"significant" stake in the company for $14.3 million and assumption of debt.

   Signs and Glassworks has a printing process that combines lithography, screen
printing and laminated foils to produce trading cards, packaging and other
graphics.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             411 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    March 23, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 14C

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy shares climb again

SOURCE: Bloomberg Business News

BODY:


   Genetic Therapy Inc.'s shares climbed yesterday for the second day in a row,
closing at their highest price since June, after the company won an exclusive
patent.

   Genetic Therapy, the Gaithersburg biotechnology company, said Tuesday that it
won a patent for "ex vivo" gene therapy, which covers a method used to
genetically alter human cells outside the body so that they provide therapeutic
benefits. The cells are then placed in patients to combat disease.

   The company's shares rose $ 1.75, or 18 percent, to $ 11.75. There were
711,900 shares traded, 14 times the three-month daily average. The stock gained
$ 1.50, to $ 10 Tuesday.

   Chairman and Chief Executive James Barrett had said he couldn't estimate how
much the patent could be worth in royalties but said he expects it to help the
company attract corporate alliances.

   Like other biotechnology companies, Genetic Therapy is seeking alliances to
help finance and market its own products.

   Henri Termeer, chairman and chief executive officer of Genzyme Corp. of
Cambridge, Mass., which is also developing gene therapy products, said the
patent is good news because it shows that the patent office will award patents
to biotechnology companies.

   Genetic Therapy, founded in 1986, is developing gene therapy treatments for
severe diseases such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, Gaucher disease and AIDS.

   Placing the genetically altered cell that produces a therapeutic protein into
a patient can help the patient fight a disease or correct a genetic defect, the
company said.

   Ex vivo genetic therapy was developed by a team of researchers headed by Dr.
French Anderson and funded by an alliance between Genetic Therapy and the
National Institutes of Health.

   Genetic Therapy received an exclusive license from the National Institutes of
Health to commercialize the technology.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1995


                             412 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 23, 1995, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: Cells planted in mice brains; hope is voiced for mental ills

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    In a variation of gene therapy that could someday help people with mental
retardation and a range of degenerative brain diseases, researchers said
yesterday that they have found a way to implant immature nerve cells into the
brains of mice so those cells can replace missing brain chemicals.

   The study appears in today's issue of the journal Nature.

   In some diseases, doctors can remedy a crucial enzyme deficiency by
injections of the missing substance, which then travels through the blood to the
organ where it is needed.

   But in many diseases of the brain, this technique fails because drugs do not
easily cross the blood-brain barrier, a membrane system in brain blood vessels
designed by nature to keep potential toxins out.

   The new study shows that by genetically engineering immature brain cells and
then implanting them in the brains of genetically-defective animals, crucial
enzymes can be slipped past this barrier and into the entire brain.

   Unlike previous attempts to supply missing chemicals to specific areas in the
brain, this technique could allow doctors to get needed chemicals diffused
throughout the entire brain.

   In humans, for instance, doctors have been able to implant fetal cells in
specific areas of the brains of patients with Parkinson's disease, where the
cells produce a needed neurotransmitter called dopamine.

   But this approach seems less promising for diseases in which multiple areas
of the brain are involved.

   The study was done by Dr. Evan Y. Snyder, a neurobiologist and pediatrician
at Harvard Medical School and Children's Hospital, and Dr. John H. Wolfe of the
School of Veterinary Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Snyder cautioned that so far the new approach has been done only in mice. But
potentially, he said, the technique could help restore missing brain chemicals
in people who have had strokes and those who have inherited illnesses such as
Sly disease, a form of mental retardation that affects one person in 100,000.

   While Sly disease is rare, it belongs to a class of problems called lysosomal
storage diseases, which include Gaucher's and Tay-Sachs, which collectively
affect one person in 1,500. These diseases could be treated with the technique,
Snyder said.

   In his study, immature cells from newborn mice were implanted into the brains
of other mice that were destined to develop mental retardation later in life
because of a genetic deficiency of a crucial enzyme.

   Because progenitor cells retain the ability to migrate throughout the brain,
one injection into hollow spaces in the brain called ventricles allowed the new
cells to be seeded throughout. The result, Snyder said, was that the mice did
not develop mental retardation.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1995


                             413 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    March 23, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: Dow nears record despite trade deficit

BYLINE: Donna Rosato

BODY:

    The Dow Jones industrial average closed within a hair of its record
Wednesday, but broader stock averages were mixed on profit taking and on
continued weakness in the U.S. dollar.

   The Dow rose 10.38 points to 4082.99, just below Monday's record 4083.68. The
Standard & Poor's 500 index edged up 0.60 points to 495.67. The Nasdaq composite
index slipped 0.68 points to 809.10. Losers beat winners 1,134 to 982 on the New
York Stock Exchange, where volume was 313 million shares.

   Bond prices fell, pushing the yield on 30-year Treasury bonds to 7.45% from
Tuesday's 7.44%.

   Bonds and stocks were pressured by the dollar, which fell after the U.S.
reported a big jump in its trade deficit. The dollar weakened to 88.95 Japanese
yen in New York, just above the post-World War II low of 88.40 yen hit in
trading Tuesday. It closed at 89.21 yen Tuesday.

   The drop in the dollar rekindled investors' fears about inflation. A weak
dollar can make U.S. imports more expensive. If inflation picks up, that could
pressure the Federal Reserve to raise short-term interest rates to make the
dollar more attractive.

   Meanwhile, the strength of the yen sent the Japanese stock market tumbling.
The steep rise in the yen against the dollar has hurt Japanese exporters, making
their goods more expensive globally. The Nikkei average tumbled 225 points
(1.4%) to 15,905 Wednesday - below the 16,000 level for the first time since
November 1992. Tuesday, Japanese markets were closed for a holiday. By
midmorning Thursday, the Nikkei was up 7.91 points to 15,912.76.

   "There's a lot of concern about how much the strong yen will hurt the
Japanese economy," says Michael Gerding, portfolio manager at Founders Worldwide
Growth Fund. "The economy in Japan is very fragile right now."

   Unless the Bank of Japan cuts interest rates to make the yen less attractive,
the Nikkei could fall as low as 14,000, says Michael Mahoney, portfolio manager
at G.T. Global. "There's a lot of pressure on the BOJ right now."

   As long as the yen remains strong, hurting the Japanese economy and corporate
profits, investors should be cautious about investing in Japan, says Doug
Johnson, market analyst at Merrill Lynch international research. "We are not
aggressive buyers of the Japanese market right now," Johnson says.

Market highlights: Japanese stocks that trade on U.S. exchanges slumped. Among
American depositary receipts falling: Matsushita Electric, 3 3/8 to $ 142 7/8;
Kyocera, 2 to $ 136 1/4; Honda, 3/8 to $ 30 1/4; Toyota, 1/4 to $ 36 3/4.

   -- Several drug stocks gained after Smith Barney made positive comments on
the drug group's earnings prospects. Also, Goldman, Sachs raised its 1995 and
1996 earnings estimates on Eli Lilly. Rising: American Home Products, 1 1/8 to $
74 1/2; Eli Lilly, 1 1/4 to $ 70 1/2; and Pfizer, 1 to $ 87 1/2.

   -- Oil stocks rose after an American Petroleum Institute report showed a
decline in gasoline production and crude inventories. Short supplies could lead
to higher oil prices. In New York, the price of light sweet crude jumped 55
cents to $ 18.96 a barrel - highest since October. Rising: Mobil, 1 to $ 88 7/8;
Exxon, 1 1/8 to $ 65 5/8; Amoco, 1/2 to $ 61 1/8; and Texaco, 3/8 to $ 65 1/8;
and Royal Dutch Petroleum, 3/4 to $ 117 1/8.

   -- Outlet Communications rose 1 to $ 28. The TV station owner hired Goldman
Sachs to advise it about the possible sale of the company.

   -- Scott Paper rose 1 5/8 to $ 88 1/4. PNC Asset Management raised 1995
earnings estimates on Scott, citing stronger global markets and Scott's
restructuring of benefits.

   -- Genetic Therapy jumped 1 3/4 to $ 11 3/4 after rising 1 5/8 Tuesday when
the developer of gene therapy for treating diseases received a broad patent for
gene therapy.

   -- Starbucks sank 1 to $ 23 1/8. The coffee chain's insiders sold about
122,400 shares of common stock in February.

   -- Lam Research gained 1 3/8 to $ 45 3/8. The semiconductor equipment maker
expects to beat analysts' expectations for its latest quarterly earnings.

   -- Arbor Property Trust dropped 1 to $ 7 3/4. The real estate investment
trust cut its quarterly dividend.

   -- Telephone equipment maker Cidco tumbled 3 3/8 to $ 27 7/8. Texas
Instruments has plans for a competing caller-identification phone system.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1995


                             414 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    March 22, 1995, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 10C

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy gains license

BYLINE: Timothy J. Mullaney, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   Genetic Therapy Inc. announced yesterday it has received an exclusive license
to an unusually broad patent that could allow the Gaithersburg biotechnology
neophyte to claim royalties on virtually all medical treatments that rely on
removing diseased cells from a patient's body for genetic alteration.

   "This process was begun at a time when there was virtually no support for
genetic therapy, when the experts said it wouldn't work," Genetic Therapy chief
financial officer Marc Schneebaum said. "We think gene therapy is something that
could change the development of medicine."

   The company was granted the license by the National Institutes of Health,
which holds the patent. NIH has worked with Genetic Therapy on the technology
since the company's 1986 founding.

   "I'm thrilled," said gene therapy pioneer Dr. W. French Anderson, the former
NIH scientist who is the patent's main inventor. "It comes at a very timely
point -- investments in biotech and gene therapy are at rock bottom. This is a
shot in the arm to get some money back out of sporting goods and fast-food
establishments and back into biotech."

   Mr. Schneebaum said the patent is so broad because virtually all subsequent
therapies that rely on genetically altering cells outside the body will be based
on fundamental research covered by the patent.

   Genetic Therapy itself is working on products to treat brain cancer, cystic
fibrosis, and breast cancer, among other diseases. The patent also will help its
bargaining position in forging partnerships with other companies that want to
develop their own products based on the patented technology, analysts said.

   The stock market took the announcement as very good news, pushing Genetic
Therapy shares up $ 1.50 to close at $ 10. Nonetheless, the products in which
Genetic Therapy will use the technique are still years away from
commercialization, and analysts and a competitor said another method of genetic
therapy is growing faster and is considered the most likely future of gene-based
treatments.

   Genetic Therapy's patented method is called "ex vivo." It involves treating
diseased cells outside the patient's body and then injecting them back into the
patient, where the treated cells help fight disease in untreated cells.

   Paul Boni, a stock analyst who follows Genetic Therapy for Mehta & Isaly in
New York, said the competing method of gene therapy is called "in vivo," in
which genetically altered material designed to treat illness is injected into
the patient's body and interacts with diseased cells entirely within the body.

   Mr. Boni said "ex vivo" genetic therapy is considered the "first wave" of
genetic therapy methods, with "in vivo" looming as a more commercially
significant "second wave."

   Mr. Boni and Alex. Brown Inc. biotechnology analyst David Webber said genetic
treatments of cells outside the patient's body are scientifically simpler than
in vivo gene therapies, but that they are harder to commercialize and distribute
and face tougher regulation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   "Nobody would do ex vivo if they can do direct injection," Mr. Webber said.
In ex vivo treatment, "each treatment is a custom treatment," he said. "It's
almost like a service business" instead of an ordinary prescription drug sale.

   Genetic Therapy is developing both ex vivo and injectable therapies,
according to the company's 1993 annual report.

   Mr. Schneebaum said the biotech industry has won federal approval of about
100 research methods to study genetic therapies in clinical trials. Most of them
are studying ex vivo technologies, he said, and Genetic Therapy Inc. is involved
in more than 30 of the projects.

   But Robert T. Abbott, chief executive of Viagene Inc., a San Diego
biotechnology company, said most of the ex vivo trials are for research purposes
only. Most of the protocols that are aimed at commercializing products either
use the injectable therapy methods or use ex vivo technology for research and
plan to convert to the newer method later, he said.

   Viagene itself is testing some ex vivo therapies, Mr. Abbott said. But, he
said, the company does not expect to have to pay royalties under the patent
until it attempts to commercialize products. By then, the company will have
developed injectable forms of the same treatments, he said, which will fall
outside Genetic Therapy's patent.

   "I don't know who it is that GTI is going to try and license," Mr. Abbott
said. "The pack is getting smaller every day."

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1995


                             415 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 22, 1995, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 80

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: Biotech alliances replacing early '90s creative financings;
EMERGING BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The biotechnology industry is beating SWORDS into partnerships as PIPES
froze during the second half of last year.

   Both were creative financing vehicles for biotechnology companies in search
of risk capital in the early 1990s. With the stock market soured on biotech
issues, SWORDS, PIPES and several other alternative financing vehicles enjoyed
brief popularity until last year, when corporate partnerships with large
pharmaceutical companies, biotech mergers and other strategic linkages became
more popular.

   "Through 1994, alliances became the vehicle through which biotechnology
companies retained their separate identities while still surviving in a
challenging environment," noted a just-released Coopers & Lybrand L.L.P. study
on the biotechnology public market.

   The study noted that corporate alliances were up 70 percent last year from
1993. Along with biotech-to-biotech mergers and outright acquisitions, they have
replaced some of the controversial creative financings of the early 1990s.

   SWORDS are Stock Warrant, Off-balance-sheet Research and Development
financings, a way to raise money in a risky research and development project by
creating a publicly owned shell company that has a contract with biotech firm.
If the project is successful and leads to a product, the biotech firm uses its
contract to acquire the project from the shell company at a nice profit to the
shell company's investors.  If the research fails, the biotech company has
minimized its risk and the losers are the shell company investors.

   Genzyme Corp. has done two SWORDS, called Neozyme I and Neozyme II for
several projects, including $ 23 million to fund a gene therapy treatment for
cystic fibrosis. Neozyme II continues the cystic fibrosis program with an
additional $ 85 million. If the gene therapy proves to be successful, Genzyme
will have to pay Neozyme II investors, who took the risk, $ 280 million to
purchase the rights back and commercialize it.

   Critics of SWORDS say it significantly boosts the cost of drug development,
while supporters say this form of off-balance-sheet financing significantly
reduces the risk of experimental drug development. Without a SWORD, one failure,
they argue, can bring a whole company down. Last summer Genzyme tried to start a
third SWORD, Neozyme III, but the stock market was negative toward biotech
stocks, prompting the company to cancel its plans.

   PIPES - private investments in public equities - lets a company sell shares
to private investors at a discount of the publicly traded price. When the shares
are registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission, they become freely
tradeable. That avoids the customary six-month to two-year waiting period.

   However, PIPES have come under SEC scrutiny over concerns about the equity
dilution and their costliness.  Like SWORDS, they are not being pursued as much
as they were a year ago. Several companies, including T-Cell Sciences of
Needham, used a PIPES financing to raise money.

   Still, PIPES and a method of obtaining overseas financing, called Regulation
S filings, pumped in $ 180 million for the biotech industry, which raised $
788.3 milion in public offerings in 1994 - down 45 percent from the previous
year, according to Coopers & Lybrand.

   "Most of that money came during the first half of 1994 as the market shifted
to partnerships and other corporate ventures," said William S. Reardon, a
Coopers partner who works with biotech companies. "Partnerships with big
pharmaceutical companies is where biotech companies are finding their futures
nowadays."

TyLink secures $ 5 million

    TyLink Corp., a 4-year-old developer of high-speed communications products,
said it has received $ 5 million in mezzanine round equity financings.

   The Norton-based firm said its two leading investors are Behrman Capital
Corp. of New York City and Edison Venture Fund of Lawrenceville, N.J. The funds
will be used to complete the company's development work on new digitial
communications hardware and software.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1995


                             416 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    March 22, 1995, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words

HEADLINE: THE CUTTING EDGE: COMPUTING / TECHNOLOGY / INNOVATION;
PLYING A MURKY GENE-THERAPY POOL;
BIOTECHNOLOGY: A PROMISING FIELD IS HINDERED BY RED TAPE, MONEY PROBLEMS AND
GREED.

BYLINE: By KAREN SOUTHWICK, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:

   When scientists first identified the gene that causes cystic fibrosis back in
1989, those suffering from the disease suddenly had hope. Medical researchers
believed it would soon be possible to replace the gene that causes the disease
-- the most common fatal genetic disorder affecting Caucasians -- by using the
new tools of biotechnology.

   But more than five years later, there is no such treatment for cystic
fibrosis: Efforts to develop one have been stalled by a daunting series of
technical, regulatory and financial problems. The difficulties encountered in
this pioneering effort provide a sobering illustration of the challenges
inherent in gene therapy -- and accentuate what many believe is a need for
greater competition among competing biotech firms and scientists in a hugely
promising but unproven field.

   "We're getting so tied up with proprietary interests that this new technology
is being heavily stymied," says Dr. Michael Blaese, chief of the Clinical Gene
Therapy Branch of the National Center for Human Genome Research (NCHGR) in
Bethesda, Md. "This new field is crying out for leadership. Without that, there
will be a very adverse effect on the development of a technology we all think is
crucial to 21st-Century medicine."

   Ironically, Blaese and his fellow researcher, Steven Rosenberg, are the
co-inventors named on a surprisingly broad gene therapy patent issued Tuesday to
Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md.

   It's easy to see why so many researchers are excited about the potential of
gene therapy. Ever since the basic structure of genes was discovered more than
three decades ago, scientists have been gaining more and more understanding of
the relationship between complex genetic structures and human characteristics.

   The $3-billion government-funded Human Genome Project is daily making
progress is its mission of identifying all 100,000 human genes -- and has
already found the defective genes associated with a number of diseases,
including cystic fibrosis. Once the problem genes have been identified,
scientists can turn their efforts to replacing, eliminating or repairing them.
They thus hope to develop treatments for much of what ails humanity: from
diabetes to migraine headaches, from obesity to cancer.

   *

   But it's a long way from identifying a gene to finding a treatment, as the
cystic fibrosis case shows. Genzyme Corp., a Cambridge, Mass., biotech company,
was one of the first to tackle the disease, which causes the lungs to fill up
with mucous. The firm first developed the genetic sequence that is missing in
the gene that causes cystic fibrosis. The idea was to deliver this piece of
genetic "code" to the lungs via an inhaled aerosol spray.

   To accomplish that, the gene must be housed in what's called a vector,
usually an altered virus that has the ability to "infect" the host cell. For
cystic fibrosis, Genzyme is using an adenovirus -- the same kind of virus that
causes the common cold -- because it can be transferred easily to the lungs.

   After several years of laboratory testing, the company has now given the
product to about a dozen people, primarily to test for safety, says Gail
Maderis, Genzyme's vice president and business manager of gene therapy. These
first trials have introduced the product into nasal tissues to measure whether
the replacement gene is "expressing," or turning on.

   The results have been mixed: The gene expresses, but the effect lasts only a
few weeks, so the treatment must be repeated. And the repeat treatments with
adenovirus activate the body's immune system, which in this instance is
undesirable. So Genzyme must continue altering the virus -- or consider using a
different delivery system that might be less efficient.

   As it tackles these various problems, Genzyme must adhere to a range of
regulatory requirements intended to guard against any possible release of an
altered gene or virus. Maderis says patients undergoing the treatment must be in
hospital isolation the entire time with "every fluid (from their bodies)
analyzed." In addition, when they actually inhale the gene, they are inside a
tent, which in turn is inside a negatively pressurized room.

   All of this promises to make gene therapy an expensive proposition. "The cost
of developing gene therapeutics will be very high," Maderis warns. She says gene
therapy trials are running about $15,000 to $20,000 per patient -- more than
three times the cost of a conventional trial. And that will translate into high
price tags for gene therapy when it is commercially available.

   *

   Many in the industry say that not enough is being done to tackle collectively
the difficulties that are slowing the development of gene therapy. Dr. Gregory
Brown, a vice president at the investment bank Vector Securities International
in Deerfield, Ill., notes that it would make sense to develop vectors that could
work for many different treatments. Because any single genetic disorder is
usually very rare, Brown says, there often are not enough potential buyers of a
drug to justify the enormous cost of research and development.

   Further, in the rush to claim ownership of genes and vectors, many of the
companies and government agencies involved in genetic research want to compete
with one another rather than work together. Blaese reports that to conduct one
gene therapy experiment at his own lab, "I have to go to six or eight or 10
different owners of pieces of the puzzle, and the companies involved don't want
to talk to each other."

   One group that's trying to deal with this problem is Rhone-Poulenc Rorer
Inc.'s RPR Gencell alliance, formed last November. The French drug company, with
U.S. headquarters in Collegeville, Pa., assembled 14 companies and research
organizations to tackle cell and gene therapy discovery and development.

   "It is clear that a variety of technologies -- a toolbox, if you will -- are
required to re-engineer biopharmaceutical discovery and development," says
Robert Cawthorn, chairman and CEO of Rhone-Poulenc Rorer. He describes RPR
Gencell as "an integrated network of external and internal scientists who will
share the tools and expertise necessary to build successful cell and gene
therapeutics on an accelerated timeline."

   Through the end of 1994, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer had invested $300 million into
Gencell, according to spokesman Bob Pearson, with another $100 million planned
this year. But many, many more such efforts will probably be needed if gene
therapy is to reach its potential. Though about 60 gene therapy trials are under
way, says Rachel Leheny, biotechnology analyst for Hambrecht & Quist, all are
still in their early stages, and commercial gene therapy products are not likely
to emerge until the turn of the century.

   "This has enormous potential," Blaese says. "We are working with very crude
tools, but at least the technology of gene transfer has progressed to the point
where it allows us to do things that have a chance of being successful."

GRAPHIC: Photo, Scientist at Genzyme in Framingham, Mass., inoculates cultures.
HERB SWANSON / For The Times

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1995


                             417 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    March 22, 1995, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 284 words

HEADLINE: THE CUTTING EDGE: COMPUTING / TECHNOLOGY / INNOVATION;
GENETICISTS GET SWEEPING PATENT

BYLINE: From Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   The biotechnology world was buzzing Tuesday with the news that the National
Institutes of Health, along with Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md., has
been awarded a surprisingly broad patent on a key gene therapy technique.

   The patent could be worth millions of dollars in royalties to Genetic
Therapy, and the fledgling firm's stock jumped $1.50 Tuesday to close at $10 on
the Nasdaq exchange. But industry experts had mixed opinions as to whether the
patent will promote progress in the field by clarifying the intellectual
property issue, or thwart progress by inviting litigation.

   "Everybody is very concerned about the breadth of the claims in this patent
and surprised that something that broad was issued," says Pam Sherwood, patent
agent with Flehr, Hohbach & Test in San Francisco.

   The National Institutes of Health won the patent from the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office, and under prior agreement immediately awarded exclusive rights
to commercialize the technology to Genetic Therapy. Since 1988, the company and
NIH have spent millions of dollars to develop it in a joint research program.

   The technique involves removing human cells and using specially developed
biotechnology drugs to insert into the cells new genes that correct
disease-causing defects. The cells are then put back into the patient to combat
disease. More than half of all the gene therapy trials now under way use this
method.

   The other major gene therapy technique involves inserting new genes directly
into a patient's body in such a way that the genes find and insert themselves
into the proper cells. This approach is considered more promising in the long
term but more difficult in the short term.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1995


                             418 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: A Biotech Company Is Granted Broad Patent and Stock Jumps

BYLINE: By TERESA RIORDAN

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 21

BODY:

   Shares of Genetic Therapy Inc. surged 17.6 percent today after the company
was assigned a broad patent covering a fundamental approach to gene therapy, a
type of treatment that scientists hope will one day successfully combat
hereditary defects like cystic fibrosis and diseases such as cancer.

   "Genetic Therapy Inc. now has a very important strategic position," said A.
Paul Boni, a biotechnology industry analyst with the New York equity research
firm of Mehta & Isaly. "I don't think people expected this patent. It's almost
like patenting the idea of writing on paper."

    The patent appears to cover any method of reintroducing into a patient some
of his own cells after they have been genetically altered in the laboratory.
Depending upon how they were manipulated, these cells theoretically can cause
the patient's own body to produce disease-fighting proteins, to correct for a
genetic defect or to increase its number of immune cells.

   Therapeutic breakthroughs have been slow in coming for gene therapy, although
more than a dozen clinical trials are under way. The patent is expected to give
Genetic Therapy a solid edge in the gene therapy field for now and put it in a
strong bargaining position to negotiate cross-licensing agreements on
biotechnology patents held by other companies.

   Genetic Therapy's shares jumped $1.50 today, to $10, in Nasdaq trading.

   The inventors named on the patent were Dr. W. French Anderson, a pioneer in
gene therapy, and two colleagues, Dr. Steven Rosenberg and Dr. Michael Blaese.
The patent actually belongs to the National Institutes of Health, where the
initial research described in the patent took place. The patent is exclusively
licensed to Genetic Therapy, a biotechnology company based in Gaithersburg, Md.

   Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania, said that the issuance of the patent was reassuring
to the biotechnology industry, which has complained loudly that the Patent
Office has set unreasonably high hurdles for the granting of biotech patents.

   "What's really important is that the U.S. Patent Office has issued a patent
with broad claims in the gene therapy field," Dr. Wilson said. "It's a good sign
for biotechnology generally, since proprietary rights are basic to the
development of this industry. It's a sign that if we are innovative, the Patent
Office will recognize our contributions."

   While acknowledging that Genetic Therapy's patent is broad, competing
biotechnology companies played down its commercial significance.

   "It's quite a nice piece of intellectual property for them, but I don't think
it's the sweeping coup their press release implies," said Dr. Robert T. Abbott,
president of Viagene Inc., which is based in San Diego.

   Dr. Abbott said researchers were turning to new types of gene drugs, referred
to as "in vivo" gene therapy, which can be directly injected into the body. The
patent covers "ex vivo" treatments, which require that some of a patient's cells
first be removed from the body and then re-injected after they have been altered
in the laboratory.

   The cost of the new generation of gene drugs is expected to be far lower than
for treatments employing the more time-consuming pioneering gene therapy
technologies.

   Even Dr. Anderson, who is a consultant to Genetic Therapy and is now at the
University of Southern California, is experimenting with such gene drugs.

   "The industry is moving toward in vivo," he said. "The difficulty is we won't
get there for 10 or 15 years. In vivo has problems that ex vivo doesn't. Ex vivo
will be the way it is done for the next decade."

   Scientists are investigating using gene therapy to treat a range of disorders
including hemophilia, Gaucher's disease and H.I.V., as well as cystic fibrosis
and cancer.

GRAPHIC: Graph shows Genetic Therapy Inc.' daily closes from March 1-March 20.
(Source: Datastream)

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1995


                             419 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            March 22, 1995 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D06

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: FIRM WINS RIGHTS TO BIOTECH DREAM

BYLINE: KATHLEEN DAY, LA Times - Washington Post Servi

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Wednesday, March 22, 1995 FIRM WINS RIGHTS TO BIOTECH DREAM

   Summary: Genetic Therapy Inc. of Maryland receives exclusive  permission to
commercialize an innovation in gene therapy

   A small company in Gaithersburg, Md., on Tuesday won exclusive rights to
commercialize a key innovation of the world's emerging biotechnology  industry.

   The rights could bring it millions of dollars a year in royalties if the
industry succeeds in developing big-selling treatments from the technology.

   Genetic Therapy Inc., which co-developed the technology with the National
Institutes of Health, said it has begun commercialization discussions with
other companies. Scientists hope that resulting gene therapy drugs will
revolutionize medicine by allowing doctors to correct inherited genetic
defects.

   In the two partners' still-experimental technique, doctors remove human
cells and use specially developed biotechnology drugs to insert into the cells
new genes that correct disease-causing defects or make sick cells more
responsive to treatment. The cells then are put back into the patient to  combat
disease.

   Gene therapy is being studied as a possible treatment for cancer,
hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, AIDS and many other disorders.

   The National Institutes of Health won the patent from the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office Tuesday and under prior agreement immediately awarded
exclusive rights to commercialize the technology to Genetic Therapy.

   Since 1988, the company and the institutes have spent millions of dollars  to
develop it in a joint research program. They will share any royalties.

   Founded in 1986, the company, which has 150 employees, has yet to make a
profit. Tuesday, news of the patent award helped drive its stock up $1.50 to
close at $10.

   Asked if people at the company were celebrating, chief executive M. James
Barrett replied: ``We've been too busy answering questions. Maybe Saturday.''

   Biotech researchers and executives agree that gene therapy products won't  be
available for several years, if ever. But if the treatments prove viable, a
broad patent on a key gene therapy technique easily could be worth millions of
dollars a year, according to Linda Miller, a biotechnology analyst for
securities firm PaineWebber Inc.

   In the other major gene therapy technique, scientists insert new genes
directly into a patient's body in such a way that the genes find and insert
themselves into the proper cells.

   Of 100 human trials of gene therapy products now under way, 70 percent rely
on the technique patented Tuesday, according to French Anderson, a doctor who
is considered the father of genetic therapy and who led the joint research
effort by the National Institutes of Health and Genetic Therapy.

   Anderson, who now heads a research laboratory at the University of Southern
California's Norris Cancer Center, predicted that this method will be dominant
in gene therapy in the near to medium term. After seven or 10 years, he said,
the industry might switch over to direct insertion of genes as the preferred
method.

   An executive at one of the country's several dozen gene therapy companies
cast doubt on that prediction.

   Robert Abbott, the president and chief executive of Viagene Inc. of San
Diego, said that direct insertion probably would prevail from the start. He
contended it would be less costly and labor-intensive than removing cells,
altering them in a laboratory and reinserting them.

   Another potential hurdle for Genetic Therapy is whether the patent will
stand.

   ``On its face it appears quite broad,'' said David Maki, a biotech patent
lawyer with the law firm of Seed and Berry in Seattle. ``There might be
challenges from other parties who think they developed the same methods before
Genetic Therapy, or from those who believe the invention was already in the
public domain and therefore isn't patentable.''

   Anderson, who left the institutes in 1992 to go to USC and remains Genetic
Therapy's chief scientific adviser, said he's not worried by other gene  therapy
patents, which are less broad than the one awarded Tuesday. He  predicted the
patents would work together.

   Gene therapy was first used experimentally on a human in 1990 under the
direction of Anderson, whose medical team at the institutes successfully
treated a 4-year-old girl for a rare blood disorder that prevents the body  from
fighting even mild forms of infection.

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = LA Times - Washington Post
Service <

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             420 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    March 22, 1995, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: Dow gallops past 4100, then retreats

BYLINE: Donna Rosato

BODY:

    The Dow Jones industrial average hit an all-time high of 4109 Tuesday but
fell back in volatile trading on stronger-than-expected economic news and a weak
bond market.

   The Dow, up 26 points early, ended down 11.07 points at 4072.61. The average
reached 4100 less than four weeks after first surpassing 4000. The Standard &
Poor's 500 index dropped 1.08 points to 495.07.

   The Nasdaq composite index slipped 0.71 points to 809.78. Falling stocks beat
gainers 1,210 to 974 on the New York Stock Exchange where volume was heavy at
367 million shares.

   Highlights: Paper stocks gained after PaineWebber raised first-quarter
earnings estimates on several paper makers. Rising: Boise Cascade, 1 to $ 32
1/8; Georgia-Pacific, 1 1/8 to $ 74 3/4; Mead, 7/8 to $ 53; Weyerhaeuser, 3/8 to
$ 37 5/8; and Willamette, 1/8 to $ 50 1/2.

   -- Semiconductor and semiconductor equipment stocks gained on optimism that
orders for computer chips will remain strong. Rising: Lam Research, 3 to $ 44;
Applied Materials, 1 3/8 to $ 57 1/8; Novellus Systems, 1 3/8 to $ 61 3/4;
Micron Technology, 1 1/8 to $ 74 7/8.

   -- FSI International jumped 3 5/8 to $ 42 3/4. The semiconductor equipment
maker posted strong earnings for its latest quarter.

   -- Bucking the trend in semiconductor stocks: Cirrus Logic fell 1 1/4 to $
36. Alex. Brown & Sons cut the stock to neutral from buy.

   -- Chrysler fell 1 1/4 to $ 38 5/8. Consumer Reports rated Chrysler's large
and midsize cars below average. Chrysler's Jeep sport-utility vehicles and
Chrysler, Dodge and Plymouth minivans were also given low marks.

   -- Coca-Cola, up 1 5/8 early, gained 3/4 to $ 58 1/2. Salomon Bros. repeated
a buy rating, saying Coke's first-quarter revenue should get a boost from the
weak dollar. That's because revenue earned overseas, when translated back to
dollars, is worth more. Coke earns 67% of revenue overseas.

   -- UAL rose 1 to $ 96 after jumping 5 Monday when the parent of United
Airlines boosted its profit expectations for the first quarter and full year.

   -- Airborne Freight dropped 1 1/8 to $ 19 1/2. The freight carrier expects
first-quarter earnings to be below estimates.

   -- C.ATS Software closed at $ 14 its first day of trading. The networking
software maker sold 2 million shares for $ 12 each.

   -- Madge added 3/4 to $ 21 7/8 after surging 4 1/2 Monday. Cisco Systems said
it will exclusively market a computer network switch product made by Madge.

   -- Marsam Pharmaceuticals gained 1 1/2 to $ 14. The drug company may be in
talks to be taken over by Ivax for $ 25 a share, CNBC-TV's Dan Dorfman reported.
Ivax was unchanged at $ 24 5/8.

   --- E.W. Scripps rose 1 1/4 to $ 32 3/8 after gaining 1 7/8 Monday. The media
company said it hired Merrill Lynch to explore a sale of its cable division.

   -- Norand plunged 6 to $ 35. The maker of computerized data management
systems fell on worries that profit margins may weaken.

   -- Genetic Therapy jumped 1 1/2 to $ 10. The developer of gene therapy for
treating diseases received a broad patent for gene therapy.

   -- Eckerd rose 1 5/8 to $ 27 1/8. The drugstore chain posted
better-than-expected earnings its latest quarter.

   -- Campo Electronic Appliances sank 1 1/8 to $ 7 1/4. Raymond James &
Associates cut 1995 earnings estimates on the consumer electronics retailer.

   -- Digital Microwave tumbled 2 5/8 to $ 13 1/8. Smith Barney cut 1995
earnings estimates on the communications equipment products maker.

   -- Casino Data Systems plunged 3 to $ 12. The gaming equipment maker warned
that first-quarter earnings will be below estimates.

   -- Cincinnati Microwave dropped 1 3/8 to $ 9 7/8. The electronic
communication device maker said it will report a loss for the first quarter.

   -- Astro-Med slid 2 1/2 to $ 9 1/2. The printer maker reported a sharp drop
in fourth-quarter earnings.

   -- Alcide gained 1 to $ 8 3/4. The chemical and drug maker posted strong
earnings its latest quarter.

   -- Positive comments from Merrill Lynch lifted Litton Industries 1 to $ 34
1/2. Litton makes electronic systems.

   -- Mark IV Industries jumped 1 1/8 to $ 18 7/8. Bear Stearns rated the
engineering products maker a buy.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1995


                             421 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    March 22, 1995, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: The Rights to a Medical Dream; Local Firm to Commercialize Gene
Therapy

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   A small company in Gaithersburg yesterday won exclusive rights to
commercialize a key innovation of the world's emerging biotechnology industry.
The rights could bring it millions of dollars a year in royalties if the
industry succeeds in developing big-selling treatments from the technology.

   Genetic Therapy Inc., which co-developed the technology with the National
Institutes of Health, said it has begun commercialization discussions with other
companies. Scientists hope that resulting "gene therapy" drugs will
revolutionize medicine by allowing doctors to correct inherited genetic defects.

   In the two partners' still-experimental technique, doctors remove human cells
and use specially developed biotechnology drugs to insert into the cells new
genes that correct disease-causing defects or make sick cells more responsive to
treatment. The cells are then put back into the patient to combat disease.

   Gene therapy is being studied as a possible treatment for cancer, hemophilia,
cystic fibrosis, AIDS and many other disorders.

   The National Institutes of Health won the patent from the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office yesterday and under prior agreement immediately awarded
exclusive rights to commercialize the technology to Genetic Therapy. Since 1988,
the company and NIH have spent millions of dollars to develop it in a joint
research program.  They will share any royalties.

   Founded in 1986, the company, which has 150 employees, has yet to make a
profit. Yesterday, news of the patent award helped drive its stock up $ 1.50 to
close at $ 10.

   Asked if people at the company were celebrating, chief executive M. James
Barrett replied: "We've been too busy answering questions. Maybe Saturday."

   Biotech researchers and executives agree that gene therapy products won't be
available for several years, if ever. But if the treatments prove viable, a
broad patent on a key gene therapy technique could easily be worth millions of
dollars a year, according to Linda Miller, biotechnology analyst for securities
firm PaineWebber Inc.

   In the other major gene therapy technique, scientists insert new genes
directly into a patient's body in such a way that the genes find and insert
themselves into the proper cells.

   Of 100 human trials of gene therapy products now underway, 70 percent rely on
the technique patented yesterday, according to French Anderson, a doctor who is
considered the father of genetic therapy and who led the joint research effort
by the NIH and Genetic Therapy.

   Anderson, who now heads a research laboratory at the University of Southern
California's Norris Cancer Center, predicted in a telephone interview that this
method will be dominant in gene therapy in the near to medium term. After 10
years, he said, the industry may switch over to direct insertion of genes as the
preferred method.

   An executive at one of the country's several dozen gene therapy companies
cast doubt on that prediction. Robert Abbott, president and chief executive of
Viagene Inc. of San Diego, said that direct insertion is likely to prevail from
the start. He said it would be less costly and labor-intensive than removing
cells, altering them in a laboratory and then reinserting them.

   Another potential hurdle for Genetic Therapy is whether the patent will
stand.

   "On its face it appears quite broad," said David Maki, a biotech patent
lawyer with the law firm of Seed and Berry in Seattle. "There might be
challenges from other parties who think they developed the same methods before
Genetic Therapy, or from those believe the invention was already in the public
domain and therefore isn't patentable."

   Anderson, who left NIH in 1992 to go to USC and remains Genetic Therapy's
chief scientific adviser, said he's not worried by other gene therapy patents,
which are less broad than the one awarded yesterday. He said the patents will
work together.

   Gene therapy was first used experimentally on a human in 1990 under the
direction of Anderson, whose medical team at NIH successfully treated a
4-year-old girl for a rare blood disorder that prevents the body from fighting
even mild forms of infection.


GRAPHIC: Chart, The Washington Post, GENETIC THERAPY (This chart was not
available)

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1995


                             422 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     MARCH 21, 1995, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2; BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 68 words

HEADLINE: Chiron Talks

BODY:

    Chiron Corp. said recent discussions to acquire Viagene Inc., a San Diego
gene therapy company, ended without an agreement. But in a government filing it
indicated it may still seek to buy the 82 percent stake in Viagene it does not
already own. The Emeryville biotech company paid $ 17.6 million for a minority
stake in Viagene in 1993.


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1995


                             423 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   March 21, 1995, Tuesday, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 972 words

HEADLINE: GIRL RECEIVES BREATH OF LIFE; TODDLER AMONG FIRST TO GET NEW
DOUBLE-LUNG TRANSPLANT

BYLINE: Roger Signor Post-Dispatch Science-Medicine Editor

BODY:


   A YEAR AGO, Autumn Bailey was near death. Born with a rare genetic disorder,
the infant's lungs had collapsed. She needed a machine to breathe.

   Today, Autumn is a picture of health. On Thursday, she devoured a hot dog,
French fries and a brownie. Then she spotted her mother's pizza and ate that,
too.

   Autumn's remarkable recovery is the result of a rare double-lung transplant
at St. Louis Children's Hospital, the only place in the world doing such
surgery. She and another infant girl are the first with the genetic disorder to
have both lungs replaced. And they're the first with the disorder to survive
more than a few months.

   It's too early to gauge the long-term prospects of the surgery, but doctors
are optimistic. They say double-lung transplants offer hope to hundreds of
infants worldwide with the genetic defect, pulmonary surfactant protein B
deficiency, or SPB. Years from now, these children may be cured by gene therapy
- the replacing of defective genes with healthy ones. Until then, the only hope
is transplants.

   "We finally have a handle on something that was a complete mystery only two
years ago," says Dr. Aaron Hamvas, medical director of the neonatal unit at
Children's Hospital. Tracking The Gene

   SPB babies have a severe deficiency of a protein that allows the millions of
tiny air sacs that line the lungs to open and close. Without it their lungs
collapse and they die.

   Years ago, doctors knew of about a dozen SPB cases worldwide. But recent
studies point to several genetic mutations that cause pulmonary problems in
infants. "It's only a matter of time before a range of pulmonary disorders are
traced to mutations," Hamvas said.

   In 1991, a newborn boy from southwest Missouri died from respiratory failure.
Dr. Lawrence Nogee at Washington University studied lung samples from the infant
and found the child lacked the SPB protein. Nogee is now on the medical faculty
at Johns Hopkins University.

   Study of medical records revealed the mother had borne a child 19 years
earlier that also died of lung failure. Tests showed he had suffered from the
deficiency.

   "The light bulbs went on all over the place," Hamvas recalled. "This terrible
illness stemmed from a genetic defect!" The genetic mutation eventually was
pinpointed by researchers at Washington, St. Louis and Johns Hopkins
universities.

   Meanwhile, the mother had become pregnant. So doctors readied themselves for
another infant with lung failure. Close to the child's expected delivery, an
amniocentesis test revealed the genetic defect.

   After birth, the child was given massive doses of the protein, but he failed
to respond and died. Researchers studied his lung tissue and pinpointed the
gene's mutation. They then developed a blood test to detect the condition. Two
SPB Babies

   Lauri and Richard Bailey were stunned when Autumn's lungs collapsed after her
birth 14 months ago in Pinellas Park, Fla., near Tampa. Two years earlier, their
second child died of respiratory failure at 5 1/2 months.

   "We had no diagnosis . . . we were told that she died of cardiac arrest,"
said Lauri Bailey, 27, a detention deputy for the Pinellas County Department of
Corrections.

   Autumn was luckier. When her lungs shut down, doctors had the blood test to
identify the problem. The Bailey's only other child, Mackenzie, 6, didn't
inherit the gene and is healthy.

   Coincidentally, another baby at the hospital had the same symptoms. The
infant, Meagan Craig of Palm Harbor, Fla., had been born a month earlier with
respiratory failure. Two siblings also had died from it. Meagan's parents
decided to take her to St. Louis Children's Hospital for a double-lung
transplant.

   The Baileys agonized over the same decision. The hospital here warned them
that she'd be one of the first infants to get double-lung transplants. "They had
no way to tell us her chances for recovery," said Lauri Bailey, whose husband,
Richard, 32, is a drill instructor at a juvenile boot camp in Pinellas County.

   The alternative was even more chilling. No children with the genetic disorder
had lasted more than a few months - even with the help of machines. Hopes For
Future Success

   In St. Louis, Meagan's immune system rejected her first new lungs, but a
second transplant was successful. Nine months later she is thriving, doctors
say.

   Autumn faired even better. She has never had anything worse than a cold since
she left the hospital.

   It's too early to say whether Autumn's and Meagan's success is typical.
Nationwide, slightly more than two-thirds of lung-transplant patients live a
year after surgery. But those patients come from an adult population - many of
them weakened by cystic fibrosis, emphysema or other diseases. The cost of
double-lung transplants ranges between $ 100,000 and $ 500,000.

   Doctors credit Lauri Bailey for putting in weeks at Autumn's bedside during
her recovery from transplant surgery. She talked to her daughter, bathed her and
played music and tapes of messages from her father and sister. Medical
technology can do only so much; children need help from family and friends, too,
said Dr. George Mallory, director of the hospital's lung-transplant unit.

   "You always presume that each tiny and desperately ill infant is first of all
a human being," he said.

   Late Thursday, Lauri Bailey held Autumn as the toddler slept soundly. After
four days of tests at Washington University Medical Center, the child got a
reward: her first root beer.

   When Autumn awoke, her large, sleepy eyes scanned a circle of doctors and
nurses. She got a clean bill of health, and headed back to Pinellas Park with
her mother.

   Another family with an SPB baby now waits at the hospital for a lung
transplant.

   "I told the mother to never give up hope," Lauri Bailey said. "We never
believed we'd come this far."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Color Photo by Larry Williams/Post-Dispatch - Lauri Bailey hugs
her daughter, Autumn, who had a double lung transplant last spring at St. Louis
Children's Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1995


                             424 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      March 20, 1995, Monday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FEATURES, Pg. 8C

LENGTH: 789 words

HEADLINE: HealthWatch;
New Cystic Fibrosis Center to help patients 13 and older

BYLINE: Amanda Husted; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Only a few years ago, the lucky cystic fibrosis patients lived to be
teenagers, and hospitals and clinics were geared for children. Some of those
children are now 40 years old.

   That's why the Egleston Cystic Fibrosis Center at Emory University is opening
today. It is believed to be one of the first comprehensive CF centers in the
nation for patients 13 and older.

   Because of new treatments, patients are living longer, healthier lives. And
gene therapy experiments are under way that someday might fix the defective gene
that causes the respiratory disease.

   Egleston's CF center, two blocks from Egleston Children's Hospital and Emory
University Hospital on Clifton Road, is a four-story, 13,000- square-foot
building that can accommodate 10 patients and a family member or "care partner."

   It will offer patients traditional hospital care - inpatient and outpatient
services - in a homelike setting. It also will provide nontraditional services,
including nutrition and exercise, and lifestyle and career counseling.

   The center will emphasize education, and wellness and prevention, with the
hope that patients taking an active role in their own care will lead to fewer -
and less costly - hospitalizations.

   CF patients who need emergency treatment, surgery or intensive care will
continue to be treated at Egleston Children's Hospital or Emory University
Hospital. Those who need hospitalization, but not acute care, will go to the new
center.

   Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disease that affects about 30,000 people in
the United States. The disorder causes the buildup of dense mucus in the walls
of the breathing airways and in the digestive tract. The clogged airways lead to
frequent bacterial infections and damage to lung tissue.

   -MARROW DONORS: If you've always wanted to be a hero, here's your chance.
Bone marrow donors are heroes to patients whose lives often hang in the balance.
A screening and recruitment drive to identify potential donors for the National
Marrow Donor Program is under way in Atlanta. Among patients who are waiting for
help is Kelly Ross, an 8-year-old student at Winona Park Elementary in Decatur
who has aplastic anemia. Potential donors must be between the ages of 18 and 55,
and in good health. The first step in donation is a blood test and listing on
the donor program's national registry; if a preliminary match is found, further
testing and counseling are done, and potential donors have the chance to change
their mind about the procedure. In the marrow drive for Kelly, the blood test
will cost $ 27.50 for the first 500 potential donors and $ 50 for each
additional volunteer. That drive will be held 10 a.m.-5 p.m. Saturday at Winona
Park Elementary, 510 Avery St. near Agnes Scott College. For information on
other scheduled drives or marrow donation, call Rhonda Jackson 881-9800, Ext.
599.

BRIEFLY

   AIDS STUDY: West Paces Medical Center is one of 17 sites nationwide testing a
drug, MGBG, for treatment of AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in patients
whose disease doesn't respond to chemotherapy. Unlike chemotherapy, the drug
causes minimal suppression of a patient's immune system, a factor AIDS patients
must take into account because their immune systems are compromised. Volunteers
must have failed one course of chemotherapy, be taking no drugs other than
anti-viral medications and cannot be pregnant. Information, 350-5653.

   -DIABETES STUDY: Emory University needs volunteers for a one-year study to
evaluate effectiveness of a new oral drug for adult-onset diabetes. Volunteers
should have diabetes that isn't controlled by pills but isn't severe enough to
require insulin. Physicals, lab work and medication will be provided free.
Information, 728-4918.

HELP YOURSELF
From staff, wire and published reports

   SENIORS' HEALTH: "Partners in Health," for senior citizens, 10 a.m. Thursday
and March 30, Lutheran Towers, Fourth and Juniper streets. Information,
872-9191.

   -THREE CLASSES: "Exercise for Losing Weight" today, "Stress Management" March
27, "Nutrition" April 3, sponsored by Saint Joseph's Hospital, all 1 p.m.,
Studio B, Concourse Athletic Club, 8 Concourse Parkway N.E. Information,
698-2000.

   -HEALTH SNAPSHOT: Free Easter photo with real bunny, 4-8 p.m. March 28,
FamilyCare-Decatur, 1045 Sycamore Drive;4-8 p.m. March 29, FamilyCare- Tucker,
5091 LaVista Road. Appointment, 501-9355.

   -BETTER GRANDPARENTS: "Improving Your Grandparenting Skills," 7-8:30 p.m.
Tuesday, Women's Health Center, North Fulton Regional Hospital. Information,
751-2660, in Forsyth-Cumming, 781-6355, Ext. 2660.

   -ALLERGIC? "Allergies," 12:30-1:30 p.m. Thursday, Richard H. Rich Auditorium,
Piedmont Hospital. Information, 605-3599.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                             425 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      March 20, 1995, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 617 words

HEADLINE: Scientists develop new gene gun to assist in fight against cancer

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Scientists have a potent new weapon in the fight against cancer - a "gene
gun" that shoots pure DNA directly into tumors.

   The gene gun can insert genes into cells in seconds, and is a faster and
potentially safer gene delivery system than the live viruses often used now,
scientists said yesterday.

   Current viral gene carriers take hours and sometimes days to deliver their
genetic cargo, and pose some risks.

   The gun uses helium gas to fire a spray of microscopic gold beads that have
been coated with DNA, the material of which genes are made. The genetic material
lodges in the cells when the gold projectile penetrates them. Inside the cells -
the gun targets cancer cells and surrounding normal cells - the genes cause
those cells to manufacture a substance that prods the immune system into an
attack against the tumor.

   Thus the gun and its ammunition do not destroy the cancer, but instead
deliver an immune stimulant that rallies the body's own defenses.

   In experiments described yesterday at the American Association for Cancer
Research, University of Wisconsin scientists said they used the gun to deliver
genes for interleukin-2 and interferon-gamma, immune stimulants known as
cytokine, to mice with tumors lying just under the skin. One-quarter of the mice
became tumor-free and lived more than 60 days, while all the untreated mice died
within three weeks.

   Although similar gene guns have been used for several years to fire DNA into
plant cells, "these are the first experiments using a gene gun in tumor-bearing
animals," said Wenn H. Sun, who also is reporting the results in a scientific
paper later this month.  Sun, formerly at Wisconsin, now is at Northwestern
University.

   The gun has not yet been used in human experiments, but early clinical trials
could begin in a year or so, the scientists said. Sun and other researchers said
they believe it could be used to alter cells genetically in a variety of human
cancers. The first targets of gene gun therapy are likely to be metastases from
breast cancer that affect the skin; skin cancer called melanoma, and another
cancer called T-cell lymphoma.

   And while current experiments are focusing on tumors on or just beneath the
skin, the scientists expect to see it employed to treat tumors deeper in the
body.

   "A surgeon could have it on hand during an operation, and if he found that
the tumor couldn't be removed, he could decide to shoot it with genes" to
provoke an attack by the body's immune system, said Dr. Gary Nabel, a gene
therapy specialist at the University of Michigan.

   The gun was developed at Agracetus, a Wisconsin biotech company.

    Made up of a pipe-like barrel atop a plastic handgrip, the gene gun
electrically fires 12 DNA cartridges without reloading.  Its force can be
varied, so that the DNA-coated pellets can be targeted to tumors on the skin or
fired through the skin through about 50 layers of cells, said Ning-Sun Yang, an
Agracetus researcher.

   Leaving the gun at supersonic speeds, the tiny gold pellets blast through the
cells' outer membranes by brute force - unlike other methods of gene transfer
that require the incoming DNA to pass through molecular ports called receptors.
Yet, the genetic bullets do not damage the cells or their delicate structures
inside.

   The gold beads are so small, said Yang, that if the cell were the size of an
average office, the gold bullet and its DNA would be the size of a tennis ball.

   Nabel said he is using the gene gun in several experiments. He said it is
also useful for gene therapy in which researchers remove a portion of a tumor,
add genes to it in the laboratory, and replace the altered tumor so that it
provokes an immune response.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1995


                             426 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          March 20, 1995 Monday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: GENE GUN LATEST WEAPON IN FIGHT AGAINST CANCER

BYLINE: By RICHARD SALTUS 1995 The Boston Globe

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Scientists have a potent new weapon in the fight against cancer - a "gene
gun" that shoots pure DNA directly into tumors.

   The gene gun can insert genes into cells in seconds, and is a faster and
potentially safer gene delivery system than the live viruses often used now,
scientists said Sunday.

   Current viral gene carriers take hours and sometimes days to deliver their
genetic cargo, and pose some risks.

   The gun uses helium gas to fire a spray of microscopic gold beads that have
been coated with DNA, the material of which genes are made. The genetic material
lodges in the cells when the gold projectile penetrates them. Inside the cells -
the gun targets cancer cells and surrounding normal cells - the genes cause
those cells to manufacture a substance that prods the immune system into an
attack against the tumor.

   Thus the gun and its ammunition don't destroy the cancer, but instead deliver
an immune stimulant that rallies the body's own defenses.

   In experiments described Sunday at the American Association for Cancer
Research, University of Wisconsin scientists said they used the gun to deliver
genes for interleukin-2 and interferon-gamma, immune stimulants known as
cytokine, to mice with tumors under the skin. One-quarter of the mice became
tumor-free and lived more than 60 days, while all the untreated mice died within
three weeks.

   Although similar gene guns have been used for several years to fire DNA into
plant cells, "these are the first experiments using a gene gun in tumor-bearing
animals," said Wenn Sun, who is reporting the results in a scientific paper
later this month. Sun, formerly at Wisconsin, now is at Northwestern University.

   The gun hasn't been used in human experiments, but early clinical trials
could begin in a year or so, the scientists said. Sun and other researchers said
they believe it could be used to alter cells genetically in a variety of human
cancers. The first targets of gene gun therapy likely will be metastases from
breast cancer that affect the skin, skin cancer called melanoma, and another
cancer called T-cell lymphoma.

   And while current experiments are focusing on tumors on or just beneath the
skin, the scientists expect to see it employed to treat tumors deeper in the
body.

   "A surgeon could have it on hand during an operation, and if he found that
the tumor couldn't be removed, he could decide to shoot it with genes" to
provoke an attack by the body's immune system, said Dr. Gary Nabel, a gene
therapy specialist at the University of Michigan.

   The gun was developed at Agracetus, a Wisconsin biotech company.

   Made up of a pipelike barrel atop a plastic handgrip, the gene gun
electrically fires 12 DNA cartridges without reloading. Its force can be varied,
so that the DNA-coated pellets can be targeted on tumors on the skin or fired
through the skin through about 50 layers of cells, said Ning-Sun Yang, an
Agracetus researcher.

   Leaving the gun at supersonic speeds, the tiny gold pellets blast through the
cells' outer membranes - unlike other methods of gene transfer that require the
incoming DNA to pass through molecular ports called receptors. The genetic
bullets don't damage the cells or their delicate structures inside.

   The gold beads are so small, said Yang, that if the cell were the size of an
average office, the gold bullet and its DNA would be the size of a tennis ball.

   Nabel said he is using the gene gun in several experiments. He said it is
also useful for gene therapy in which researchers remove a portion of a tumor,
add genes to it in the laboratory, and replace the altered tumor so that it
provokes an immune response.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1995


                             427 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     March 19, 1995, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1307 words

HEADLINE: UB STUDY LINKS 'SMOKER GENE,' BREAST CANCER;
 WOMEN AT GREATEST RISK  ARE FOUND TO SHARE TRAIT

BYLINE: By MIKE VOGEL, News Staff Reporter

BODY:

    Some women "inherit" a greater chance of smoking leading to breast cancer,
according to University at Buffalo research being unveiled today at a Toronto
conference of cancer experts.

   Preliminary evidence uncovered by the UB study provides the first indication
that women who smoke and share a common genetic trait are much more likely to
develop breast cancer.

   While earlier studies have sought links between smoking and breast cancer,
the new research adds a third factor -- genetic vulnerability. Smoking is more
dangerous for women with a particular type of gene, the researchers found.

   The work may have wide implications in assessing environmentally related
human health risks.

   "We're talking about a gene-environment interaction," said UB researcher
Christine Ambrosone. "Ours is the first (study) that has looked at the genetics
and the risk factor."

   Like a trigger on a smoking genetic gun, the common form of a specific gene
has been found to increase breast cancer risks dramatically -- but only among
smokers.

   In the study of 362 Caucasian, postmenopausal Western New York women, the
UB/National Cancer Institute team found that women who were both heavy smokers
and had the gene type were about eight times more likely to develop breast
cancer than non-smokers.

   The research is being presented today during the 86th annual meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research.

   The study concentrates on a gene, N-acetyltransferase, or NAT, that
detoxifies a major carcinogen in cigarette smoke.

   The gene has two forms, or polymorphs. People with one form are classed as
slow-acetylators and don't detoxify cigarette smoke as efficiently as
fast-acetylators, whose cells include the other form of the NAT gene.

   "People are not as equally susceptible to environmental exposures," Dr.
Ambrosone said. "People vary in how high the level of (detoxifying) activity is,
depending on the genes they've inherited."

   Dr. Ambrosone's team found that two-thirds of the women in the study were
slow-acetylators and estimated that 40 to 70 percent of the Caucasian population
in the United States fall into this category.

   "Fast-acetylators" were not found to increase risks for breast cancer.

   "It may well be that smoking is a breast cancer risk factor only for women
who are slow-acetylators," said Dr. Ambrosone, stressing that the preliminary
study needs to be expanded and repeated to test its validity.

   While earlier studies had hinted at links between smoking and breast cancer,
the second most common cancer killer of American women, earlier epidemiological
studies never consistently found cigarette smoke to be a breast cancer risk
factor.

   The leading cancer killer for women, lung cancer, has been widely linked to
smoking.

   "There's been a lot of research into smoking and breast cancer, and there's
always been evidence that cigarette smoke could be linked to breast cancer
risks," Dr. Ambrosone said.

   "There are a lot of reasons to suspect that cigarette smoking is related to
breast-cancer risk," agreed Dr. Peter Shields of the National Cancer Institute.

   Studies in 1978 and 1980 indicated that nicotine metabolites, or break-down
products, are found in breast fluids from female smokers, and laboratory tests
have shown that cigarette carcinogens can produce DNA damage in human breast
cells and mammary tumors in rodents.

   Last May, American Cancer Society researcher Eugenia E. Calle found that
smokers were 25 percent more likely than non-smokers and former smokers to die
of breast cancer. Her study followed more than 600,000 women for more than six
years.

   DNA researchers also have identified a mutated gene, BRCA1, that Dr.
Ambrosone said is considered rare.

   "But if people have it, they seem to be at a very high risk no matter what
they do," she said.

   National Cancer Institute researcher Neil Caporaso said the genetic
polymorphs being studied by the UB/NCI team are a type that increase cancer risk
only when a person is exposed to certain environmental agents.

   "This gives hope that cancer may eventually be preventable not through exotic
gene therapies, but through a person's own lifestyle changes," the
Maryland-based researcher said. "These genes are harmless when the environmental
exposure is eliminated."

   Dr. Ambrosone agreed that genetic engineering is not the right approach.
Other studies of the NAT gene she has linked to the cancer risks of smoking, she
added, show signs of impacts on other cancers as well.

   Slow-acetylators exposed to certain dyes may face increased risks of bladder
cancer, she said, while fast-acetylators who eat a lot of red meat may be
increasing their risk of colon cancer.

   Eliminating cigarettes, smoke or dyes would be a better approach that trying
to change the genes, she pointed out.

   "If you don't have the environmental exposure, you don't have the increased
risk," she said. "You very simply eliminate the environmental exposure."

   Linking genetic compositions and exposure risks is an emerging field, because
most earlier studies did not include DNA sampling to provide data on the
presence or forms of specific genes.

   Dr. Ambrosone's study was based on a large breast cancer epidemiological
study conducted on 933 Western New York women from 1986 to 1991, which collected
data on smoking habits.

   "Through someone's foresight, blood clots from that study were also frozen
and stored," Shields said. The stored blood allowed DNA extraction and gene
studies.

   Modern epidemiological studies increasingly include DNA data, so future
explorations of the evidence should be easier. The UB researchers are starting
now to look at premenopausal women to search for similar links.

   Other research is likely to consider combinations of genetic evidence and
environmental exposures to try to discover what Japanese women -- where
slow-acetylators number only 10 percent of the population -- are far less likely
than Americans to develop breast cancer, or why Long Island and other areas have
higher breast cancer incidence than other areas.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1995


                             428 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                      March 12, 1995, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 448 words

HEADLINE: 3 SOUTHLAND SCHOOLS LEADING IN DECATHLON

BYLINE: By ISAAC GUZMAN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: FRESNO

BODY:

   After two days of brain-bending competition, Academic Decathlon teams from
three Southern California high schools were among the front-runners for the
state championship Saturday.

   A team of nine whiz kids from Los Angeles' John Marshall High School was the
unofficial winner of the Super Quiz oral competition, a boisterous,
open-to-the-public event in which decathletes from 41 schools answered questions
from the field of biotechnology.

   West High School of Torrance tied for second place in the quiz with a team
from San Luis Obispo, and Laguna Hills High School of Orange County was in a tie
for third with a team from Sonoma.

   The most closely watched event in the decathlon, the Super Quiz is often an
indicator of which team will take home the state title, which this year is being
contested at Cal State Fresno.

   "This is just one little battle in a giant war," said Marshall's Linda Sui.

   The overall winners of the state championship will be announced at an awards
ceremony today. That team will go on to compete for the national title in
Chicago in April.

   Comprising 10 events in subjects such as economics, literature and fine arts,
the decathlon is an intellectual obstacle course that leaves even the brightest
minds dim and dragging after hours of knocking noggins with their opponents.

   During the Super Quiz, the teams, each made up of nine members, had to answer
questions such as:

   "Transmuting virally altered white blood cells and squirting DNA containing
liposomes into lungs are both examples of: (a) pre-implantation diagnosis (b)
gene therapy (c) genetic fingerprinting (d) genetic mapping (e) techniques for
producing transgenic animals.

   The answer: (b) gene therapy.

   "I'm just happy it's over," said Marshall decathlete Elsie Lau after the
Super Quiz.

   "I'm going to sleep, and then I'm going to the party," said teammate Paul
Auerbach, referring to a bash thrown for the contestants Saturday night.

   Going into the competition, Marshall's students were the odds-on favorite.
Their score at the Los Angeles Unified School District decathlon in November was
the best local score in the state, raising the team's hope that their school
would recapture the state title for the first time in nearly a decade.

   In both 1985 and 1986, a team from Marshall High won the state title. The
1986 team went on to become national champion.

   Although Marshall's victory in the Super Quiz by no means decided the overall
outcome of the decathlon, it disappointed West High's Glen Lim. After he learned
that his team placed second, he dropped to his knees.

   "Well, we tried and it's kind of disappointing, but we tried," he said. "I
think I could have done better."

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1995


                             429 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 9, 1995 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 416 words

HEADLINE: Colored hair that grows on you;
Biotech company tackles problem from the roots up

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Rooting out a perennial hair-coloring problem, a San Diego biotechnology
company says it can now color growing hair from the roots up. AntiCancer Inc.
says its breakthrough eliminates off-color roots by injecting color into the
follicles at the base of each hair. The Kearny Mesa-based company stumbled upon
its hair-coloring agent while researching methods of preventing hair loss caused
by chemotherapy. AntiCancer says its hair coloring agent, which has been
demonstrated only in laboratory conditions thus far, contains liposomes that
attach themselves to hair follicles, delivering natural melanin to the growing
hair shaft. "The liposomes never enter the blood stream or the body," says
Andrew Perry, president of the company's consumer products unit.

   "It's as if the follicles are magnetic to these liposome particles." Perry
said that unlike simple dyes, which stain the hair shaft, AntiCancer's coloring
replaces pigment within the follicle.

   The company says this could strengthen the growing hair as well as change its
color. AntiCancer's preparation is unable to alter the hue of previously grown
hair: that requires conventional dyes. The local company's agent could be
provided in a variety of colors. "It comes in blues, blonds, pink.

   You could actually grow colored hair," Perry says. Though human testing of
the hair color has yet to begin, AntiCancer said the liposomes do not stain the
skin and can be applied as simply as shower gel or shampoo.

   The company declines to specify how long the effect lasts but says "frequent"
re-applications are required to continue the color growth. AntiCancer says it
plans to soon begin human testing of its coloring agents in Sweden, where Perry
says the product already has received press attention.

   The company has published its findings in a scientific journal and says it
anticipates an easy path to market in the United States because its product is
not a drug. AntiCancer, an 8-year-old company with 20 employees, has funded its
work largely from $2 million it has raised from private sources.

   Perry said the company has also received some Small Business Administration
grants for its work. AntiCancer says it also has developed a strain of mice
without immune systems with transplanted human cancers.

   The company provides the animals for drug and disease research purposes. The
company is also at work on a genetic-therapy solution to preventing gray hair
and late last year said it had begun testing a genetic therapy for lung cancer
in China.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             430 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     March 7, 1995, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. D9

LENGTH: 2351 words

HEADLINE: Identifying industries where growth can cluster;
Region needs market-leading firm to spawn another 'Silicon Valley'

BYLINE: Steve Creedy, Post-Gazette Staff Writer

BODY:


   As Tim Parks drove toward the O'Hara headquarters of Don Jones' burgeoning
high tech company last week, he passed the tents set up by protesting workers at
the ailing 109-year-old candy bar maker, D.L. Clark Co.

   Parks, president of the Pittsburgh High Technology Council, couldn't help
noting how the depressing scene at Clark contrasted with the jammed parking lot
outside Jones' company, Automation News Network, and how the two reflected the
region's changing face.

   ''It just struck me ... how ironic this is,'' Parks says.

   ANN is the kind of local company Parks loves to see -- smart, fast-growing,
with a national presence and high-tech jobs. With ''downsizing'' rampant among
the region's industrial behemoths, technology startups such as ANN are viewed as
a key to Pittsburgh's future.

   Founded in 1991, ANN began by selling a computerized ''yellow pages'' to
industry on floppy disks and two years ago took the initial jump into cyberspace
with an industrial online service called IndustryNet. Last year, that initial
jump became a quantum leap when ANN began offering all of its services online
and linked IndustryNet to the Internet's World Wide Web.

   ANN is now considered a leader in its field and today employs about 150 full
and part-time workers in North America, two-thirds of them in Pittsburgh.
Revenues are expected to top $ 27 million this year, up from $ 10 million last
year and $ 3.4 million the year before.

   It's a success story Parks and others hope to see repeated as Pittsburgh
continues to shrug off its dying steel town image and dons the mantle of high
technology.

   ''I think there are probably more signs of good success stories today than
what we've had over the past five years,'' says Ted Glyptis, a partner with
Coopers and Lybrand. ''I think there is reason for people to be a little bit
more optimistic.''

   That doesn't mean Pittsburgh is a boiling cauldron of entrepreneurial soup.
New companies may be starting up here but the region doesn't get rave reviews as
a hotbed of enterprising activity.

   ''We are probably at the bottom of the barrel at the rate at which we start
companies in this region,'' says Tom Canfield, president of The Enterprise Corp.
of Pittsburgh, a business development group. ''We are probably 50th out of the
50 major metropolitan regions in the United States.''

   A study Canfield conducted found that Pittsburgh has had problems using the
resources of entrepreneurs already here, as well as a culture that hampers the
rate of new company formation and success. Unfortunately, locals haven't been
the only ones to reach that conclusion.

   Pittsburgh's high-tech aspirations took a battering in the latest edition of
Forbes ASAP, a magazine that ranked the city 47th out of 100 in a survey of
places to locate ''smart'' businesses.

   Pittsburgh did well in categories such as cost of housing, cost of living,
quality of life and local airport facilities. It bombed as a place that attracts
new immigrants or whose residents are computer-literate. It also received low
marks for entrepreneurial zest, general education and the number of regulations
affecting business.

   A report released last year by the Allegheny Conference on Community
Development also noted a number of factors inhibiting growth, including high
taxes, a shortage of ''adventure'' capital for startups, a tough local labor
climate and the slow transfer of technology from laboratory to shop floor. On
the plus side, the report highlighted the region's enviable quality of life,
strong work ethic, international connections and world-renowned institutions.

   The report -- called the Regional Economic Rivitalization Initiative --
suggested a number of steps for accelerating existing activities and assisting
companies in developing local industries with a global reach. Among those steps
are a better coordinated approach to economic development and the formation of
teams to help develop abandoned industrial sites, assist companies and develop
demonstration projects.

   The study also identified five industry ''clusters'' -- metalworking;
chemicals and plastics; health systems and biomedical; information and
communication products and services, and environmental products and services --
as the most promising for the region's future development.

   Local industry observers say that three clusters in particular -- information
and communications products and services, biotechnology, and environmental
technology -- have good potential for forming a regional high technology base.

   Special forums already have been set up by the high tech council to nurture
growth in each of these clusters by encouraging partnerships and the interchange
of ideas.

   Glyptis sees this as a measure of the commitment to local high tech
development -- something he believes will pay off eventually.

   ''I think when you have people who are as intelligent as they are and
committed to really trying to take it to the next level, it's the right
ingredients to make it happen,'' he says.

   Whether these efforts will bear fruit is a matter of conjecture. Much as
locals would like to see Pittsburgh regain its industrial kingpin status, most
people believe the town's future lies in a smorgasbord of small to medium-sized
firms in a mix of industries.

   Here are some of the prospects and developments in each of these sectors.

Information and communications

   Setting the pace in terms of local growth and potential is the information
and communications technology sector.

   Spearheaded by high-flying Fore Systems (see separate story in this section)
and fueled by spin-offs from Carnegie Mellon University, many people believe the
region's communications and software industry is approaching a critical mass
that will unleash a sustained and self-perpetuating growth.

   Western Pennsylvania boasts more than 300 software companies that provide
about 10,000 jobs and produce a combined annual revenue of more than $ 1
billion. Depending on which figures you use, Pittsburgh ranks either fifth or
sixth nationally in software employment, and jobs here pay from $ 40,000 to $
65,000.

   Most local software firms are small, employing 25 or fewer people, though a
number have broken the 100-employee barrier. Software companies here produce a
wide variety of products used in such diverse applications as engineering,
banking, health care, manufacturing and transportation. Many are on the cutting
edge of their fields.

   Added to this is a communications sector that includes manufacturers of
computer peripherals, cables and high speed switches.

   But Pittsburgh has yet to spawn the kind of mega-corporation that ignited
growth the way Hewlett-Packard Co. did in Silicon Valley and Digital Equipment
Corp. did in Boston.

   Local leaders see Fore as possibly being that kind of breakthrough company,
but it remains to be seen how much impact the rapidly-growing computer network
concern will have. Nor was there another company on the horizon that people
interviewed for this story could point to as an obvious equivalent to DEC or
Hewlett-Packard.

   That doesn't stop people like Carnegie Mellon's technology transfer chief,
Benno Bernt, from hoping.

   Bernt, whose role is to help research at Carnegie Mellon transfer from the
laboratory to the commercial world, keeps a chart on his wall mapping the
genealogy of the semiconductor industry in Silicon Valley. It traces 12
generations of companies and shows the large numbers of companies a few big,
successful businesses can generate.

   Bernt's hope is that Carnegie Mellon's internationally recognized research
into computer science and robotics may one day produce a blockbuster company
whose time has come.

   ''That seems to be one of the primary mechanisms for things to happen,' he
says. ''One particular industry takes hold and if it's the right time, the right
era and the right competitive advantage, they make it and begin to spin out
additional companies.''

Biotechnology

   The University of Pittsburgh, with its giant medical center and
world-renowned research, is seen as a technological wellspring for a potential
biotech industry.

   Pittsburgh already has some strong companies that produce medical equipment
but there's a dearth of firms in the risky but potentially lucrative
biotechnology fields such as gene therapy and tissue engineering.

   With government grants becoming harder to get and moves afoot to impose
stricter control on health care costs, researchers at Pitt's medical center are
seeing commercial ventures in a new light.

   Officials at Pitt have revamped and simplified the center's technology
transfer process and report a significant increase in the number of people
seeking to commercialize their inventions.

   ''Since we've ramped up efforts, we've had 20 inventions in the past two
months ... where in the past it has taken the whole year to get to 30,'' says
Reed McManigle, a technology transfer specialist at the medical center.

   Another thing that's changed, says McManigle, is the way the university is
now interested in proactively forming companies around technologies. It's trying
to bring in money and working with local people to set up companies, he says.

   Nonetheless, Pitt officials share a complaint repeated by other entrepreneurs
around town: the scarcity of venture capital here, which they believe reflects a
reluctance to take risks.

   ''The venture capital entities are not coming here, but they will join
activities or materials we license to somebody else elsewhere,'' says Sam
Gershon, the university's associate vice chancellor for research in health
sciences.

   There are a number of reasons for that, say the Pitt officials. First,
Pittsburgh doesn't have an existing pharmaceutical or biomedical research
industry and investors are reluctant to jump in first. Second, other states and
cities -- Maryland and Baltimore are an example -- have programs specifically
aimed at attracting new biotech industries.

   ''We have the intellectual power to do this, but to link it to business
development we need money to say come to Pittsburgh and don't go to Boston or
some other place,'' Gershon says.

   One concept from Pitt that's prompting local interest is tissue engineering,
one of five demonstration projects identified in the Allegheny Conference
revitalization study.

   Dr. Peter Johnson, an associate professor of surgery at Pitt, says technology
is approaching the time when scientists will be able to craft tissues such as
cartilage and organs by growing cells outside the body.

   That may sound like science fiction, says Johnson, but there are already
about 20 companies in the field in other parts of the United States. He believes
Pittsburgh, with its established expertise in transplants and cancer treatment,
is well positioned to take advantage of the fledgling industry and its projected
$ 80 billion market.

   The driving force behind tissue engineering is medical economics. Johnson
says using engineered tissue will be cheaper than the expensive process of
harvesting tissue from other parts of the body.

   ''It represents the largest single area of the health care budget you can
trim by bringing technology to bear,'' he says. ''With that kind of rolling
economic river, tissue engineering is the water wheel you stick in and it drives
a lot of technology development.''

   The tissue engineering initiative brings together a 300-strong network of
researchers and other professionals and involves collaboration between Pitt and
Carnegie Mellon. It's that sort of collaborative spirit, says Johnson, that will
allow Pittsburghers to pull together and help tissue engineering get off the
ground here.

   ''It's really going to happen and it's going to be a big enough market that
if Pittsburgh gets a good chunk of it, it's going to be worth something,'' he
says.

Environmental technology

   While much of the biotech industry is still on the drawing board, the
environmental sector already has a well established track record.

   ''Pittsburgh is recognized around the United States as being one of a half
dozen or so centers for the environmental industry,'' says Ed Berkey, the
president of the Center for Hazardous Materials Research, a Pittsburgh
organization involved in environmental training, research and development.

   ''This is an area where there is some comparative strength and comparative
advantage relative to the environmental industry as a whole.''

   Berkey estimates there are more than 400 environmental firms employing 8,000
to 10,000 people within a 75-mile radius of Downtown Pittsburgh. Though there
are a couple of larger players such as Westinghouse, most environmental
companies tend to be small, with an average of 10 to 20 workers and annual
revenue of something like $ 1.5 million.

   They cover many new and even odd environmental technologies -- fungi that
clean up contaminated soils, microbes that eat the residue left by explosive
weapons.

   Berkey says Pittsburgh's environmental strength stems from the fact it was
one of the first places in the world to confront its environmental problems.
That created the opportunity for people to form companies, develop expertise and
get involved in various aspects of the industry as it evolved.

   ''And as you know, Pittsburgh is a place where people like to stay,'' Berkey
says. ''Even as industry changed and many of the large research labs downsized,
we find that the professionals who are working in the field have stayed here.''

   Berkey says the local environmental industry has been somewhat hidden and is
now trying to raise its profile. Right now, he says, it's a highly competitive
environment and not an industry in which you can make a lot of money easily.

   Nonetheless, he expects it to be a significant factor in Pittsburgh's future
as the industry switches its emphasis from cleaning up past problems to the
prevention of new problems.

   ''It's going to take time to happen, but it's dynamic and it's evolving and
in five years it's going to be a lot different than it is today, and (in) 10
years more so,'' he says.

   KRTBN

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Tony Tye/Post-Gazette: Beyond a building at the
Pittsburgh Technology Center on Second Avenue, one can still see LTV's Hazelwood
plant.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1995


                             431 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1995 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                          March 7, 1995, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 850 words

HEADLINE: Hands-on science;
 Biotechnology, DNA experiments part of small-school teaching

BYLINE: Robert Franklin; Staff Writer

DATELINE: Wrenshall, Minn.

BODY:

   In chemistry class, 11th-grader Tony Sheda s-l-o-w-l-y poured some ethanol
into a partially-filled test tube and - voila!  - a thin, milky film of
concentrated DNA appeared between two layers of liquids.

    In biology, Rebecca Haataja used a wire-tipped rod to scrape some bacteria
from a petri dish and carefully poke it into a test tube that would soon contain
cloned DNA.

    "I like science. I like hands-on experiments," Rebecca said of the science
labs that David Blinn teaches at the high school in Wrenshall, a blue-collar
town of 296.

    Tony said the experiments beat taking tests. And sophomore Heather MacDonald
said that "it's more interesting to actually do stuff than sit and take notes."

    Youngsters at Wrenshall and four other small northeastern Minnesota schools
are getting to "actually do stuff" with DNA and are learning more about
biotechnology than some of their bigger-city peers - thanks to a partnership
with the Blandin Foundation and the College of St. Scholastica.

    The foundation has provided money to train high school teachers at the
college and to buy expensive equipment that the little schools can borrow for a
few weeks at a time but could never afford to buy.

    So students in Blinn's biology and chemistry classes got to use a $
6,000-plus array of chemical and electrical equipment and supplies as they
cooled, cooked, cultured, and otherwise manipulated their experiments last week.

    Educators say nearly all schools teach about the growing field of DNA but
labs are reserved mostly for advanced students and larger schools because of the
costs.

    Wrenshall, which calls itself "the energy corner of northeastern Minnesota"
because of its oil and gas pipelines terminals, has only about 430 students in
kindergarten through 12th grade, all in one building.

    St. Scholastica found that, students who learned about DNA only from
textbooks, found the material was "very difficult to understand, but when they
did the experiments it became very clear," said Douglas Walton, an associate
professor of biology at the Duluth college who organized the DNA teaching
program. "We wanted to bring something to the students that they had not
experienced personally but which is part of their everyday life, if you watch
the news."

    DNA is deoxyribonucleic acid, a gene-directing blueprint, and it is making
news in the O.J. Simpson trial and in other efforts to place criminal suspects
at crime scenes. It is making fiction, as in Jurassic Park's replication of
dinosaurs from 65 million-year-old DNA.

    It is also the basis for gene therapy (replacing defective genes with
functioning ones), producing gene products (such as insulin from bacteria) and
introducing new functions (such as bacteria that eat oil spills and crop
varieties that grow bigger or are insect-resistant).

    "A lot of this stuff is happening," said Wrenshall sophomore Darren
Peterson, explaining why the DNA experiments are worthwhile. "They're getting
closer and closer to being able to clone more complicated organisms."

    Blinn's students learn more than how to isolate and clone DNA. They learn
how enzymes cut DNA into fragments, how electric currents allow them to measure
strands of DNA in a gel substance and how cultures can turn colors to show
whether or not a bacteria contains cloned DNR.

    Blinn's enthusiasm in the classroom seems contagious, as students announce
their successes: "We got it, Mr. Blinn!" from Tony, and "Hey, Mr. Blinn, can we
do it again?" from Phil Stephenson.

    Blinn himself was a student last summer in Walton's three-week St.
Scholastica course that also included teachers from Barnum, Carlton, Esko and
Moose Lake - all small school districts along the Interstate Hwy. 35 corridor in
Carlton County, south of Duluth.

    Their training was part of a faculty fellowship program sponsored by the
Blandin Foundation of Grand Rapids, Minnesota's largest rural-based foundation.
From its beginning in 1982 through last year, the foundation paid out $ 1.4
million for 117 faculty fellowships and 194 undergraduate research fellowships
in various disciplines to help rural schools.

    For summer fellowships this year and next, it has granted another $ 730,000
to the Minnesota Private College Research Foundation, a consortium of 16
private, liberal arts colleges.

    "The College of St. Scholastica has really done a nice job in getting in
contact with small schools," said Blinn, a native of nearby Cloquet.

    That is important partly because programs such as the DNA lab give
youngsters "a little bit of a leg up" in studies that are not even offered yet
in all colleges, he said.

    It also is important because the thought of college intimidates even some
good students in small towns where college isn't necessarily the expected career
choice, he said. "To make a connection with a small college, it helps bridge
that."

    "When these opportunities come along . . . you can't say enough about them,"
he added. "It's like winning a mini-lottery of some kind."


GRAPHIC: Photograph

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1995


                             432 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      March 6, 1995, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 2448 words

HEADLINE: Speeding the process;
New techniques help recovery;
Sports Medicine/The healing game Second of three parts

BYLINE: By Larry Tye, Globe Staff

DATELINE: WELLESLEY

BODY:

   Time may heal all wounds, but in an age when more athletes are getting
wounded - and showing less patience for healing - the medical profession is
doing all it can to push ahead the comeback clock.

   You can sense it in laboratories across America, where scientists are
uncovering genes and drugs that speed the healing of cartilage,ligaments and
tendons.

   You can surmise it at a British university, where biologists say machines
that gently shake fractured joints can cut repair time by 30 percent.

   Best of all, you can see it at physical therapy sessions like those Dan Dyrek
runs out of a modest office in Wellesley Hills, where low-tech exams are
displacing high-tech fixes, generalized cures are out and patient-specific
prescriptions are the watchword, and therapists are more and more confident
about pinpointing problems and quickly correcting them.

   "In the past, patients were put into broad categories of problems; if you
didn't fit in that category, we couldn't identify your problem," says Dyrek, who
treated Larry Bird's back troubles and has helped other Celtics get back into
the game.

   "Sports medicine has matured . . . What we need to do is identify individual
sources of all complaints, and we can do that much better today."

   Cathy O'Brien, a world-class marathoner who's been treated by Dyrek for
everything from aching quadriceps to lower back pain, says she's experienced the
fruits of that new way of thinking: "It's not a lot of hocus-pocus. I consider
what he does and the techniques he uses as being an important part of my
training.

   "He's really taken me from where I couldn't really stand without pain to
where I'm training 100 miles a week and feeling back to my old self."

   Such progress in the realm of rehab has been gradual and decidedly
unromantic, which is why it has gotten less attention than sports medicine's
dramatic leaps forward in the operating room.

   In fact, physical therapy exams like the one Dyrek recently gave another
elite runner, Judi St. Hilaire, are flat-out boring, remarkable more for what's
missing than what's there.

   There are no high-tech machines to monitor the elite runner's movements and
metabolism. No textbooks with fancy figures and charts matching her symptoms to
a particular muscle group or joint. Not even a hammer to test her reflexes.

   St. Hilaire simply faces the wall, hands on hips, raising her knees as high
as they'll go. Then she hops onto the examining table, where Dyrek twists and
turns her legs and feet, torso and back, massaging muscles and tissue, testing
her range of motion, searching for inflammation and inquiring what runs she's
done lately, telling her what he's found and seeing what she thinks.

   That's decidedly different from what might have happened 15 years ago, or
even five, mainly because Dyrek and therapists like him now understand better
how the body responds to injury and how it can be pushed to recover. And because
patients like St. Hilaire are better at interpreting their aches and working
with a therapist to get rid of them.

   Before, Dyrek might have had St. Hilaire do the same back stretch that every
other runner does, and might have been misled because the pain was on her left
side. Now his tests tell him the real problem is a wound on the right side of
her pelvis that causes pain to shoot to the left, and he prescribes a
custom-made remedy that includes a walk in the parking garage before she drives
home to Somerset, four repetitions of leg and knee stretches before each run,
and staying off the treadmill for several days.

   "I could have treated her left side until I was blue in the face, and we
might have made temporary gains, but it wouldn't work at all," Dyrek says.
"You've got to go after the right side, which was the actual source."

   St. Hilaire, who's had surgery on both feet and unsettling aches from head to
toes, is a believer: "Dan doesn't just treat the symptom; he won't just treat
the muscle that's bothering me. He goes after the culprit."

   Just back from Tampa, where she finished seventh in a competitive
15-kilometer race, St. Hilaire says she "couldn't have done it without Dan. I
would have hung my career up."
Today's more confident and experienced physical therapists also have a different
take on training machines.

   A decade ago, many jumped on the high-tech bandwagon, believing that finding
the right machine was the key to a cure. Machines are still there in their
offices - fancy ones like the isokinetic dynamometer that looks like a dentist's
chair and lets therapists treat patients at different speeds, and everyday ones
like a treadmill - but they're often idle. Therapists say they care about
building strength only if it helps build function, and that patients too often
used machines as a crutch, avoiding the rigorous requirements of rehab; the
bottom line, they add, is getting people back to activities they need and want
to do.

   Yet one type of machine - biofeedback - is used more than ever. That's
because it cues therapists and patients into how each exercise affects each
muscle group and lets them adjust workouts to produce precisely the effect
intended, explains James E. Zachazewski, who runs the sports program at MGH
Physical Therapy Associates in Boston.

   Also getting a lot of wear and tear in rehab work today are devices like
hot-water bottles and ice packs that have been around since the Roman Empire.
Hot packs, ultrasound machines and plain hot water are used to raise the
temperatures of tissues, enhance the flow of blood and make it easier to stretch
joints and muscles. Cold, meanwhile, is used to reduce swelling.

   He decides when and how to use such aids based on two factors, Zachazewski
says: "First is knowledge I have from the scientific literature relative to
healing . . . what's supposed to happen. The second is your symptoms and how you
respond.

   "If something that's not supposed to happen happens, then I have to
reconsider the program."

   Dr. K. Donald Shelbourne saw things happen that weren't supposed to happen in
his orthopedic practice, and the result was a metamorphosis in the way he and
many other health providers think about the whole subject of healing.

   The Indianapolis Colts physician spends most of his time reconstructing torn
anterior cruciate ligaments in knees, one of the most common injuries in sports
medicine. The golden rule used to be that it would take six months to play
sports after ACL surgery, and a year to fully recover, Shelbourne says, "but
with rehab and proper surgery, people I treat are back in six weeks and pretty
much normal after 3-4 months."

   That's partly because his patients tend to be highly motivated athletes who
were in good shape to start with.

   But Shelbourne believes something else is at work, something that might be as
relevant to weekend warriors as professional sportsmen: "We found out that
people who pushed themselves, against our advice, did better than people who
listened to us.

   "We're not as smart as we thought about the limits of human potential."

   One problem is that doctors historically have generalized too much in rehab,
setting standards based on the lowest common denominator of people they treat.
Another trouble, Shelbourne says, is that the cookbook of cures was based on
research in dogs, goats and monkeys, "and maybe they're not enough like humans."

   The solution, he says, is "to individualize programs, let people push
themselves harder than they thought they could, and if they start to get in
trouble, then have them appropriately back off."

   Shelbourne's call to arms has had many physicians up in arms. They worried
that even top-notch athletes need to be reined in at times, and that casual
sportsmen could hurt themselves by following his advice. Still, his push for a
personalized approach is now widely accepted in the world of sports medicine, as
is his insistence that athletes often know more about their bodies than their
doctors do.

   What about his suggestion that most of us can get back on our feet quicker
than we'd thought?

   "His track record is very good," offers Dr. Robert Leach, editor of the
American Journal of Sports Medicine and former physician for the Celtics.
"There's probably a point where you can't go any further, but so far, I don't
think he has pushed too far."

   At schools like UCLA, Shelbourne's approach is the gospel - with great
results, says Sandy Shultz, trainer for the women's basketball and softball
teams, and men's and women's cross-country: "Shelbourne has really kind of
opened a lot of people's eyes in rehab across the country.

   "We're just finding we can be much more aggressive and get them functional
much sooner. We get better rehab by not waiting so long."

   Matt Waddell knows firsthand how well that works. When the 22-year-old guard
for Purdue's basketball team had ACL surgery last September, he expected to be
out until at least January. But Shelbourne had him back by November, in time for
the start of the season, and Waddell is now the No. 2 scorer on the team.

   "He didn't really give my leg too much time to rest; as soon as you can walk,
he likes you to get right on it and exercise it," says Waddell. "From my
experience, it does work."

   Willpower isn't the only way to speed up healing, of course. Gene therapy can
help, along with a properly applied jolt of power.

   Researchers are working on identifying genes responsible for cell growth,
then will insert them to make cells grow around a wound and speed healing.
"We're trying to determine what's the right gene for cartilage and bones, and
the methods are now at hand to insert those genes," says Dr. Joseph Lane,
chairman of UCLA's Department of Orthopedic Surgery.

   "We can do this outside the body. The question is, can we do it inside the
body?"

   That question is being explored in animals, and in tissue cultures, Lane
says, and the first experiments are under way in humans with arthritis. If
everything works, he adds, genetic techniques could be used to "control wound
healing. To speed it up or, with an injury like to a tendon in the hand, to have
it heal without a scar to adjacent tissues."

   Genetic therapy isn't always a panacea, however. At the same time genes
promote the growth of useful cells, they're telling other cells "not to make
much protein," warns Dr. Henry Mankin, chief of orthopedic surgery at
Massachusetts General Hospital. "If you're dependent on a cell making protein as
part of its function, then making cells not make much protein doesn't help you.

   "Genes act under some circumstances to turn things off, and we don't always
know the circumstances. That's part of the brave new world."

   Other researchers are excited about the possibility of helping healing along
by zapping fractures with an electrical shock or with ultrasound.

   American doctors have known for more than 20 years that applying electricity
to fractures stimulates the growth of bone and promotes healing, and they've
been doing that for more than 15 years with bones that weren't healing at all.
Animal studies suggest the same procedure will promote healing of
slow-responding fractures in the wrist, ankle and elsewhere, and researchers
hope to launch studies soon to prove that.

   "It's exciting stuff . . . patients don't feel a thing," says Dr. Carl
Brighton, professor of bone and joint surgery at the University of Pennsylvania.
Someday, he adds, people with fractures could be wearing casts with tiny
electrical stimulators built in where "they wouldn't have to do anything; they
shouldn't have to change the battres, too, along with other bone repairs.

   The most promising uses for ultrasound, Heckman adds, "are frustrating
fractures where the doctor is tempted to do something more aggressive like
surgical intervention."

   Motion has been shown to help, too, although just how much and with what
injuries is the subject of intense debate.

   That debate became focused in 1980, when Dr. Robert Salter of the University
of Toronto reported that healing of joint surface cartilage in the knee was
quicker and the new cartilage stronger when subjects spent 24 hours a day, for
three weeks, on a machine that moved their leg up and down in a motion that
required no effort on their part. Salter's subjects, however, were rabbits, and
his tests looked only at cartilage injuries.

   Since 1980, Salter says, it has become clear that the procedure works at
least as well on humans, and that it works with ligaments, tendons and infected
joints as well as cartilage. Motion, he explains, enhances healing by raising
the metabolism in tissues and ensuring that operations to regrow cartilage cells
yield new cells stronger than they would have been.

   The procedure is widely used today, in Boston and around the world, but it's
also still controversial. "It really does facilitate patient care and comfort,"
says Dr. Robert Poss of Brigham and Women's Hospital. "The jury still is out on
whether it actually accelerates or promotes earlier or better healing of
tissues."

   Dr. Thomas Einhorn, professor of orthopedics at Mt. Sinai Medical School and
president of the Orthopedic Research Society, is more bullish: "I consider it
one of the major advances in orthopedics this century . . . I use CPM continuous
passive motion on total knee replacements and after I treat joint injuries . . .
on broken knees, shoulders and kneecaps, you probably should use CPM."

   But Mankin says that while CPM "sounds good and looks good and we use it,
it's not as valuable for the restoration of joint function as we originally
thought." And Dr. John Richmond, head of sports medicine at New England Medical
Center, calls CPM "questionable.

   "It's not that anything is damning - nothing says it isn't good - but
unfortunately, there's nothing that says it's good, either. And there's
certainly a downside in terms of inconvenience. If the injury is in your leg or
knee, it puts you in bed or on a couch for 3-4 weeks."

   Cam Neely knows all about that inconvenience. The Bruins star stayed in a CPM
machine 23 hours a day for three weeks after his knee surgery three years ago.
"It is hard," he says, "But I'd like to think it helped me."

   Whether the mechanism is ultrasound or electricity, CPM or some other type of
motion machine, what all these approaches have in common, says Heckman, is that
they represent a major transformation in the way doctors think about healing.
"When I was a resident 25 years ago," he recalls, "they told you all you do is
tend Mother Nature's garden in treating a fracture.

   "That's not the case, obviously. There are things you can do . . . There's an
opportunity here to affect this process positively."

   Tomorrow: New ways to prevent injuries.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1995


                             433 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            March 4, 1995, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY NEXT TREND IN TECHNOLOGY;
BATTELLE FUTURISTS ISSUE FORECAST ON 21ST CENTURY

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   The gene scene has eclipsed the computer revolution, at least in the view of
futurists at Battelle.

   The think tank at 505 King Ave. - which gets paid to keep an eye on tomorrow
- forecast this week that gene therapies will emerge as the most profitable new
technology over the next 10 years, although micro-electronics still will be big.

   A measure of the speed of the genetics revolution is that, except in terms of
agricultural trends, gene mapping and therapy weren't mentioned in ''America
2000,'' a 1983 Battelle forecast that ceded the future to computers.

   Neither were high-definition TV and mobile energy sources, such as fuel cells
- both ranked high in Battelle's new survey.

   At the same time, other technologies that looked like hot properties 12 years
ago have dropped off the radar of present-day futurists.

   Among them are robotics, energy-saving technologies and alternative energy
sources, including municipal waste incinerators.

   This all goes to show that trying to peer around the turn of the century is
risky, even when the milestone is but five years away.

   Stephen Millett, head of Battelle's technology-management group, issued a
warning Tuesday with his group's list of the top 10 high-tech investments
through 2005.

   ''This is not inevitable,'' he said at a business seminar at Battelle. ''What
we're saying is that opportunity exists if an effort is made.''

   The engine for gene therapy is the Human Genome project, organized by the
United States in 1989 to identify and determine the function of the estimated
100,000 genes in human cells. The project, which won't be completed until after
the turn of the century, is expected to aid in the fight against about 3,500
diseases.

   At the briefing, Craig Hassler, a Battelle research leader, said the project
should produce ''fairly significant products'' in the next 10 years. Also on the
agenda, however, are ethical problems, including how the new genetic information
will be used.

   Genetics, Hassler said, ''is at the same point where the microcomputer
industry was 10 to 15 years ago.''

   Battelle's 1983 report ranked microprocessors as the most promising
technology of the future.

   ''America 2000'' also foresaw rapid advances in the 1990s in
telecommunications and the development of new composites and materials.

   John Griffin, the economist who was the project chief for the '83 report,
said most of his predictions proved on the mark.

   ''Even robotics held up pretty well when you consider that automation since
1983 has been integrated throughout the production process,'' he said.

   Griffin, now retired from Battelle and a partner in Celeste & Sabety, an
industrial consulting company, said another big change from the 1980s is the
stability of world energy markets.

   In 1983, Battelle forecast that the United States in the 1990s - feeling
threatened by its dependence on foreign oil - would move aggressively to promote
energy conservation; encourage greater production of domestic oil, gas and coal;
and invest heavily to develop new power sources.

   None of that happened.

   ''A lot of that, frankly, is attributable to a much more stable world
environment where the threats forcing markets toward renewable resources have
stabilized,'' Griffin said. ''That's unfortunate because the conditions are
still there.'' Another big change since the 1980s, Griffin said, is the speed
with which new technologies have moved into consumer products.

   This is especially true in electronics, where Millett sees more personalized
products.

   ''What I see happening is basically the development of a hand-held computer
which is interactive and sends data back from a distance,'' he said.

   Such shirt-pocket computers would be voice-activated and capable of receiving
voice messages and data, he predicted.

   If you think that sounds like Star Trek, he said, you're right.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Chris Russell/ Dispatch, Dr. Robert Marrero, left, and senior
research associate Courtney Miller are part of a Battelle team determining which
technologies will be big in 10 years. Gene therapies could be the most
profitable.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1995


                             434 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 35;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 99 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
IMMUNE RESPONSE STOCK FALLS AFTER FINANCING NEWS Shares of the Immune

BYLINE: Reuters

BODY:

   Response Corporation, a biopharmaceutical company in Carlsbad, Calif., fell
yesterday after it said that Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. would stop financing its
development of a therapeutic vaccine for AIDS. Immune Response fell 81.25 cents,
or 18.6 percent, to $3.5625 in Nasdaq trading. Rhone-Poulenc, the United States
pharmaceutical arm of Rhone-Poulenc S.A. of France, decided to end its research
support for the vaccine to focus on core therapeutic areas and key technologies,
like cell and gene therapy. Immune Response has regained all manufacturing,
marketing and distribution rights.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1995


                             435 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             March 2, 1995 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C07

LENGTH: 1341 words

HEADLINE: NEW DIRECTOR OF PRIMATE CENTER CONFRONTS CHALLENGES OF CHANGE

BYLINE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Thursday, March 2, 1995 NEW DIRECTOR OF PRIMATE CENTER CONFRONTS CHALLENGES
OF CHANGE

   Summary: Work space for researchers is in short supply, and the  recent
affiliation with OHSU offers expanded opportunities

   ``So much of what is in the news today, particularly in the hot area of
genetic therapy, all comes out of very fundamental research. Some of it in
frogs or drosophila or mice.'' -- M. Susan Smith, director, Oregon  Regional
Primate Center

   The new director of the Oregon Regional Primate Center is land rich and
laboratory poor.

   M. Susan Smith's Hillsboro domain includes 250 prime acres, 55 scientists
and about 2,200 primates, but it is ``very tight'' on researchers' work space,
she says. And that's not her only concern:

   *The primate center is on the brink of monumental change because of its
recent affiliation with Oregon Health Sciences University.

   *Westside light rail, with two stations that abut primate center property  at
the 185th and 206th street stations, is virtually knocking at her door.

   *Smith is working with the city of Hillsboro, land-use planners and
neighbors to meet the challenge of encroaching development in the area.

   *And she foresees a time when OHSU and center scientists, complemented by
investigators at the nearby Oregon Graduate Institute, will be a magnet for  the
biotechnology industry.

   ``Our concern is that we need to be able to continue to do the research  that
we do here,'' Smith said. ``We need to have control over how our land is
developed, the kinds of things we can build here.''

   The center's rhesus monkeys are held in a variety of housing environments  on
the campus.

   ``We are a primate center, and we have to be concerned about being able to
protect our animals as the population density in this area increases,'' Smith
said.

   So far interactions with the city of Hillsboro, Tri-Met and her neighbors
have been excellent, in her view. Although she sees the affiliation with OHSU
as a ``win-win situation,'' it still has its challenges.

   The new connection with OHSU came about last June when the Medical Research
Foundation, owners and operators of the primate center, merged with the Oregon
Health Sciences University Foundation, combining assets of about $200  million.

   ``It is to our advantage to become as affiliated with OHSU as we can be,  and
certainly in the last six months there are a number of things that are  better
because we are affiliated, even though we are not totally a part of  OHSU,''
Smith said.

   The Oregon primate center, which was the first in the country when it  opened
in 1962, is the only one of the seven national primate centers that is  not
formally a part of a university.

   The primate centers were established so scientists from various disciplines
could study, conduct research and train others in programs using nonhuman
primates. The Oregon center is supported by an annual core grant from the
National Institutes of Health of about $5 million.

   There has always been scientific exchange between primate center and OHSU
researchers, Smith said.

   Dr. Peter O. Kohler, OHSU president, said the stronger affiliation with the
primate center should enhance joint research activities and the ability to
compete nationally for first-class investigators.

   OHSU's 400 scientists are working on 700 projects. Last year they earned  $65
million in grants. The primate center's scientists have about $5 million  in
grants.

   Primate center and OHSU scientists are joining forces in research programs
that seek understanding of human reproduction, viral infections such as AIDS
and brain development and disorders.

   But OHSU researchers won't be moving out to the primate center anytime  soon.
Laboratory space is scarce. As it is now, OHSU researchhers who want to
collaborate must share a center colleague's independent laboratory or use some
general core laboratory space.

   ``So one of our challenges for the future is going to be to get resources  to
build another research building,'' Smith said.

   In addition, she's interested in the research park concept, which might
include the primate center and neighbors at the Oregon Graduate Institute,
AmberGlen, the Oregon Center for Advanced Technical Education and the Center
for Advanced Partnerships in Technology and Learning.

   There is no question that more research space would attract well-funded
scientists, and there is no doubt that the affiliation with OHSU would tap new
avenues of financial support, Smith said.

   ``We are not alone anymore,'' Smith said. ``We can certainly take the
advantage that is available at the OHSU foundation. They are good at this and
so it will be good for us too, I think.''

   Institutions such as OHSU and the primate center generally rely on
investigators to generate their own research money. This sort of funding is  the
backbone of biomedical research in this country, but nationally only a  fraction
of grant applications gets funded.

   ``I don't see us costing Oregonians anything. On the contrary, I think we
have the potential for adding to the economy,'' Smith said.

   ``We are a little business. We employ about 200 people, and we certainly
hope that we will contribute to the economic expansion of this area.''

   A vital challenge for all scientists in biomedical research is to be more
effective in getting their message out about the importance of nonhuman
primates to biomedical research, she said.

   ``So much of what is in the news today, particularly in the hot area of
genetic therapy, all comes out of very fundamental research. Some of it in
frogs or drosophila or mice,'' Smith said.

   It is not until disease strikes that some people get educated about
biomedical research, she said. Such people become backers of animal research
because they begin to understand that research is often the only way to make
progress against a disease.

   ``It is very hard to cure something or fix it if you don't really  understand
the underlying mechanisms that are causing the problems to begin  with,'' Smith
said.

   The primate center has had no recent problems with animal rights advocates,
something Smith attributes to an open-door policy allowing educational tours  so
people can see how the animals are housed and cared for.

   ``Certainly the federal guidelines on how one must take care of animals are
very strict,'' Smith said. ``If only we could care as much about our
children.''

   Smith sees primate centers playing a greater role in the development of
drugs because pharmaceutical companies want access to nonhuman primates  without
the expense of establishing their own facilities.

   ``It varies, but if you went out on the market and bought an adult rhesus
monkey, it would probably cost $2,500, so that is sizable,'' she said.

   Formerly a professor of physiology at the University of Pittsburgh School  of
Medicine, Smith is a neuroscientist and neuroendocrinologist.

   In her own research she is interested in the way brain mechanisms regulate
female reproductive functions such as lactation and menstrual cycles. And she
is doing basic research into the consequences of aging and menopause on brain
function.

   About 60 percent of the research at the center involves using nonhuman
primates, and the rest involves mice, rats and frogs.

   ``We are pretty much self-sustaining in terms of breeding, and the  advantage
of breeding your own monkeys is that you can make them disease  free,'' she
said.

   On a basic scientific level, the animals are involved in the study of
diseases such as AIDS, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and problems  of
female reproduction such as endometriosis.

   ``The advantage that we have here is we have the ability to get involved in
vertical integration of scientific information where you can take information
that you gain at the most basic fundamental level -- perhaps a frog or a mouse
-- and because we have resources here, we can make rapid leaps into
applications into a nonhuman primate,'' she said.

   ``And because of our affiliation with OHSU, we can begin to frame things as
potentially clinically relevant pieces of scientific information.''

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             436 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                February 28, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: Gene Implanted in Mice Via Pregnant Mothers

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS have implanted a gene into mouse embryos by injecting it into the
pregnant mothers, in a surprising achievement that may someday enable doctors to
treat genetic diseases in the womb.

   Copies of the implanted gene remained active after the mice were born, the
researchers reported.

   Experts said the technique might eventually provide a way to prevent serious
damage done before birth by some genetic diseases. The conditions produce
results like blindness, mental retardation and disfiguring skull malformations.

    "This broadens the horizons on the way in which we can use gene transfer to
treat human disease," said Dr. Kenneth Culver, who until recently headed the
Human Gene Therapy Research Institute in Des Moines.

   Dr. James Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania, called the findings an exciting surprise.

   The results are reported in the March issue of the journal Nature Genetics by
researchers at the National Cancer Center Research Institute in Tokyo and the
Chiba University School of Medicine in Japan.

   One author, Dr. Masaaki Terada, at the cancer center, cautioned in a
telephone interview that the prospects for treating human disease with the
technique were "a long, long shot."

   The researchers selected a readily detectable gene, connected copies of it to
microscopic fatty bubbles and injected the combination into tail veins of
pregnant mice. The experiment was not intended to treat any disease. Scientists
simply wanted to know whether the technique for implanting genes would work.

   The genes were no longer detectable 14 months after the mice were born. They
had remained separate from the set of genes that are passed on as cells replace
themselves.

   Researchers found no evidence that mice given the gene before birth could
later pass it on to their own offspring. That is encouraging because scientists
do not want treatment of a patient to affect the genetic inheritance of future
generations.

   The technique was surprisingly efficient at implanting genes because of the
way the placenta handled the fatty bubbles, said Dr. David Curiel, director of
the gene therapy program at the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

   Dr. Culver said the technique might be used in animals to reveal how genetic
flaws caused birth defects, and then eventually used to implant genes to prevent
those defects in people.

   When doctors are alerted by a family history of defects and do genetic
testing, conditions like dwarfism, disfiguring skull malformations and other
skeletal problems might be preventable in the womb, said Richard Leavitt of the
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation.

   "We'd be talking about a very substantial number of individuals," Dr. Leavitt
said, referring to those who might avoid birth defects.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1995


                             437 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        February 28, 1995 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: MICE-EMBRYO GENE IMPLANT OFFERS HOPE

BYLINE: By MALCOLM RITTER AP science writer

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists implanted a gene into mouse embryos by injecting it into the
pregnant mothers, a surprising result that may someday let doctors treat genetic
diseases in the womb.

   Copies of the implanted gene remained active after the mice were born,
researchers reported.

   Experts said the technique may eventually provide a way to prevent serious
damage done before birth by some genetic diseases. The conditions produce such
results as blindness, mental retardation and skull malformations.

   "This broadens the horizons on the way in which we can use gene transfer to
treat human disease," said Dr. Kenneth Culver, who until recently was head of
the Human Gene Therapy Research Institute in Des Moines, Iowa.

   Dr. James Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania, called the findings an exciting surprise.

   The results are reported in the March issue of the journal Nature Genetics by
researchers at the National Cancer Center Research Institute in Tokyo and the
Chiba University School of Medicine in Japan.

   One author, Dr. Masaaki Terada at the cancer center, cautioned that he
considers the prospects for treating human disease with the technique "a long,
long shot."

   The researchers selected a readily detectable gene, connected copies of it to
microscopic fatty bubbles and injected the combination into tail veins of
pregnant mice. The experiment was not aimed at treating any disease; scientists
simply wanted to know whether the technique for implanting genes would work.

   The genes were no longer detectable 14 months after the mice were born.  They
had remained separate from the set of genes that are passed on as cells replace
themselves.

   Researchers found no evidence that mice given the gene before birth could
later pass it on to their own offspring. That's encouraging because scientists
don't want treatment of a patient to affect the genetic inheritance of future
generations.

   The technique was surprisingly efficient at implanting genes because of the
way the placenta handled the fatty bubbles, said Dr. David Curiel, director of
the gene therapy program at the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

   Culver said the technique might be used in animals to reveal how genetic
flaws cause birth defects, and then eventually used to implant genes to prevent
those defects in people.

   When doctors are alerted by a family history of defects and do genetic
testing, conditions such as dwarfism, disfiguring skull malformations and other
skeletal problems might be preventable in the womb, said Richard Leavitt of the
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation.

   "We'd be talking about a very substantial number of individuals (avoiding)
very burdensome birth defects," Leavitt said.

   Wilson said the technique may someday give doctors a way to prevent
irreversible damage before birth from a class of relatively uncommon genetic
diseases that cause such symptoms as blindness and retardation by the time of
birth or shortly thereafter.

   Depending on how long an implanted gene worked, patients might still need
other therapy after birth, he said. No later therapy is yet available for most
of these diseases, but Wilson said developing treatments is a matter of time.

   Curiel said even if an implanted gene works only temporarily, that might be
long enough to help with some diseases. For example, it might head off a
relatively common condition called respiratory distress syndrome, in which lungs
of premature babies are too immature to work properly, he said.

   For diseases that cause liver failure in newborns, planting a gene before
birth might give doctors more time to find an organ donor to provide a permanent
fix, he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1995


                             438 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     February 27, 1995 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1606 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL SCHOOL GOES FOR THE GOLD ;
CWRU NEARS TOP TEN IN RESEARCH MONEY

BYLINE: By JOHN FUNK; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

DATELINE: CLEVELAND

BODY:

   A decade after its leaders began devising a plan to awaken Case Western
Reserve University's medical school from a self-described coma, the school is on
the verge of cracking medicine's financial Top Ten.

   CWRU now ranks 12th out of 128 medical schools in the nation for medical
research funding from the government's National Institutes of Health.

   In 1994, CWRU's medical school received nearly $97 million in research grants
from NIH - twice what it did just five years earlier.

   The NIH-funded research at Case Western covers projects from Alzheimer's
disease to pediatrics.

   "They do everything. That is a well-diversified institution," said Dr. Jerome
Green, director of NIH's Division of Research Grants in Washington.

   While a significant portion of the NIH-funded research is conducted at its
primary affiliate, University Hospitals, researchers holding CWRU faculty status
are also working at MetroHealth Medical Center, Mt. Sinai Medical Center, the
Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit.

   CWRU affiliated in 1992 with Henry Ford, a hospital that has developed a
successful managed-care program that uses preventive care and other strategies
to keep medical costs down. CWRU is now able to offer medical residencies in
Detroit to students interested in becoming primary-care doctors. Research grants
to Henry Ford accounted for $15 million of the $97 million in federal funding.

   Still, the grants make CWRU the largest recipient of federal medical research
funding in Ohio, dwarfing the $48.1 million received by Ohio State University
and the $40.8 million for the University of Cincinnati, according to Green. The
Cleveland Clinic received about $20 million in NIH grants last year.

   The mega-funding is the result of a growth strategy initiated seven years
ago, said Dr. Adel Mahmoud, director of medicine at University Hospitals and
chairman of the department of medicine at CWRU.

   In 1988, CWRU ranked 25th in the nation with $41.4 million in NIH grants.

   Mahmoud said Cleveland Tomorrow, a nonprofit organization that represents the
area's top 50 companies, commissioned a study of Cleveland's medical centers and
concluded that CWRU had the best chance to become a national biomedical research
center if it developed strategies to attract talent and dollars.

   "The reason we are where we are today is that we calculated that we had to
increase our research funding at a rate higher than the Top Ten" academic
research centers, Mahmoud said. "In 1987, we drew a curve [of funding rate
increases]. We knew we had to jump the curve."

   That meant investing heavily in basic science research in order to have the
facilities and equipment to compete for big NIH grants, said Dr. Neil S.
Cherniack, dean of the medical school.

   The investment included the construction of the $69 million,
200,000-square-foot Celeste Biomedical Research Building completed in 1992.

   It also meant the recruitment of nationally ranked researchers with the
ability and reputation to attract NIH funding.

   Seven years ago, the department of medicine had two researchers who received
$1 million grants, Mahmoud said. Today there are 14. Overall, the medical school
staff has grown by about 60 during the same period.

   And NIH funding has steadily increased at the rate of 7 percent to 15 percent
a year, Cherniack said.

   Mahmoud said the effort has changed the institution from one that had been
"in a coma" to a financially and scientifically aggressive competitor with a
national reputation.

   "The Top Ten schools, built with plans like ours, are aggressive," he said.
"The other 110 are in a coma. We were not part of this culture 10 years ago.
When I said we were going to be in the Top Ten, people said I was cuckoo!"

   This tough attitude means that researchers who don't get their grant
applications approved within a year or 18 months "have to develop alternate
plans" for employment, Mahmoud said.

   It also means being able to provide cutting-edge patient care.

   "It has paid off in clinical departments being able to link research with
research going on in basic science departments," Cherniack said. It has allowed
the doctors in the clinical departments to remain on the cutting edge and to
develop new treatments.

   An example is "gene therapy," injecting a patient with altered genetic
material to help the body's own defenses fight certain diseases. "To develop
gene therapy, there had to be an infrastructure of basic science in molecular
biology," Mahmoud said.

   The department of neurosciences is an example of the buildup of basic science
at CWRU. The department did not exist five years ago.

   It was started with $500,000 in foundation grants, said Chairwoman Story C.
Landis. Today it has a staff of 75 and is ranked seventh in the nation in the
race for federal dollars.

   Although the department's focus is basic science, its members routinely
collaborate with researchers in clinical departments seeking answers to specific
treatment problems.

   For example, researchers in neuroscience and neurology, a clinical
department, are investigating why brain cells quickly die when deprived of
blood, such as after a stroke.

   "If you know why they die, then you have a reasonable chance of developing a
therapy that prevents that death," she said. "Now they are working on a
[strategy] to intervene very early, to dissolve blood clots within six hours."

   Landis, a former Harvard University faculty member, said it is common at CWRU
- but rare at other universities - for members of several departments to
collaborate on grant applications.

   The economic impact of the medical school's buildup can be seen in the growth
of local biotech companies, Cherniack said.

   According to the Edison Biotechnology Center, 10 new companies have sprung up
in Cleveland since 1985 based on research done at CWRU/University Hospitals, the
Cleveland Clinic Foundation and other Cleveland hospitals.

   James Kovach, former director of the technology liaison program for Edison,
worked closely with researchers at the Clinic and CWRU over the last two years
"trying to identify platform technology upon which new companies could be
formed." He assisted in the formation of two new companies.

   Kovach next week takes over as director of technology management at CWRU. His
mission is to find research results that can be patented and licensed for
manufacture.

   CWRU researchers filed seven patent applications related to biomedical
research in 1992, four in 1993 and about eight in 1994.

   "I think we can do better," said Kovach, adding that licenses are more
important than patent filings because licenses lead to production.

   "This new technology really will help Cleveland develop. It will increase the
well-being of patients. And I think it will prove to be a way of saving money in
the health care of tomorrow," he said.

   Though he could not cite a specific analysis, Mahmoud said for each research
dollar that flows into the medical school, five dollars in spending is generated
in the Greater Cleveland economy.

   Cherniack summed it up this way: "This is better than Gateway. This $97
million comes from Washington. It's not a sin tax, not just from people in the
area. It is a true inflow of funds to Greater Cleveland."

   Mahmoud said that in the next five years he believes CWRU and University
Hospitals can move from a ranking of 12th to fourth or fifth in the annual
competition for NIH dollars. He said University Hospitals will have to build
another research building to do it, since the Celeste building is already at
capacity.

   Landis said that will be interesting politically.

   "NIH is only growing by inflation. Further expansion here will entail the
loss of funding in other places," she said.

   NIH's Green said the agency today has only enough money to fund 20 percent to
25 percent of the grant applications - down from the 75 percent rate of 30 years
ago. He said the number of applicants has increased and the amount requested for
each research project has also increased.

   CWRU's dramatic research buildup has some less tangible but important
benefits besides improving patient care, Mahmoud said.

   "It's important because we live in a class society. Consequently, to be part
of the national scene, part of the national decision-making process ... you
really need to grow," he said.

   "We want CWRU-UH to be like the Cleveland Orchestra, the pride of the
community. The money and the fame will increase our ability to enhance the
quality of life and provide better health care, better education."

   MEDICAL RESEARCH'S TOP 20

   These university medical schools received the most medical research money in
1994 from the government's National Institutes of Health.

   1. Johns Hopkins University $188 million 2. University of California, San
Francisco $169.9 million 3. Yale University $146.6 million 4. Washington
University (St. Louis) $134.9 million 5. University of Washington (Seattle)
$126.3 million 6.  University of Pennsylvania $126.1 million 7. Stanford
University $118.9 million 8. Duke University $115.7 million 9. Columbia
University $112.4 million 10. University of Michigan $108.3 million 11.
University of California, San Diego $104.8 million 12. Case Western Reserve
University $96.6 million 13. University of Pittsburgh $92.2 million 14.
University of North Carolina $90.4 million 15. University of California, Los
Angeles $90.2 million 16. Baylor University $88.9 million 17. Harvard University
$82.8 million 18. University of Alabama at Birmingham $82.1 million 19.
University of Colorado $76.6 million 20. Albert Einstein College of Medicine
(New York) $74.8 million

GRAPHIC: PLAIN DEALER; CHART

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1995


                             439 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                February 22, 1995, Wednesday, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 378 words

HEADLINE: AIDS TREATMENT TO USE BABOON CELLS; MARROW TRANSPLANT AIMS TO BOOST
IMMUNITY

BYLINE: William Allen Post-Dispatch Science Writer

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:


   Frustrated by failed AIDS treatments, scientists are about to try an unusual
tactic: transplanting baboon cells into humans.

   The researchers hope to transfer the baboon cells' natural ability to win at
hand-to-hand combat with the AIDS virus - a feat that humans cannot match.

   "At a time when many believe that vaccine development is not going to be
effective, our rationale is to try a natural form of gene therapy," said one of
the scientists, Dr. Suzanne Ildstad.

   Ildstad is a transplant surgeon at the University of Pittsburgh. She and AIDS
researchers at the University of California at San Francisco plan to take
purified bone-marrow cells from a baboon and transplant them into an AIDS
patient. Ildstad reported the plan Tuesday at the annual meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.

   Bone marrow manufactures many components of the body's immune system, which
defends against viruses, bacteria and other invading organisms. The human immune
system cannot defend itself against the AIDS virus, but cells from the baboon
immune system appear resistant to the main AIDS virus, HIV-1.

   In experiments with animals, Ildstad and other researchers have shown that
immune cells of one species can be transplanted into another without help from
immunosuppressive drugs. These drugs block the recipient's immune system from
attacking the transplants.

   The baboon-to-human transplant should begin on an AIDS patient in San
Francisco in the next few months, Ildstad said. She declined to identify the
patient except to say that he had an advanced case of the disease. Three other
people may get the treatment.

   Researchers will transplant baboon bone-marrow cells that have been purified
to raise the concentration of key immune cells and to make them more compatible
with humans. They are known as facilitator cells and stem cells. An experiment
three years ago in Pittsburgh with unpurified cells failed to have an effect on
an advanced AIDS patient, who eventually died.

   If they take hold, the transplanted cells should manufacture cells that can
overpower the virus. Ildstad said she was "cautiously optimistic" that the
experiment would succeed in restoring at least some of the patient's
disease-fighting ability.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1995


                             440 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                February 22, 1995, Wednesday, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: AIDS TREATMENT TO USE BABOON CELLS

BYLINE: William Allen Post-Dispatch Science Writer

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:


   Frustrated by failed AIDS treatments, scientists are about to try an unusual
tactic: transplanting baboon cells into humans.

   The researchers hope to transfer the baboon cells' natural ability to win at
hand-to-hand combat with the AIDS virus - a feat that humans cannot match.

   "At a time when many believe that vaccine development is not going to be
effective, our rationale is to try a natural form of gene therapy," said one of
the scientists, Dr. Suzanne Ildstad.

   Ildstad is a transplant surgeon at the University of Pittsburgh. She and AIDS
researchers at the University of California at San Francisco plan to take
purified bone-marrow cells from a baboon and transplant them into an AIDS
patient. Ildstad reported the plan Tuesday at the annual meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.

   Bone marrow manufactures many components of the body's immune system, which
defends against viruses, bacteria and other invading organisms. The human immune
system cannot defend itself against the AIDS virus, but cells from the baboon
immune system appear resistant to the main AIDS virus, HIV-1.

   In experiments with animals, Ildstad and other researchers have shown that
immune cells of one species can be transplanted into another without help from
immunosuppressive drugs. These drugs block the recipient's immune system from
attacking the transplanted cells.

   The baboon-to-human transplant should begin on an AIDS patient in San
Francisco in the next few months, Ildstad said. She declined to identify the
patient except to say that he had an advanced case of the disease. Three other
people may get the treatment, depending on how the first patient responds.

   Researchers will transplant baboon bone-marrow cells that have been purified
to raise the concentration of key immune cells and to make them more compatible
with humans. They are known as facilitator cells and stem cells. An experiment
three years ago in Pittsburgh with unpurified cells failed to have an effect on
an advanced AIDS patient, who eventually died.

   If they take hold, the transplanted cells should manufacture cells that can
overpower the virus. Ildstad said she was "cautiously optimistic" that the
experiment would succeed in restoring at least some of the patient's
disease-fighting ability.

   Some scientists expressed doubt.

   "It's a very good experiment to do, but I would be pleasantly surprised if it
fulfills everything we would like," said Dr. Fritz Bach, a researcher at Harvard
University Medical School in Boston.

   The baboon cells may not survive long enough to have an impact, he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1995


                             441 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 21, 1995 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 917 words

HEADLINE: UCSD team hopes to cure babies with HIV

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:

   ATLANTA -- A team of UCSD researchers working on the frontiers of medicine is
preparing a novel gene therapy technique to treat infants born with the AIDS
virus. By giving newborns transfusions of genes that could protect their immune
systems against the virus, the researchers hope to prevent the fatal disease
from ever developing in those children. "There are not many options for treating
infants now," said Flossie Wong-Staal, a University of California San Diego AIDS
researcher who will present the gene therapy strategy today at the American
Association for the Advancement of Science's annual meeting here. "In the long
term, this is the only approach that can offer a cure." Wong-Staal expects to
seek federal approval by spring to begin trying the experimental technique in
newborns.

   The approval process could take several months. Almost 20 percent of babies
of mothers infected with the AIDS virus themselves carry the virus at birth.

   They typically develop the disease by age 2 and die within a few years
despite drug treatments that attempt to attack the virus.

   As of last June, 5,734 children under 13 in the United States had been
diagnosed as having AIDS, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control.
The gene therapy strategy involves taking blood from the umbilical cord when the
baby is born, then arming immature cells in the blood with a gene that produces
a scissorslike molecule that has been shown to snip vital components of the AIDS
virus -- the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV. Doctors would then transfuse
the genetically altered cells back into an infant, where the cells will mature
to produce crucial blood and immune cells, all of which then will contain the
scissorslike molecule made by the gene.

   The cells should then escape infection because the scissors can cut the
genetic material of any invading HIV, leaving the virus unable to commandeer the
cell's own machinery to survive or reproduce. "We're stopping the virus," said
Wong-Staal, who is known for her contributions to understanding how the AIDS
virus works.

   If the gene therapy is successful, the children should never develop AIDS,
which kills people by destroying their immune system and leaving them vulnerable
to a host of infections. The gene therapy would then be considered "a cure," she
said.

   The technique tries to eradicate the cause of the disease, the HIV, not just
treat symptoms. The first trials primarily will assess the safety of the
technique, and refinements probably will be necessary to get to the point of
saving lives, she stressed. The infant treatment is similar to another
experimental gene therapy she has preliminary federal approval to try in
AIDS-infected adults. In adults, the immune system's infection-fighting T-cells
will be armed with the molecular scissors and re-injected. That treatment
attempts to slow the progress of the disease by preserving the blood's vital
T-cells, which are typically killed by AIDS. The strategy in infants goes much
farther, however, by providing a continuing supply of healthy cells.

   The adult treatment could need to be repeated periodically, and protecting
the adults' T-cells alone may not be sufficient to stop the disease, she added.
Infants are more susceptible to the ravages of AIDS than adults because infants'
immune systems have not fully developed.

   The gene therapy is "a pre-emptive strike" against the disease, Wong-Staal
said. The technique adds the therapeutic gene to what are called stem cells,
those that later will differentiate to form an array of different blood cells,
including some critical to maintaining a healthy immune system.

   The umbilical cord is a rich, ready source of these stem cells. Once
reimplanted into the infants, the stem cells continue to make not only new blood
and immune cells but a new generation of stem cells, too.

   The supply of genetically boosted and protected cells will not run out, she
said.

   The molecular scissors that protects the cells is what scientists call a
ribozyme. Wong-Staal has evidence from the lab that the stem cell replacement
could work in infants.

   She has shown in lab dishes that genetically boosted stem cells from infants
can resist HIV infection. The study will be used as evidence of the treatment's
potential benefit when she seeks permission from the National Institutes of
Health and the Food and Drug Administration to begin treatments. But questions
about the therapy's success remain, Wong-Staal said, adding, "There are a lot of
unknowns still." Even after stem cells are treated in infected babies, some
other blood and immune cells will be carrying HIV, and it is unclear whether
these will cause AIDS, Wong-Staal said.

   It may be that the children could tolerate some infected cells without
developing the disease, she said. Doctors might also find that they would need
to use radiation bursts to kill the infected immune cells in the child's body
and "reconstitute" the immune system with fresh injections of the genetically
boosted stem cells, she said. While stressing that it will take a number of
studies to perfect the treatment, Wong-Staal said she remains optimistic about
its potential. "Conceptually, it's very exciting," she said.

   "We have ways of fine tuning the therapy so that it should work." Wong-Staal
also imagines one day harvesting stem cells from the blood of adults with HIV
and genetically boosting those cells, too, with the ribozyme.

   Any such tests would be more difficult and would await the results of the
infant trial, she said.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: FLOSSIE WONG-STAAL | AIDS researcher at UCSD
(A-4:1,2); PHOTOBY: Union-Tribune / JERRY RIFE

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             442 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   February 21, 1995, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: Health; Z15, , HE

LENGTH: 998 words

HEADLINE: BOOKS; A History of Progress

BYLINE: Lawrence G. Proulx, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:


   The Limits of Medicine:

   How Science Shapes Our Hope for the Cure

   By Edward S. Golub, PhD

   Times Books, New York

   258 pp; $ 23

   The march of medical progress seems brisk these days. But wait. "We think we
are being swept along in the flow of history," writes biologist Edward S. Golub.
"We aren't."

   Golub reminds us that, progress notwithstanding, we are still all going to
die. And it is to his credit that, with a message so banal and so distasteful,
he has written an engaging and informative book.

   As we enter the 21st century, Golub wants us to know exactly where our
present richness of health came from, so that we might have more reasonable
expectations from science and redirect our efforts and dollars more
productively.

   "The Limits of Medicine" is largely a synopsis of Western medicine, starting
with the ancient Greeks. He visits Hippocrates, Galen, Jenner, Lister, Bernard,
Pasteur, Koch and other great figures, always with the intent of sharpening our
focus on the context of their work and the dimensions of their achievements. "If
we have a false understanding of the past," he writes, "we are liable to have
false hopes for the future."

   The first lesson is on how bad things used to be. Disease and death were
"constant presences" over the vast expanse of human history, and neither doctors
nor anyone else could do much about it. "The Great Man view of history tells us
little of the incredibly high rate of infant death, the even higher rate of
sickness and the appallingly short life expectancy," Golub writes. During the
reign (1643-1715) of France's Sun King, Louis XIV, "less than 10 percent of the
population reached the age of sixty." And as recently as 1885, "when my own
grandparents were alive, the infant death rate in New York City was 273 per
1,000 live births, the same percentage as in the time of Louis XIV." (For
comparison: We are scandalized that the infant death rate in D.C. is 17 per
1,000.)

   Golub sketches what it was like to live under such circumstances and how
physicians of the past conceptualized disease. But his overriding interest is in
making clear just how the improvements were made that erased those
circumstances.

   In the late 19th century, science came to understand that diseases were
caused by specific living entities. For thousands of years before, diseases were
believed to be manifestations of imbalances within the body. Even Edward
Jenner's widely hailed vaccination for smallpox at the end of the 1700s, which
in hindsight looms as a huge clue, did not change the prevailing view.

   "Because communicable diseases were still not considered separate entities
and only cranks believed in the idea of contagion, there was no attempt to
derive a general principle from Jenner's work, to try to develop vaccination
procedures for other diseases," Golub explains.

   It was not until Louis Pasteur trounced his detractors in a dramatic test of
his vaccine against anthrax in 1881, following it up four years later with a
successful vaccine against rabies, that the world recognized the enemy as
"germs." With Pasteur's work was born a reverence for scientific medicine that
has scarcely dimmed in over 100 years.

   Paradoxically, as Golub emphasizes, most of the great improvements in health
of which we today are the beneficiaries came about from sources unrelated to
vaccines and other such specific approaches. He relays the humbling message
professor Edward H. Kass of Harvard Medical School delivered in a speech to the
Infectious Disease Society of America in 1970: "Dr. Kass told them it was not
medical research that had stamped out tuberculosis, diphtheria, pneumonia and
puerperal sepsis; the primary credit for those monumental accomplishments must
go to public health, sanitation and the general improvement in the standard of
living brought about by industrialization." And much of the public health work
was accomplished by men skeptical or disdainful of the idea of disease-causing
germs.

   For example, Max von Pettenkofer, an eminent physician and chemist of Munich,
held that changes in the level of ground water created a "cholera miasma" that
caused the disease. In 1854, he wrote that he had "disposed, once and for all,
of causation by drinking water" (which is now known to be the principal cause).
But, believing in cleanliness and ventilation, he nevertheless redesigned the
water supply system of Munich in such a way that contamination was thereafter
avoided.

   Turning to the present day, Golub argues that while attention focuses on such
glamorous and all-promising research as gene therapy, we may be overlooking
humbler and perhaps more readily effective tools. In relation to AIDS, "the
tragic consequence was that although we knew the causative agent of AIDS (the
HIV virus), the manner in which the disease is spread (unprotected sex and
contaminated needles), and who were the people most at risk, we chose to put our
faith in technology."

   He suggests that complex chronic diseases might be better addressed with the
"insulin mode" than the "penicillin mode," that is, by finding ways to make life
easier for those with the diseases rather than by searching mainly for complete
cures.

   Similarly, he argues that, with all the marvels of medical research, we
should not delude ourselves into thinking we're about to conquer death. With the
long lives so many of us now have, we would do well to "develop a new spiritual
sense of how we value ourselves as well as others as we grow old, and we must
learn to make a comfortable place for death at the end of our lives." It isn't
wise, he implies, "to turn the full force of modern high-tech medicine onto
someone who has lived 88 years."

   All sensible suggestions, but perhaps a bit too sensible. When Golub asks,
"As a society, do we want scientific medicine to prevent death indefinitely, to
relieve all suffering . . . ?" he seems quite sure we'll answer no!

   Writer Lawrence G. Proulx lives in Washington.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1995


                             443 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              February 17, 1995, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; NATION/WORLD BRIEFINGS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 603 words

BODY:


   DEMOCRATIC PRAYERS: Former President Jimmy Carter disclosed that he prayed
for the Democrats to win last November and even asked for the defeat of Newt
Gingrich and Oliver L. North. Carter, speaking at his annual press luncheon in
Atlanta, also advised President Clinton that his veto power could go far in
reclaiming the public's faith in the administration. "I think his veto will be
upheld," Carter said. "I think it will re-establish to some degree the faith
people have had."

   AGAINST SLAVERY: It only took 130 years, but Mississippi's Senate has voted
to abolish slavery. The House will vote next. Mississippi is the only state
never to ratify the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution outlawing slavery.
The state held out when the amendment was adopted in 1865, in part because there
was no reimbursement for freed slaves.

   TAXING PROJECT: After eight years and $ 2 billion, the IRS has made minimal
progress toward bringing its computer systems into the 1990s, congressional
auditors said. "There remains a high risk that IRS will not complete (its
modernization program) promptly and cost-effectively," said Hazel E. Edwards of
the General Accounting Office. The IRS is asking Congress for $ 1.03 billion for
its modernization program in 1996, up from $ 622 million this year.

   PRESIDENTIAL HOPEFUL: Conservative TV commentator Patrick J. Buchanan, who
lost a 1992 bid to defeat George Bush's GOP nomination for a second term as
president, took the first formal step toward a second run for the nomination by
announcing a presidential exploratory committee.

   COLLEGE SHOOTING: A man shot a woman on a college campus, leaving her in
critical condition, and then killed himself, authorities said. Student Liza
Moon, 26, was shot outside the main building of Cuyahoga Community College's
Eastern Campus in suburban Highland Hills, Ohio. The suspect, Andre Presley, 21,
apparently was an acquaintance of Moon but was not a student, the college said.

   LOWERING CHOLESTEROL: A new gene therapy has successfully lowered cholesterol
in mice and encouraged scientists to take a closer look at how a protein in the
blood affects clogged arteries, Vanderbilt University researchers reported in
the journal Science. The study also raised the possibility of someday using bone
marrow transplants for a variety of gene therapies if traditional treatments and
drugs fail to control cholesterol and related problems.

   CARGO PLANE CRASHES: A cargo jet crashed seconds after taking off late
Thursday at Kansas City International Airport, killing all three crewmen on
board, aviation officials said. The aircraft, a DC-8 owned and operated by
Burlington Air Freight was carrying kerosene.

   ASSASSINATION PERCH: More than 31 years after the assassination of President
John F. Kennedy, the Texas School Book Depository in Dallas is getting back the
window from which Lee Harvey Oswald was said to have fired the fatal shots. The
window was removed six weeks after the Nov. 22, 1963, assassination by the
building owner, D. Harold Byrd, to protect it from vandals. After his death, it
passed to his son. The depository, which now houses The Sixth Floor, an exhibit
on Kennedy's life and death, will unveil the window Monday.

   SHOOTING MARKED: Hundreds of Israeli militants, including some who sneaked
around army roadblocks, prayed at the West Bank grave of the Hebron mosque
massacre gunman on the anniversary of his death in the Jewish calendar. Baruch
Goldstein, a Brooklyn-born Jewish settler, was beaten to death last Feb. 25 by
Muslim worshippers at the Tomb of the Patriarchs after he killed 29
Palestinians.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1995


                             444 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        February 17, 1995 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: PROTEIN CUTS CHOLESTEROL IN MICE

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists say they successfully treated cholesterol-plagued mice by altering
their genes to produce a vital protein, a therapy that one day might help people
fight heart disease.

   Vanderbilt University researchers gave bone marrow transplants to mice
lacking a protein that naturally filters out cholesterol. The transplants not
only corrected the genetic defect and lowered the rodents' super-high
cholesterol, they also prevented deadly artery clogs, MacRae Linton reported
Friday in the journal Science.

   The treatment is still years away from human testing, particularly because
bone marrow transplants are so risky, Linton and colleague Sergio Fazio said.

   Still, experts praised the research for showing that the protein, called
apolipoprotein E or apoE, might dramatically fight heart disease.

   "That's very exciting," said James Wilson, director of gene therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania. "Now the idea would be for us to find the most
clinically practical way to get apoE expression in a patient."

   Some people inherit a disease in which they either produce no apoE or
defective apoE. This form of hypercholesterolemia is fairly rare, hitting an
estimated one in several thousand Americans, but those patients have cholesterol
levels so high they can suffer heart attacks in their teens.

   ApoE is found primarily in the liver, where it filters out of the blood both
dietary cholesterol and most of the body's naturally produced cholesterol. A
small amount of apoE also is in the bone marrow.

   Doctors have tried to correct apoE genes directly in the liver. Wilson, for
example, cut out parts of five patients' livers, grew a new gene in those cells
and then re-implanted them. Although the patients are doing well, nobody could
prove if the resulting apoE production actually protected their hearts - or if
it would last.

   Linton's mice models of the human disease indicate apoE does prevent
atherosclerosis, the clogging of heart arteries. And because his experiment was
done in the bone marrow, which contains the body's progenitor cells, the
resulting apoE production should be permanent.

   "It's all very theoretical now," Linton cautioned. "But the potential is
there."

   Linton injected bone marrow from healthy rodents into ones with no apoE and
raised their protein production to 12.5 percent of normal mice. Seven weeks
later, cholesterol dropped 70 percent, into the normal range, in the diseased
mice.

   The now-healthy mice and some untreated mice then were fed a high-fat diet
for three months before being autopsied. The heart arteries of the transplanted
mice contained only small amounts of plaque, while the untreated ones had huge
clogs.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1995


                             445 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 17, 1995, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 238 words

HEADLINE: Colorblind theory gets a new tint

BYLINE: Steve Timko

BODY:

    Scientists have discovered the 200-year-old theory about colorblindness may
be wrong.

   Humans, they say, may have many more genes that help them see color and
colorblindness may have similar range.

   In today's Science, Maureen and Jay Neitz, husband and wife team at the Eye
Institute at the Medical College of Wisconsin, challenge old thinking.

   It had been believed that three genes sense the three primary colors - red,
blue and yellow - and mix them to create the colors in the spectrum.

   If one gene was missing or flawed, there would be some degree of
colorblindness.

   The Neitzes, who studied DNA in blood from 27 men, found as many as 10 color
genes. Their discovery suggests that even people with normal color vision have a
unique range of color genes.

   This could make some more sensitive to reds, while others wouldn't see the
difference in burgundy and scarlet.

   "Usually, when people have (color) arguments, they think it is just a
semantic thing," Jay Neitz says. "Now we see there are bases for differences
among people who have perfectly normal color vision."

   From 8% to 10% of men suffer colorblindness, but only .4% of women, he says.
For most, that means not telling red from green, which can be dangerous while
driving a car.

   "There's no doubt that people could develop a gene therapy," he says. But
that might be expensive and dangerous. Glasses or contacts might be more
practical, he says.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1995


                             446 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   February 16, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 14D, EARNINGS

LENGTH: 307 words

BODY:


   Genetic

   Therapy Inc. ... ... ... ... ... ... Ticker ... ... ... Yesterday's

   Gaithersburg ... ... ... ... ... ... Symbol ... ... Cls. ... Chg.

   ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. .. .. GTII ... .. .. 8 3/8 .. .. - 1/8

   Period ended

   12/31 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4th qtr. ... ... Year ago ... ... Chg.

   Revenue ... ... ... ... .. .. $ 2,861 ... .. .. $ 1,751 ... .. .. +63.4%

   Net Income ... ... ... ... .. $ (3,203) .. .. .. $ (2,457) ... ... ----

   Primary EPS ... ... ... .. .. $ (0.25) ... .. .. $ (0.21) .. .. .. ----

   ... ... ... ... ... ... .. .. 12 mos. ... .. .. Year ago ... ... Chg.

   Revenue ... ... ... ... .. .. $ 17,246 ... .. .. $ 6,116 ... .. .. +182.0%

   Net Income ... ... ... ... .. $ (5,527) .. .. .. $ (8,629) ... ... ----

   Primary EPS ... ... ... .. .. $ (0.42) ... .. .. $ (0.78) .. .. .. ----

   Figures in thousands (except per share data.)

   Rent-A-Wreck

   of America Inc. ... ... ... ... ... Ticker ... ... ... ... Yesterday's

   Owings Mills ... ... ... ... ... .. Symbol ... ... Cls. ... ... Chg.

   ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... RAWA ... .. .. 1 3/8 ... .. .. unch.

   Period ended

   12/31 ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 3rd qtr. ... ... Year ago ... ...Chg.

   Revenue ... ... ... ... .. .. .. $ 764 ... ... ... $ 801 ... ... .. -4.6%

   Net Income ... ... ... ... .. .. $ 95 ... .. .. .. $ 2 ... .. .. .. +4,650%

   Primary EPS ... ... ... .. .. .. $ 0.01 ... ... .. $ (0.01) ... ... --

   ... ... ... ... ... ... .. .. .. 9 mos. ... .. .. Year ago ... .. Chg.

   Revenue ... ... ... ... .. .. .. $ 2,324 ... .. .. $ 2,667 .. .. .. -12.8%

   Net Income ... ... ... ... .. .. $ 332 ... ... ... $ (85)* .. .. .. --

   Primary EPS ... ... .. .. .. .. $ 0.05 ... ... ... $ (0.05)* ... .. --

   * Includes extraordinary gain of $ 61,667, or 2 cents per share.

   Figures in thousands (except per share data.)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1995


                             447 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 15, 1995 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for patients with colon cancer to be tested here

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   By giving a simple injection in the upper arm, some San Diego doctors soon
will treat cancer patients with genetically altered cells in hopes of boosting
their immune systems to attack tumors. The injections developed by physicians at
the San Diego Regional Cancer Center are among the first human trials of a gene
therapy technique here. The cancer center doctors have received federal
permission to proceed with the test, and they are preparing patients' cells for
injections that should begin within weeks, Dr. Robert E. Sobol said. The tests
in patients with colon cancer are designed primarily to assess the safety of the
experimental treatment, but physicians will keep a close watch for any tumor
regression, he said. Sobol and Dr. Ivor Royston will lead the study, which will
be carried out in hospitals in the Sharp HealthCare system. The injections will
contain a mere thimbleful of cells, some of which have been altered to carry a
gene that produces Interleukin-2, a protein that the doctors believe can
stimulate activity among the immune system's cancer-fighting cells.

   The injections also include cells from the patient's own tumor.

   Together, the cells serve as a target to promote activity of the immune
system's cancer fighters, specifically cytotoxic T-cells and natural killer
cells. "That immune response is hopefully propagated through the body" to seek
out the colon cancer too, Sobol said. The technique induced tumor regression in
mice that had colon tumors, prompting the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to
approve this human trial, Sobol said. It is the second gene therapy technique
under study for treatment of colon cancer.

   Doctors at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., are pursuing a different
genetic technique for the cancer that strikes about 138,000 people annually in
the United States and claims 55,000 lives. The nine patients involved in the
trial here are seriously ill.

   Standard treatments of surgery, chemotherapy and radiation have failed to
eradicate their disease. Each will receive three injections over a six-week
period while doctors assess the therapy's safety.

   They may receive additional doses if the treatment seems to be providing some
benefit against the cancer, Sobol said. The doctors will test blood samples for
evidence of a boost in the number of cancer-fighting cells, and they will
monitor the tumors for any sign of size regression. If the therapy can be shown
to provide benefit, the doctors envision the gene therapy one day as a
complement to standard cancer treatments, not a replacement, Sobol said. It
might be used with chemotherapy or radiation to fight the recurrence of cancer
after surgery.

   Microscopic pockets of the original tumor often linger in the colon or
migrate to the liver or abdomen, spawning secondary tumors. The chemotherapy and
radiation given now to eradicate such tumor traces do not always work, leading
to secondary tumors that often prove fatal. "It's another way to attack that
problem," Sobol said. He cautioned that more trials likely will be required
before it is known whether the technique works.

   "It's going to be a long road to develop this properly," Sobol said. The
trial is among a burgeoning number of clinical studies of gene therapy
techniques across the country aimed at treating cancers in the blood, prostate,
skin, lung and even the brain. Locally, Viagene Inc. has developed a gene
therapy for attacking AIDS that is being tested at UCSD Medical Center. Flossie
Wong-Staal, a UCSD researcher, is awaiting FDA permission to test another gene
therapy technique to fight AIDS. Trials of that approach, which uses a
scissorslike molecule to snip the AIDS virus inside cells, have not yet begun.
Sobol says his immune-boosting technique may be useful in attacking other
cancers, including those in the prostate, lung and breast. He and Royston
previously used a similar gene therapy technique to try to treat a virulent
brain tumor in a La Mesa woman.

   That treatment of one patient was not a formal trial like the latest one.
Rather, it was undertaken with a "compassionate plea" exemption from ordinary
rules requiring extensive evidence that the therapy might work. The exemption
was granted because all conventional treatments had failed. That woman, Clemma
Hewitt, died.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             448 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 14, 1995, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 433 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer patients added to gene therapy

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Researchers at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center are expanding gene therapy to patients with advanced breast
cancer.

   The first gene therapy trial there involved advanced ovarian
cancer.  It began last September and has enrolled four patients so
far.

   This one, under the direction of Drs.  Albert Deisseroth,
Gabriel Hortobagyi and Frankie Holmes, will test whether putting a
gene for multi-drug resistance into blood-making cells will enable
doctors to give higher doses of anti-cancer drugs.

   None of the doctors can say whether the treatment works yet.

   But it is another attempt at curbing the second greatest cancer
killer of women in the United States.

   An estimated 182,000 new cases of breast cancer are expected
to be diagnosed in the United States this year.  A total of 46,000
women are expected to die from the disease.

   Eighty percent of patients with early stage breast cancer
live at least five years after diagnosis.  But survival rates drop
dramatically when the disease is recognized and treated later.

   The 10 women who enroll in the study must be under the age
of 60, have advanced breast cancer that has relapsed after surgery
and adjuvant treatment and cannot have had a drug called Taxol,
said Deisseroth.

   Deisseroth and his colleagues will hook a piece of DNA
called the multidrug resistance gene to a virus that will then
invade peripheral blood stem cells (cells in the normal circulation
that give rise to more mature cells of the immune and blood
systems) and become part of the cells' genetic code.  There, the
gene will pursue its normal activity, pumping toxic agents (in this
case anti-cancer medications) out of the bone marrow and preventing
the drugs from destroying those cells.

   Anti-cancer drugs, for the most part, produce toxic effects
in the bone marrow.  When they destroy marrow, they eliminate the
body's ability to produce the white blood cells that protect
patients from infection.

   The body relies on 200 billion short-lived white cells
daily to ward off bacterial attacks.  When the body cannot produce
these cells, the patient contracts the disease and dies.

   To prevent that, doctors have had to limit the amount of
chemotherapy they use.

   Using the technique, doctors can blast the tumor with high
dose anti-cancer drugs, and follow quickly with smaller doses of
different anti-cancer medications over time.  Those smaller doses
act to ""clean up'' residual cancer left behind, Deisseroth said.

   Those women or their physicians interested in the study can
call Deisseroth at 792-7953.


LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1995


                             449 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           February 13, 1995, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Section C; Page 3

LENGTH: 326 words

HEADLINE: Health Watch Study to test gene therapy against HIV

BYLINE: By Amanda Husted and Bill Hendrick STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   An experimental gene transfer therapy to boost the immune systems of people
infected with the AIDS virus will be tested at West Paces Clinical Research
Inc., a private, nonprofit foundation at West Paces Medical Center.

   West Paces is one of only 15 sites nationwide, and the only one in Georgia,
involved in the two-year clinical trial, which will test a vaccine called HIV-IT
(V). The therapy was developed by Viagene Inc., a biotechnology company in San
Diego, and the Green Cross Corp. of Osaka, Japan, a pharmaceutical company.

   Researchers hope that the vaccine will keep the AIDS virus from weakening
people's immune systems or at least delay the onset of the disease. The vaccine
works by boosting CD4 cells, the T-cells that fight infections in the body.

   About 190 patients will be enrolled in the study nationwide. Some patients
will receive the vaccine - an intramuscular injection - and the rest will
receive a look-alike inactive substance; neither researchers nor patients will
know who is getting the real vaccine until the trial is concluded.

   To be eligible for the study, patients must test positive for the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS; have a CD4 T-cell count of 100
or more; be ages 18 to 65; live within a 100-mile radius of Atlanta; and if
taking the anti-AIDS drugs AZT, ddl or ddC, the patient must have been taking
them for at least three months. Women and minorities are encouraged to
participate.

   For more information, call 350-5714.

   SURVEY ON PAIN: Using a survey of more than 3,000 people age 18 and older,
the Arthritis Foundation estimates that 3.7 million people may suffer from
fibromyalgia. The disorder is characterized by widespread pain and tender
points, fatigue, disturbed sleep and stiffness. The survey suggests that it is
more widespread - and underdiagnosed - in the 50 and older population. For a
free brochure, call (800) 283-7800.

   From staff, wire and published reports

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1995


                             450 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 13, 1995, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A6

LENGTH: 1053 words

HEADLINE: At the heart of the matter;
Problems with balloon angioplasty have lead researchers to study gene therapy in
a search for alternatives

BYLINE: Byron Spice, Science Editor, Post-Gazette

BODY:


   The beauty of balloon angioplasty is its simplicity.

   A tiny balloon briefly inflated inside a coronary artery pushes aside fatty
plaque that has narrowed the artery and has caused chest pain or, perhaps, a
heart attack. It's quick, it's safe and it requires no surgery. That's why
balloon angioplasty is performed about 400,000 times each year in the United
States.

   The problem with balloon angioplasty is also simple: in as many as two out of
every five patients, the artery narrows again within a matter of months.

   A remedy has proven elusive. Researchers have tried cutting the plaque with
tiny, whirling knives, blasting it with lasers and propping it up with miniature
scaffolding. ''We really must admit to underwhelming success to date,'' said Dr.
Bryan Donohue, director of interventional cardiology at Allegheny General
Hospital.

   Faced with these apparent dead ends, researchers have begun studying how to
use gene therapy to change the behavior of the smooth muscle cells in the vessel
walls. Intriguing evidence is accumulating at a number of research centers that
these cells can be genetically reprogrammed to keep them from proliferating and
causing the artery to narrow again.

   At the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, researchers hope to use
stents -- expandable, cylindrical scaffolding placed in an artery to keep it
open -- both to hold the artery open and to deliver therapeutic genes to the
cells in the artery wall.

   Dr. Conrad Smith, director of interventional cardiology at Pitt, said the
stents alone had been shown to reduce by 10 percent the rate of re-narrowing, a
process doctors call restenonis. That translates into a restenosis rate of as
much as 30 percent, ''still an unacceptably high rate,'' he added.

   Restenosis is a consequence of the body's vigorous mechanisms for healing
itself, not of a sudden re-accumulation of plaque. When a balloon-tipped
catheter is inflated inside a narrowed artery, it not only squeezes the fatty
plaque against the artery wall, but also causes tiny tears in the lining of the
artery.

   ''The problem that we've had is the healing that occurs in response to this
controlled trauma,'' said Allegheny General's Donohue. In some patients, the
healing process is too vigorous, resulting in restenosis. That's why angioplasty
patients are routinely prescribed aspirin; the drug reduces the number of blood
platelets that signal the smooth muscle cells to proliferate, he said.

   At Pitt, researchers hope they can deliver a gene into those smooth muscle
cells to prevent an overactive healing response, Smith said.

   They would use a stent specially designed by Carnegie Mellon University
bioengineers to penetrate the residual fatty plaque and come in contact with the
smooth muscle cells, he said.

   As with many gene therapy schemes, the therapeutic gene would be packaged
within a virus specially prepared so that it does not produce illness. Viruses
can efficiently enter a cell and incorporate themselves into the cell's genetic
structure; the therapeutic gene thus would take advantage of these viral
mechanisms to insert itself into the cells.

   Smith said these viral packages would be attached to the outside of the
stents with a gel developed by Pitt's artificial heart program. The gel degrades
over a period of two weeks, providing an extended opportunity for the genes to
''transfect'' the smooth muscle cells.

   A major question is which gene should be transferred. Unlike gene therapy for
a congenital condition such as cystic fibrosis, researchers aren't trying to
replace a missing or defective gene. Instead, Smith said, they have to find a
gene that will change the cell's biochemistry in more subtle ways.

   A leading contender for use in the Pitt experiments is the inducible nitric
oxide synthase, or iNOS, gene, which was isolated by David Geller, then a
research fellow in Dr. Timothy Billiar's lab at Pitt, in collaboration with
researchers at Johns Hopkins University.

   Cells with an active iNOS gene can make nitric oxide, a molecule that dilates
blood vessels, prevents blood clots, stops the growth of smooth muscle cells and
reduces inflammation that can stimulate smooth muscle growth, Billiar said.

   The iNOS gene produces an enzyme that produces a thousand times more nitric
oxide than two other enzymes that produce nitric oxide, Billiar said. That makes
iNOS attractive for treating cardiovascular disease.

   ''It may have a number of therapeutic uses,'' he said, noting it may also
prove useful for treating some cancers and some viruses. ''It's all in the
hypothesis stage.''

   Other research centers reportedly have seen encouraging results of gene
therapy in animals using the other, less active forms of the nitric oxide
enzyme, Billiar said, but no reports have been published. ''There's a lot of
enthusiasm now,'' he added. ''It's being pursued by some good labs.''

   But the possible choices for therapeutic genes are many. Researchers at the
universities of Michigan and Chicago, for instance, recently reported on animal
experiments suggesting that a tumor suppressor gene could reduce restenosis
rates, Billiar noted.

   Clinical trials of the iNOS gene could begin in two or three years, if animal
studies suggest ''a night and day response'' to the gene therapy, Billiar said,
noting studies in pigs already have begun in his lab. Smith is beginning pig
studies of the stent.

   Clinical trials for a different type of gene therapy for vascular disease
began last fall at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Brighton, Mass. Doctors there
hope to avoid the need for either angioplasty or bypass surgery by transferring
a gene for producing vascular endothelial growth factor into smooth muscle
cells. The vegF gene encourages the growth of additional blood vessels around a
blocked or narrowed area.

   The initial trials are being performed in patients with narrowed leg
arteries, but the technique might eventually be used for heart patients.

   Allegheny General's Donohue, contending that it is too soon to determine what
genes are worth delivering, sees potential in using stents to deliver an
antibody, called IIb,IIIA, to the cell wall. Like chewing gum in a door lock,
the antibody keeps platelets from aggregating at the site and thus helps prevent
growth of the smooth muscle cells.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Daniel
Marsula/Post-Gazette; University of Pittsburgh Cardiology Department:
(Cardiovascular gene therapy)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1995


                             451 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1995 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                        February 11, 1995, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: Running U. of Oregon from Minneapolis;
 President's daughter in hospital here

BYLINE: Conrad deFiebre; Staff Writer

BODY:

    Dave Frohnmayer walked into his office at the University of Minnesota
Friday, checked his e-mail, voice mail and fax and had an assistant help him
with some new video teleconferencing equipment.

    There's nothing unusual about that, except for one thing: Frohnmayer is
president of the University of Oregon. His daughter's high-technology leukemia
treatment has brought him to Minnesota indefinitely, and high-tech
communications have allowed him to bring his work 1,800 miles east.

    "My staff is calling me the 'virtual president,' " Frohnmayer said with a
laugh. "I think this may be a first in higher education."

    University officials set Frohnmayer up in a spare office on the seventh
floor of the Phillips Wangensteen Building last week, four minutes by tunnel
from daughter Kirsten's bed in the University Hospital's bone-marrow transplant
unit.

    Doctors completed infusion of an unidentified donor's marrow for Kirsten,
21, early Friday. Now she and her family face a perilous 100 days when she risks
possible fatal infections or transplant rejection.  Dave Frohnmayer already has
lost one daughter to a rare congenital disease that can lead to leukemia. He
plans to be at Kirsten's side for as long as necessary, at least several weeks.

    "His family really needs him, but so do we," said Lynn Weingardt, a
University of Oregon systems specialist who joined Frohnmayer Friday to train
him in video teleconferencing.

    "In a few minutes he'll be able to see his office back in Oregon," Weingardt
told a reporter as Frohnmayer fiddled with computer commands. Sure enough, his
dark-paneled office in Eugene, Ore., and several assistants popped up on screen,
and Frohnmayer got down to business. He was briefed by his staff and dealt with
some correspondence.

    "Pretty slick," he said after signing off. "The technology is really here
now to be present when you're not present." Frohnmayer, head of the
17,000-student university since July, will preside by video over his regular
Wednesday executive staff meeting.

    Besides the new video gear and the fax machine, his Minnesota office has a
voice-mail-equipped cellular phone, Internet access and radio e-mail that
handled more than 100 messages a day before it began acting up Friday. He also
gets daily Federal Express packets from his home office.

    Frohnmayer's Eugene East is "probably as sophisticated as we've ever gotten"
in accommodating a hospital visitor, said university spokeswoman Sally Howard.
"A lot of times we just set somebody up in an office with a phone. We've tried
to make it as easy as we can at a not-so-easy time."

    Frohnmayer, 54, said he averages about two hours a day in his remote office,
and the rest of his time with wife, Lynn, and Kirsten, whose health problems
have made page-one news back in Oregon.

    Until a month ago, the Frohnmayers thought Kirsten might be helped by a new
gene therapy for Fanconi anemia, which killed her 12-year-old sister, Katie, in
1991 and also has stricken Amy, 8. But a new blood test showed that the disease
had progressed into early signs of leukemia, which necessitated the treatment in
Minnesota.

    Frohnmayer, a former Oregon attorney general and 1990 Republican candidate
for governor, has been a leader in fighting the rare disease. He and his wife
have cofounded a marrow donor registry, published a family handbook in several
languages, started an international support group and raised $ 2.5 million for
research.

    Fanconi anemia, which afflicts no more than 2,000 people in the United
States, is carried in recessive genes and destroys bone marrow's ability to
produce blood cells. Most patients die of complications before age 20.

    Kirsten, however, had remained healthy until recently. A former high school
student body president and valedictorian, she is a senior honor student at
Stanford University, majoring in human biology. Over the Christmas holidays she
went skiing with her family and joined in festivities at the Rose Bowl, where
the Oregon football team played.

    Now she lies in a sterile ward hoping that the transplant therapy, which
involves destroying her own bone marrow and immune system with radiation, works.

    "It's a very high-risk procedure," her father said. "It's watch-and-wait
now. The patient's doing probably better than the parents at the moment."


LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1995


                             452 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 10, 1995, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: M.D. Anderson cancer patients get experimental gene help

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   One patient with advanced lung cancer has begun treatment
with a new form of gene therapy for the disease at the University
of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, hospital officials confirmed
Thursday.

   The treatment involves injecting a gene that acts as a brake
for cell division into portions of a lung tumor that cannot be
removed surgically.  The gene, called p53, is attached to a
defective retrovirus that can infect cells but does not reproduce
after infection.

   Dr. Jack Roth, chairman of Anderson's department of thoracic
surgery department, removed as much tumor as he could by surgery
and then attempted gene therapy on the remainder.

   The patient will receives doses of the therapy for four
consecutive days after the surgery.

   No further information was released on the patient.  A total
of 14 patients will be treated with the technique as part of a test
to determine whether the gene therapy will increase survival in
these patients, most of whom have advanced disease.

   Roth was not available for comment.  He will probably not
know if the treatment worked for several months.

   Scientists have found that genetic defects -- some inborn
and other caused by environmental agents that cause mutations in
the genetic code -- are at the root of many cancers.

   In some lung tumors, the p53 gene is abnormal.  By
injecting a normal gene into tumor tissues, Roth hopes to restore
control to cell division and stop the reproduction of abnormal
tumor cells.

   When he tried the treatment in the lab, he found that
putting normal p53 genes into cancer cells stopped their growth.

   Roth has been planning the study for several years and
received the go-ahead from federal agencies last year.

   Lung cancer is the Number 1 cancer killer in the United
States each year.  An estimated 168,000 new cases are diagnosed in
the United States annually.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1995


                             453 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 10, 1995, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: M.D. Anderson cancer patients get experimental gene help

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   One patient with advanced lung cancer has begun treatment
with a new form of gene therapy for the disease at the University
of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, hospital officials confirmed
Thursday.

   The treatment involves injecting a gene that acts as a brake
for cell division into portions of a lung tumor that cannot be
removed surgically.  The gene, called p53, is attached to a
defective retrovirus that can infect cells but does not reproduce
after infection.

   Dr. Jack Roth, chairman of Anderson's department of thoracic
surgery department, removed as much tumor as he could by surgery
and then attempted gene therapy on the remainder.

   The patient will receives doses of the therapy for four
consecutive days after the surgery.

   No further information was released on the patient.  A total
of 14 patients will be treated with the technique as part of a test
to determine whether the gene therapy will increase survival in
these patients, most of whom have advanced disease.

   Roth was not available for comment.  He will probably not
know if the treatment worked for several months.

   Scientists have found that genetic defects -- some inborn
and other caused by environmental agents that cause mutations in
the genetic code -- are at the root of many cancers.

   In some lung tumors, the p53 gene is abnormal.  By
injecting a normal gene into tumor tissues, Roth hopes to restore
control to cell division and stop the reproduction of abnormal
tumor cells.

   When he tried the treatment in the lab, he found that
putting normal p53 genes into cancer cells stopped their growth.

   Roth has been planning the study for several years and
received the go-ahead from federal agencies last year.

   Lung cancer is the Number 1 cancer killer in the United
States each year.  An estimated 168,000 new cases are diagnosed in
the United States annually.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1995


                             454 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             February 9, 1995, THURSDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SECTION2; FEATURES; WATCH IT! ; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 284 words

HEADLINE: Love Flies Off Course in 'Wings'

BYLINE: By Lon Grahnke

BODY:


   "Wings" swoops into NBC's Thursday lineup tonight with Part 1 of a (STAR)
(STAR) (STAR) episode, airing at 8:30 on Channel 5. The quick sweeps visit ends
at 9.

   A high school reunion gives Nantucket pilot Brian Hackett (Steven Weber) a
second chance with lost love Sara (guest star Sheila Kelley from "L.A. Law").
Helen Chappel (Crystal Bernard) gets even with a former cheerleader. And Joe
Hackett (Tim Daly), Helen's fiance, learns that he may be a daddy.

   The Valentine cliff-hanger will be resolved when "Wings" returns to its
regular roost at 7 p.m. Tuesday.

   MAGAZINE RACK: Tonight's (STAR) (STAR) (STAR) 1/2 edition of "48 Hours" (9 to
10, Channel 2) examines the use of gene therapy as a treatment for people with
HIV or AIDS. "The Search for a Cure" follows three volunteers undergoing the
experimental therapy in a California clinic. . . . Friday's "20; 20" edition (9
to 10, Channel 7) includes a (STAR) (STAR) segment about the loss of sexual
desire among married couples. Spouses from the Chicago area describe the
techniques they learned from psychiatrist Domeena Renshaw, founder of Loyola
University's sex-therapy clinic.

   SPACE INVADERS: "The X-Files," Fox's (STAR) (STAR) (STAR) (STAR) drama about
paranormal phenomena, cranks into winter-sweeps overdrive at 8 p.m. Friday on
Channel 32 with the first hour of a two-part episode.

   An encounter with an alien life form stirs dark memories for FBI Special
Agent Fox "Spooky" Mulder (David Duchovny). When Mulder was a boy, he witnessed
the abduction of his sister by an extraterrestrial force. Now an interplanetary
bounty hunter threatens Mulder's partner, Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson). Part 2
will air at 8 p.m. Feb. 17.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1995


                             455 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 9, 1995, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: HOUSTON; TV notes; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: Fox getting rid of 'Get Smart'

BYLINE: MIKE McDANIEL, Houston Chronicle TV Editor; Staff

BODY:

   Get smart?  Fox is doing just that.

   The Feb. 19 episode of the lowly rated ''Get Smart''
will be its last.  Just how bad are Get Smart's
ratings?  Last week, it finished 90th.  If it weren't for
the series on the fledgling United Paramount and Warner Bros.

   networks, Smart would have finished dead last.

   After Get Smart gets it, Fox will begin rolling out
four new series, including:

    ''The Great Defender,'' about a ""streetwise,
guerrilla-warfare attorney'' who joins a conservative Boston
law firm.  Michael Rispoli and Richard Kiley star.  Starts March
5 in place of Get Smart and ''Simpsons''
reruns.

   ''Medicine Ball,'' another hospital series featuring a
cast of unknowns.  Starts March 13 in place of ''Models,
Inc.''

   ''VR 5,'' starring Lori Singer as a woman who enters a
virtual reality computer realm, where she communicates with
her dead dad (David McCallum).  Starts March 10 in place of
''M.A.N.T.I.S.''

   ''The Critic,'' the animated series that had a brief
run on ABC.  It starts March 5 in place of ''House of
Buggin'.''

   Buggin' is scheduled to return in April.  Fox says
Models and M.A.N.T.I.S., both poorly rated,
will be considered for next year's schedule.

   A reason to hope

   Hope is the message of tonight's ''48 Hours,'' an
engaging look into a new way of treating the virus that causes
AIDS.

   ""Search for the Cure'' (9 p.m., Channel 11) documents the
process and the emotions as three HIV-positive patients
undergo gene therapy.  Richard Schlesinger's report, a year in
the making, follows Marty, Connie and Gene as they go through
the pre-treatment screening process, then as they begin
receiving injections.

   The report is careful in stating that the project is
experimental and in outlining the hypothesis of the therapy -
that persons who receive doses of genetically engineered HIV
will build up an immunity and thus avoid full-blown AIDS.

   The report also provides a glimpse into how rigid the
standards are for qualifying for the test, and how competitive
it is to become a part of these trial studies.

   It is most successful at portraying the heart and the hope -
from the patients, their families and from Dr. Jeffrey Galpin,
who heads the drug trial - that become essential in business
as risky as this.

   The study is a work-in-progress, so there is no stunning
announcement of a cure at program's end -but neither is there
a need for pessimism.  Tonight's report may not offer all the
answers (we never learn why Gene is bald, for example), but to
the millions infected with HIV, it offers something more
important - hope.

   Bits 'n' pieces

   Five local cable companies have joined in a promotion to honor
Black History Month.  Through Feb. 17, cable installation will
be reduced to $ 9.95, with $ 5 of every installation going to
the United Negro College Fund.  Also, customers can get HBO for
half-price for the first month

   John Goodman has signed a one-year deal to return next season
to ''Roseanne.'' Marlee Matlin will reprise her role
as a dancing bandit next month on ''Picket Fences. ''
Rolonda celebrates its first birthday Friday with a
show updating ""memorable'' moments.  Channel 11 is profiling
several local - and living - African-Americans in 30-second
vignettes airing throughout February.  The spots are titled
""Making History Today. ''


LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1995


                             456 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 9, 1995 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:1,6,7,8; B-2:2,3

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: Thursday's words of wisdom . . .

BYLINE: Tom Blair

BODY:

   At SDPD's morning command meetings, police Sgt. Kevin Rooney attempts to set
the tone each day with a few chalked words of encouragement on the blackboard.

   He generally succeeds.

   Yesterday, he won unanimous grins.

   Sgt. Kevin's quote for the day: "If you shoot at a mime, should you use a
silencer?" [ ] News that fits Former Assistant DA Richard Neely, second in
command to ex-DA Ed Miller, has joined the law firm of Hinchy, Witte, Wood,
Anderson & Hodges.

   Among the high-profile bad guys prosecuted by Neely: cop killer Joselito
Cinco and murderer and rapist David Stiles . . . There will be a San Diego angle
to tonight's CBS News special on the "Search for a Cure" for AIDS. The hourlong
program cites progress in the clinical study of an experimental HIV gene therapy
at SD-based Viagene Inc. . . . Making his first appearance here since declaring
his noncandidacy for president, one-time San Diego quarterback and ex-Rep. Jack
Kemp comes in next week to address the Prudential Real Estate Affiliates'
national convention.

   SD's Steve Games is host, and national Prudential Pres. Steve Bauer will
preside over the meeting of some 5,000 delegates . . . Silvio Pucci, a former
Channel 8 assignment editor and press secretary to Susan Golding, has joined the
staff of Assemblyman Jan Goldsmith as press aide. [ ] So I hear At XTRA Sports
Radio 690, the transition from jock talk to straight news can sometimes be
awkward.

   Which may explain why the woman doing news briefs at 10:30 yesterday morning
announced that Judge Ito has refused "to squash" a subpoena . . . A new order?

   At the big debt-retirement dinner Monday night for new DA Paul Pfingst, Roger
Hedgecock sat at the head table with Pfingst and Los Angeles DA Gil Garcetti.

   Appeal Court Justice Dick Huffman, the former assistant DA who prosecuted
Hedgecock in his first 1980s political corruption trial, sat at a nearby table .
. . Pat Rogers, the Chargers ranking veteran with 31 years in the public
relations office, is going to the altar.

   Rogers, a widow, will marry widower Mike Thompson -- a match made, she says,
by the office interns.

   Like most things in Rogers' life, the wedding date, June 17, is dictated by
the Chargers' schedule. "It's after minicamp and summer camp," she explains,
"and before training camp." [ ] Hollywood South SD photographer and sometime
actor Chris Canole has landed a recurring role in the new Paramount TV series
"Star Trek Voyager."

   Canole plays one of the crew members of the starship.

   A physics major out of UCSD, his other acting roles include a semi-regular
part on TV's "Silk Stalkings" and a small part in the upcoming "Apollo 13,"
starring Tom Hanks. (Canole plays NASA photographer Bill Hetrick, real-life
father of Canole's best high school buddy at El Capitan, Ron Hetrick.) . . .
Meanwhile, Paramount is looking at San Diego as possible home base for a new
series that's described as a sort of "Hill Street Blues" in a TV newsroom . . .
Currently filming here: "Spring Fling," an ABC-TV movie with Joyce DeWitt
("Three's Company"). San Diego plays the part of Miami . . . Later this month,
Richard Thomas ("The Waltons") comes for location filming on a USA Cable movie,
"Will Kill for Food or Money." [ ] San Diegans' Ink Chargers megamillionaire
Junior Seau, who picked up an additional $26,000 for playing in the Super Bowl,
has already given away more than a third of that.

   Seau's the newest member of United Way's Alexis de Tocqueville Society after
a donation of 10 grand . . . La Jolla's Charlie Jones, the television
sportscaster nonpareil, is suddenly a name in South America. During Jones' play
last week in the AT&T Pro-Am at Pebble Beach, the tournament press room was
flooded with calls.

   Reporters from as far away as Buenos Aires and Sao Paulo wanted to know about
the white-haired American on their TV screens.

   Says Jones: "They figured I must be important by the company I kept.

   I was playing with Eduardo Romero, the number-one pro from South America."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             457 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1995 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                        February 9, 1995, Metro Edition

SECTION: Variety; Pg. 10E

LENGTH: 105 words

HEADLINE: Critic's choice

BYLINE: Noel Holston; Staff Writer

BODY:

    Even judged against the average Elvis Presley musical, 1967's "Clambake" (7
p.m., TNT) is pretty lame. But with NBC late-night host Conan O'Brien, pictured,
offering comic commentary, as part of TNT's "Our Favorite Movies" series, it
takes on a surrealism that will change forever how you look at the King's
celluloid antics.

    - An intensely dramatic "48 Hours" (9 p.m., WCCO-Ch. 4), "The Search for a
Cure," observes a woman and two men who are participants in an experimental
program in California, testing a form of gene therapy that, if successful, could
make HIV infection a manageable illness, like diabetes.


GRAPHIC: Photograph

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1995


                             458 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 9, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 103 words

HEADLINE: CRITIC'S CORNER

BYLINE: Matt Roush

BODY:

    -- Mad About You (NBC, 8 p.m. ET/PT, not previewed): New trick, same old
dog. And a rare chance to see Brent Spiner - Star Trek: The Next Generation's
android Data - out of yellow makeup. He plays an agent who signs dumb-dog Murray
as a client after Paul (Reiser) directs the mutt in a commercial.

   -- 48 Hours: The Search for a Cure (CBS, 10 p.m. ET/PT): An exceptional hour,
more than a year in the works, that tracks the progress of three patients
testing a new drug in the fight against HIV. Also profiled: the doctor
pioneering this gene-therapy treatment. Richard Schlesinger is the
correspondent.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, Jefferson Graham, USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1995


                             459 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words

HEADLINE: Where Retirees Can Continue Learning

BYLINE: By PENNY SINGER

BODY:

   ONE of the best getaways for retirees is on the campus of Iona College in New
Rochelle. There, members of the Learning in Retirement Institute have the
opportunity to roam through the world of new ideas and new experiences.

   What separates this study program from others, said Peggie Cashman, the
institute's director, is its purpose, which is to provide an opportunity for men
and women to share their experience, talent and skills with their peers.

    "We conduct courses and study groups, and we have a program of special
events that gives members an opportunity to learn new skills, enjoy new
experiences and meet people who share similar interests," Ms. Cashman said.
"Both the study groups and courses are coordinated and conducted by members, and
they are high caliber, indeed. In our membership we have former teachers,
corporate executives and publishers and people from other professions who help
us put together a variety of courses in literature, art, history, science, music
and public affairs."

   The institute is sponsored by the School of General Studies at Iona, and it
is affiliated with the Boston-based Elderhostel Institute, established in 1974
to offer continuing education to older people. The Learning in Retirement
Institute is patterned on Elderhostel's summer programs on college campuses, Ms.
Cashman said.

   "The difference is that our members are able to participate in the program
without ever leaving home," he added, explaining that the Elderhostel Institute
acts as a clearinghouse for information and as a consultant to the group.

   Recently, the Elderhostel Institute held a conference of Learning in
Retirement groups at Salem State College in Salem, Mass.

   "There are now 200 Learning in Retirement Institutes nationwide," Ms. Cashman
said. "We are still the only one in Westchester County. In September we
completed our first full year of operation."

   Ms. Cashman, a former teacher, said her interest in developing learning
opportunities for older people began after her six children were grown and she
went back to school to get a master's degree in gerontology at City College
Institute of Studies for Older Adults in Manhattan.

   "Everyone in the health and education field is in agreement that as people
live longer and retire earlier, they will need opportunities for lifelong
learning more than ever," Ms. Cashman said. "So when I read about the Learning
Institute, I was so enthusiastic I went to Brother John G. Driscoll who was then
the president of Iona with the idea. He thought it was wonderful, too, and
arranged to have Iona sponsor a Learning in Retirement Institute."

   Brother James A. Liguori, who recently succeeded Brother John as president of
Iona, emphasized that Iona was one of the first colleges in the country to
welcome older students.

   "As our population matures, there is a critical need for learning," he said.
"And that's what Brother John realized 23 years ago when he made it possible for
older people to audit courses at Iona."

   And having older people on campus, he said, has a twofold effect.

   "It's highly beneficial for young people to see that learning is not
something that stops short after graduation but a lifelong process," he said.
"It's a valuable lesson for the future for young people when it is expected that
everyone is going to have to educationally retool for jobs in new fields."

   Sponsorship of the Learning in Retirement Institute, Brother James
emphasized, was also in keeping with Iona's commitment to be of use to the
larger community.

   "From my firsthand observations I have seen how the Elderhostel program
operates," he said. "In the summer I teach at Boston University, and this past
summer there was an Elderhostel group on campus living in the dormitory. I was
struck by their enthusiastic and upbeat attitudes and their intellectual
curiosity. The group in the Learning Institute at Iona has the same qualities."

   Accessibility is one of the most desirable features of the Learning in
Retirement Institute, said Eugene Schwartz, a retired science teacher. "Without
leaving home, the intellectual and academic features of Elderhostel are
available to us," he said. "We are active in Elderhostel. My wife and I went to
China and Italy with Elderhostel groups, and we always take one or two
Elderhostel trips a year, so when the Learning in Retirement Institute group was
formed, we joined immediately."

   What Mr. Schwartz especially likes about the group, he said, is the emphasis
on member participation.

   "It is stimulating," he said. "We run our own show. In the spring semester
coming up, my wife and I are conducting a course in archeology. We will give an
overview of the classical discoveries of the ancient world and will discuss
what's new in the field, and we will also have slide lectures. Guest lecturers
are also coming."

   In preparing the course, Mr. Schwartz said, he has put in an incredible
amount of work. "But that's what makes it all worthwhile," he said. "Last
semester, we took a fascinating course in Harlem Renaissance and a truly
extraordinary one on the cutting edge of gene research that was given by top
members of the faculty, scientists and doctors at Albert Einstein School of
Medicine."

   In discussing course offerings, Eleanor Seifter, head of the curriculum
committee, said: "We tried to offer a balanced program choosing from various
categories in art, literature, medical science and social issues. Classes are
held on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, and last semester we had about 120
people enrolled. We get ideas from the group, and all of us use any connections
we might have to get the best people in their fields to come and speak to us."

   Ms. Seifter suggested the course "Medicine, as It Might Be Practiced in the
21st Century," then arranged for a friend of hers, Dr. Barbara Birshtein, a top
researcher on gene therapy at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, to lecture.
"Dr. Birshtein also got seven other leading doctors at Einstein to participate
as lecturers," Ms. Seifter said. "And it was the first time they had addressed a
group of lay people, but as they said afterward, they were so impressed by the
intelligence of the questions our members asked that they would gladly repeat
the experience."

   On a different note, Shirley Bloom, a retired music teacher, said she was
worried that her course, "Introduction to 20th Century Music" would be
undersubscribed. "It was pretty avant-garde, the kind of stuff most people are
not used to," she said. "But I was surprised and delighted by the response. I
had 25 people in the first eight weeks and 40 in the next. Some people loved the
music, some hated it, which led to very heated discussions."

   Lila Ogman, president of the group's executive council and a coordinator of
the film-viewing study group, said members of the Learning in Retirement
Institute seem to enjoy themselves more than most in normal adult educational
settings. "I think it is because at the institute we have time for discussion
after a course and we also have an opportunity for socializing," she said. With
the exception of Ms. Cashman, who is on the staff at Iona, all the others who
work at the institute are volunteers. The yearly fee for membership is $ 15, and
membership is open to anyone over 55. The institute will hold an open house on
Feb. 19 at 2 P.M. in Spellman Hall on the Iona campus.

   "This is an opportunity for people to meet course coordinators and they will
describe their offerings," Ms. Ogman said.

   "The spring semester begins on March 23 and ends on May 23. Study groups will
meet on the Iona campus and at the Elks Club in New Rochelle." The number to
call for further information is 633-2590.

CORRECTION-DATE: February 12, 1995, Sunday

CORRECTION:

   An article last Sunday about the Learning in Retirement Institute of Iona
College in New Rochelle misstated the yearly membership fee. It is $ 150, not $
15.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Furthering their education: Edward and Eleanor Behrmann, Louise
Stern and Ruth and Edward Matzko, above; Louise Stiller and Marilyn Thiede,
left. (Photographs by Chris Maynard for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995


                             460 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 4, 1995, Saturday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A2

LENGTH: 205 words

HEADLINE: Mutant genes slow HIV growth

BYLINE: Newsday

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Three people have been injected with mutant HIV genes in an attempt to slow
down the virus's growth in their bodies.

   Early results of the first genetic engineering experiment on HIV-positive
humans were presented last week by the University of Michigan's Dr. Gary Nabel,
addressing the Second National Conference on Human Retroviruses, held in
Washington.

   At least some of the mutant HIV genes reached their targets, Nabel reported,
and are producing a phony version of a protein essential to HIV replication. He
said he hopes to have concrete results by June or July.

   So far, the patients have experienced no side effects, Nabel said. None of
the three participants had developed full-blown AIDS when the study began.

   Nabel's team worked with a mutant form of an HIV gene called ''rev.'' This
gene makes a protein needed for the packaging and release of new viruses from
human cells. But the mutant gene won't do that job. It is intended to act as a
decoy, taking the place of the normal gene and thus mucking up the viral
machinery.

   Nabel's approach to gene therapy for HIV is one of many currently under
development around the world. Other teams have proposed therapies that aim to
knock out other HIV genes.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995


                             461 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     February 3, 1995, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: POTENTIAL AIDS CURE, LINT CATCHER CAPTURE INVENTOR AWARDS HERE

BYLINE: By JAMES T. MADORE, News Business Reporter

BODY:

    The principals of Greatbatch Gen-Aid Ltd. of Clarence have been named
"inventors of the year" for a possible cure for AIDS.

   Wilson Greatbatch and John C. Sanford were honored by the Niagara Frontier
Intellectual Property Law Association and the Technical Societies of the Niagara
Frontier at their annual awards banquet Thursday night.

   The event marked the 20th anniversary of the inventor awards.

   Greatbatch captured the first award in 1975 for his digital demand pacemaker.

   This year he shared the honors with his partner, Sanford, a medical
researcher who specializes in gene therapy.

   "We're trying to cure AIDS, using genetic engineering," Greatbatch said in an
interview last September. "We've been working eight years on it now."

   Greatbatch and Sanford were issued a patent last year for a "method of
conferring resistence to retroviral infection." Theirs was one of more than 600
patents granted to local individuals and corporations in 1994.

   The Niagara Frontier Intellectual Property Law Association and the Technical
Societies of the Niagara Frontier selected the inventor of the year after
considering nominations relating to more than 70 patents issued in 1994.

   The first runner-up prize went to Ravindra Pandey and Thomas J. Dougherty of
Roswell Park Cancer Institute for their work with photodynamic therapy.

   The second runner-up prize went to Edward A. Rowe of the Occidental Chemical
Corp. for his work in separating chlorine from a mixture of gases.  Occidental
has a huge chlorine plant in Niagara Falls.

   Many past winners joined about 200 people for Thursday's banquet, held at
Salvatore's Italian Gardens in Depew.

   Speakers reminded the audience that Western New York is home to about 50
major inventions.

   According to Greatbatch, the area's firsts include:

   U.S. jet plane,

   Novocaine,

   Treatment of lung cancer using radiation,

   Commercial-drilled gas well,

   Music synthesizer,

   Grain elevator,

   Weather station,

   Beef on weck,

   Chicken wings and

   Windshield wiper.

   Besides the industrial awards, the law association and technical societies
annually honor the Junior Inventor of the Year. Adam Witkowski was recognized
for a lint picker that he created.

   The 6-year-old Buffalo resident is the son of Kenneth and Tamarra Witkowski.
He was sponsored by Marian Canedo, creator of Invention Conventions and a former
New York State Teacher of the Year.

   Ms. Canedo currently serves as director of Early Childhood Center and Academy
Programs for the Buffalo Public Schools.

GRAPHIC: ROBERT E. STODDARD, Buffalo News, Adam Witkowski, left, shows his lint
catcher invention to Wilson Greatbatch Thursday night at the banquet honoring
area inventors.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995


                             462 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    FEBRUARY 3, 1995, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PENINSULA FRIDAY; Pg. P2; SCHOOL NOTES

LENGTH: 753 words

HEADLINE: Palo Alto Seeks to Renovate Schools
 $ 143 million bond measure going before voters in June

BYLINE: John Wildermuth

BODY:

    A $ 143 million school bond measure will go before Palo Alto voters in June
as the Palo Alto Unified School District attempts to put together an ambitious
renovation program.

   The newest of the district's 16 schools, Nixon Elementary, was opened in
1971, and that was the last time the district was involved in a major
construction effort, said district business manager Walter Freeman. This will be
the district's first bond measure in 25 years.

   The bond measure is expected to cost local property owners an average of $ 63
for every $ 100,000 of assessed valuation annually over the life of the bonds.

   Most of the district's schools were built in the 1940s, 1950s and early
1960s; parts of Palo Alto High School date back to the 1920s.  Just about every
school in the district needs major work to bring it up to current standards,
Freeman said.

   At least $ 14 million of the bond issue will be used to meet the state's most
recent earthquake requirements, Freeman said. Major work is also needed on
heating, ventilation and electrical systems at the schools, as well as much
reroofing.

   The district also plans to enlarge the classrooms at most of its elementary
schools. The 900- to 950-square- foot classrooms were fine when students always
sat in desks all in a row, Freeman said, but at least 1,200 to 1,300 square feet
is needed for the type of small group activities that now make up much of the
elementary school day.

   Even if the bond measure receives the needed two-thirds vote, the district
will not sell all the authorized bonds at once. It will take seven to nine years
to complete all the renovation work, Freeman said, so the district will sell
bonds only as they are needed.

   ...

   BELMONT: An exhibition of schoolchildren's artwork that soon will be winging
its way across the globe is on display until February 16 at the Manor House
Gallery, 1219 Ralston Ave., Belmont.

   The artwork, by children at Cipriani School in Belmont, is part of the
Paintbrush Diplomacy program, which matches about 300 classrooms in the United
States with counterparts across the world.

   The kindergarten through third- graders at Cipriani will be exchanging
artwork with students in Bulgaria, the Dominican Republic, the Philippines,
Singapore, India and Japan. The theme of all the art is ''global families.'' ...

   ATHERTON: Dr. Milton Werner will take over July 1 as director of Sacred Heart
Prep and St. Joseph's School in Atherton, becoming the first lay person ever to
direct the two Catholic schools.

   Werner, who has spent the past six years as principal of Encinal High School
in Alameda, will replace Sister Margaret Brown, who will leave the schools after
six years. He also has served as assistant principal at James Logan High School
in Union City and as vice principal of Alameda High School.

   The high school was founded in 1898 and the elementary school in 1906, both
by the Religious of the Sacred Heart. They are part of a network of 19 Sacred
Heart schools across the country. The co-educational schools have a combined
enrollment of 798 students.

   ...

   MOUNTAIN VIEW-LOS ALTOS: A 30-member committee has recommended that the
Mountain View-Los Altos High School District try again to pass a bond issue to
refurbish the district's aging high schools.

   The district had bond issues on the ballot in April and June last year, but
both fell just short of the two-thirds majority needed for passage.

   The bond issue recommended by the district's High School Construction Review
Committee would be for $ 58 million, more than $ 10 million less than what was
asked for last year, said Jean Newton, a spokeswoman for the district. Money
from the bond issue, which is expected to be on the June ballot, would be used
to renovate Mountain View and Los Altos high schools, both of which are more
than 40 years old.

   ...

   ATHERTON: Walter Dunn, a senior at Menlo School in Atherton, has been named a
semifinalist in the Westinghouse Science Talent Search. He is one of 13
semifinalists from California and one of 300 nationwide.

   Dunn's winning project developed a new gene therapy technique to transfer
genes from one cell type to another. His research stems from work in a new
biotechnology research class offered at Menlo under the direction of biology
teacher Tanya Bauriedel.

   Dunn, who lives with his family in Cupertino, hopes to attend MIT or Stanford
next year.

   .

   Information for School Notes can be mailed to The Chronicle, 401 Marshall
Street, Redwood City 94063 or faxed to (415) 299-9208.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Artwork by Cipriani students, including one by kindergartner Gina
McClurg, is on display in Belmont SCHOOL NOTES , BY JOHN O'HARA, THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1995


                             463 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           February 2, 1995 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 905 words

HEADLINE: FROHNMAYER DAUGHTER HAS SIGNS OF LEUKEMIA

BYLINE: BRIAN T. MEEHAN, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Thursday, February 2, 1995 FROHNMAYER DAUGHTER HAS SIGNS OF LEUKEMIA

   Summary: A blood test reveals that a new gene therapy for Fanconi  anemia
will come too late for 21-year-old Kirsten

   Kirsten Frohnmayer, the 21-year-old daughter of University of Oregon
President Dave Frohnmayer, skiied with her family during the Christmas  holidays
and joined in the wonder of the 1995 Rose Bowl.

   But when the Frohnmayers returned from Pasadena, Calif., the family landed
back in the terribly familiar world of Fanconi anemia and dashed medical  hopes.
The gene therapy treatment the Frohnmayers hoped for would come too  late to
help Kirsten. A blood test told them that.

   In January, Kirsten went for a blood test that has been routine since she
was diagnosed with Fanconi anemia at age 10. In 1991, the rare genetic blood
disorder took the life of her 12-year-old sister, Katie.

   The blood test revealed what Dave and Lynn Frohnmayer long had feared:
Kirsten, a senior honors student at Stanford University, had developed early
signs of leukemia -- a cancer of the blood that is a common progression for
Fanconi anemia patients.

   ``This is a really unhappy development that we've feared for years because
we've watched so many kids go in this direction,'' Dave Frohnmayer said
Wednesday. ``We're obviously dismayed we've missed the window for gene therapy
for Kirsten.''

   The family responded as it has done so often in its long battle with the
fatal disease. The National Marrow Donor program, a registry co-founded by the
Frohnmayers, located a matching bone marrow donor. This week, Kirsten and her
mother, Lynn, flew to Minneapolis, where the University of Minnesota Hospital
and Clinic agreed to perform a bone marrow transplant. The arduous procedure
could begin within a week.

   ``The marrow transplant is really her lifeline,'' said Dave Frohnmayer.
``Gene therapy was right on the horizon and we were within inches of it with
Kirsten as one of the first patients. . . . But it will no longer happen in
time for Kirsten.''

   Fanconi anemia afflicts about 2,000 people in the United States. It was
named for the Swiss scientist who identified the disease in the 1920s.
Researchers don't know what causes the disease, but they do know it is carried
in a recessive gene that can lie dormant for generations.

   The disease packs a baffling arsenal of symptoms and strikes patients
differently. It can cause birth defects, damage the heart and brain, retard
growth or lead to leukemia. In most patients, the disease eventually attacks
bone marrow and wrecks the marrow's vital function of producing blood cells.

   A successful bone marrow tranplant is the only proven cure.

   On Sept. 21, 1991, Katie Frohnmayer died of complications related to  Fanconi
anemia. She was 12 and her father was Oregon's attorney general. The
Frohnmayers' medical odyssey began when Kirsten, the family's oldest child,  was
first diagnosed. Her youngest sister, Amy, 7, also has Fanconi anemia,  though
she has not shown any symptoms. Brothers, Mark, 20, and Jonathan, 10,  do not
have the disease.

   The family, which prides itself on not becoming victims, has relentlessly
advocated Fanconi research. They published a handbook for families in several
languages, started an international support group and raised $2.5 million for
research.

   Research has advanced rapidly since 1992 when a Canadian scientist
identified one of the genes involved in Fanconi anemia. The family has been
waiting for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to approve a gene therapy
trial.

   In the disease, bone marrow slowly stops making vital red and white blood
cells and platelets. The drop in red blood cells weakens patients through
anemia, the lack of white cells impairs infection-fighting, and the platelet
drop upsets clotting.

   Dave Frohnmayer said the transplant could cure his daughter, though the
procedure is risky.

   ``The whole idea behind a bone marrow transplant basically is to give a
lethal dose of radiation and then rescue the bone marrow with a transplant,''
he said.

   He said the donor, who will remain anonymous, is a close match. He said the
registry located the donor match largely because of an explosion in the number
of volunteer donors. Since 1987, the registry has grown from 17,000 volunteers
to more than 1.5 million.

   Frohnmayer said Kirsten is likely to remain in Minneapolis for at least 100
days after the transplant. On Wednesday, he told a faculty assembly of his
daughter's condition. He said he would join his wife and daughter later this
week. The University of Minnesota has set up a temporary office for Frohnmayer
to remain in touch with his office and duties in Eugene and Salem.

   ``She is unbelievably courageous and optimistic, with her eyes fully on the
risks she is facing,'' he said. ``She could have drowned herself in self-pity
years ago, but instead she spends her life scheming up ways to help other
people.''

   Kirsten is a human biology major at Stanford. In an interview last summer,
the former South Eugene High School valedictorian spoke about the disease that
stole her sister and her childhood.

   ``I'm definitely a happy person and I don't obsess about this problem at
all,'' she said. ``But I never have that feeling of complete total safety. You
always know there is that threat. . . . It's given me an appreciation for life
that I think people don't have unless it's threatened.''

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo -- KIRSTEN FROHNMAYER

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             464 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   FEBRUARY 1, 1995, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Firm Gets Infusion Of $ 80 Million
 Systemix's parent raises its stake

BYLINE: Peter Sinton, Chronicle Senior Writer

BODY:

    Sandoz AG, the giant Swiss pharmaceutical company, yesterday agreed to pump
another $ 80 million into Systemix Inc., raising its stake in the Palo Alto
biotechnology company to about 70 percent from 60 percent.

   The cash infusion will help the 6-year-old drug development company continue
its pioneering work developing gene and cell therapy treatments for cancer, AIDS
and other diseases. The deal is the latest example of drug giants pumping cash
into much smaller companies to broaden their research alliances and fuel
development of new drugs.

   Last week, London-based Glaxo Plc agreed to acquire another Palo Alto
company, Affymax Plc, for more than $ 500 million. And earlier this month
Ciba-Geigy completed its $ 2.1 billion acquisition of Emeryville-based Chiron
Corp.

   Sandoz will purchase 4.62 million shares of Systemix common stock from the
company and receive warrants for an additional 1.37 million shares. If the
Basel- based firm exercises all the warrants, it could increase its stake to
73.9 percent on a fully diluted basis. Systemix stock rose 1 1/8 to 17 1/8
yesterday on Nasdaq.

   SOLID FINANCIAL BASE

   ''This transaction offers Systemix a solid financial base for our core
programs,'' said John Schwartz, acting president and chief executive officer.
''It provides additional funding for clinical trials in the United States and
Europe, as well as advancement of our R&D efforts.''

   At the end of September, the company had $ 37 million in cash, enough to last
until mid-1995. Through the first nine months of last year, Systemix lost $ 28.8
million on revenues of $ 3.3 million.

   Chief Financial Officer Wendy Hitchcock said that Systemix approached Sandoz,
which during the past three years has invested $ 390 million in the company at
an average price of about $ 66 a share.

   STOCK HAS TUMBLED

   Systemix's stock price has plummeted as it ran into delays turning its
patents into products. One problem, said Hitchcock, is that when the company
went public in 1991, the company's cellular therapies did not require approval
by the Food and Drug Administration. But they do now, which has greatly
lengthened the time it takes to get a product to market, she said.

   Yesterday's announcement did not come as a surprise to S.G. Warburg analyst
Kevin Wilson, who in a January 3 research report suggested that ''Sandoz will
not let its investment founder for lack of cash and will buy the remainder of
Systemix at a premium.''

   In addition to its long-term investment in Systemix, Sandoz has been involved
in a joint venture called Progenesys to develop therapeutic antiviral agents for
treatment of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. Systemix has no products but will
begin its first clinical trials this spring. It has isolated the parent cells of
the blood system. By transplanting them back into patients following
chemotherapy, it hopes to replenish the blood and immune systems. It also is
working on gene therapy, which has potential applications in treating cancer,
HIV and genetic diseases.

   Commenting on Systemix's promise, Paul Heerling, head of research at Sandoz
Pharma Ltd., said, ''The investment reflects our belief in the technological
edge provided by Systemix in oncology and gene therapy.''

   This year looks like another banner year for collaborations between mid- and
large-sized pharmaceutical houses and biotechnology companies, according to
BioWorld Financial Watch. The industry newsletter recently reported that there
were 117 new alliances last year -- 70 percent more than 1993 -- and the total
value topped $ 1.9 billion.


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1995


                             465 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 1, 1995 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1704 words

HEADLINE: Topic of Cancer;
Cancer research focuses on starving tumors of their blood supply

BYLINE: SUSAN DUERKSEN, Staff Writer

BODY:

   True to its metaphor, the War on Cancer is incorporating a standard military
technique: cutting off the enemy's supply lines. An expanding legion of
researchers is experimenting with potential drugs aimed not at tumors themselves
but at the network of new blood vessels that develop to feed a tumor. Without
the blood vessels, a tumor can't grow and can't spread.

   It may even die, or become more vulnerable to direct attack. "It's a totally
new approach to the treatment of cancer," said Dr. John Laszlo, American Cancer
Society vice president for research. "Theoretically, something that would get at
the new blood-vessel formation of tumors would be effective against all solid
tumors.

   It's very exciting." Plenty of researchers and drug companies agree.

   About 30 potential drugs targeting various steps in the development of new
blood vessels are now in some stage of testing. Most of the experiments are
still preliminary -- taking place in lab dishes or animals.

   But initial testing in human cancer patients has begun on at least eight
drugs, including a fungus derivative and the infamous sleep aid thalidomide,
known mostly for causing birth defects. Despite successful results against
tumors in animals, scientists caution against overoptimism until the drugs have
been tested in large numbers of people.

   From past disappointments they know that drugs can cause very different
reactions in different animals. While the new approach has "tremendous
potential," said Dr. James M. Pluda of the National Cancer Institute, "the
ground is strewn with potential great cancer agents." Even Dr. Judah Folkman, a
Harvard University surgeon and originator of the new strategy, said it's too
soon to guess how well it will work, which drugs may prove best or how many
years it will take before treatments may be ready for general use. "A lot of
work lies ahead," Folkman said.

   "It is a new way of thinking, that you can hold a tumor in check.

   If and when patients are getting better, we'll know." Scientists have known
for decades that all kinds of tumors are fed by networks of new-growth blood
vessels, which tumors attract in a process called angiogenesis.

   Without continually building new vessels to bring nutrients and carry off
wastes, tumors couldn't grow large enough to do any harm.

   The blood vessels also provide a pathway for tumor cells to break off and
spread to other parts of the body. In 1971, Folkman proposed that cutting off
angiogenesis might stop cancer cold.

   At the time, it was an intriguing theory, a curiosity.

   No one knew enough about the workings of angiogenesis to plan an attack.

   But in the last few years, as details of the process have come into focus, it
is increasingly recognized as a very attractive, vulnerable target. It is
particularly attractive because angiogenesis is uniform in virtually any tumor.
Normal blood vessels replenish themselves very slowly, taking more than 1,000
days to turn over cells.

   The extremely rapid growth of angiogenesis -- with turnover every five days
-- kicks in only in wound healing, embryonic development, the monthly growth of
the uterine lining in menstruating women -- and in cancer. So as long as
patients aren't pregnant, don't have a recent wound and don't mind a temporary
cessation of menstruation, many researchers figure treatments can be designed to
disable angiogenesis without significant ill effects. Angiogenesis also occurs
in several other conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis and macular
degeneration, the leading cause of adult blindness. Some of the potential
anti-cancer drugs also are being tested as treatments for those diseases.
Telling cells to die Cancer researchers who have struggled for years to outsmart
erratic, tricky tumor cells are delighted at the greater vulnerability of the
cells in which angiogenesis takes place.

   To many scientists, it seems a perfect Achilles' heel. "A tumor is a very
clever beast," said David Cheresh, a cell biologist at Scripps Research
Institute in La Jolla.

   "Cancer cells don't play by the rules.

   But noncancerous cells behave by a well-defined set of rules for life and
death." That regulated behavior, Cheresh has found, includes obedience to a
particular chemical switch that tells developing blood-vessel cells it's time to
mature or die. Cheresh, Peter C. Brooks and others in their lab have designed
two proteins -- one an antibody and one a smaller, synthetic peptide -- to hit
that switch.

   The proteins fit into a receptor that is present on cells forming new
capillaries but -- and this is key -- not on mature, existing blood vessels.

   With the proteins blocking the receptors, signals to mature are deflected and
the cell instead is cued to self-destruct. In December, the Scripps team
published the first results of testing the proteins against human tumors
implanted in chick embryos.

   New vessels that fed the tumors were destroyed, but established blood vessels
were untouched.

   Cheresh said further tests in mice, rabbits and pigs are bearing out the
results. Folkman and Pluda said they are particularly impressed with the Scripps
method because it kills the blood-vessel cells, while most other proposed
anti-angiogenic drugs just halt their growth.

   Cheresh said his treatment also shrank many tumors, instead of simply
freezing them in place. Genes and fungus Almost accidentally, a handful of drugs
was found to halt angiogenesis in the 1980s. They included thalidomide, alpha
interferon (already in use as a cancer and hepatitis drug) and a substance
released by a rare fungus that has since been synthetically produced and named
TNP-470. While working in his Harvard lab late one night in 1985, Dr. Donald
Ingber found the fungus contaminating a petri dish where he was culturing
capillary cells.

   He noticed the cells near it had changed shape, closing off reception of
incoming signals. A decade of purifying and testing later, TNP-470 has stopped
tumor growth in animals from mice to monkeys and has proved safe in humans.

   Experiments are about to begin at UCLA and several other research centers on
its effectiveness for patients with prostate and breast cancer and Kaposi's
sarcoma, a skin lesion common in AIDS patients. Alpha interferon has been shown
to halt the rapid proliferation of capillaries in hemangiomas -- common and
usually benign vascular tumors of infancy -- and is being used worldwide for the
10 percent of cases that are life-threatening. But interferon's toxic effects
are much worse in adults, limiting its usefulness. This year, the National
Cancer Institute will start human trials of thalidomide in Kaposi's, melanoma,
brain, breast and prostate cancer and to treat macular degeneration. Dr. Robert
D'Amato, who discovered that the fetal limb damage caused by thalidomide was due
to suppressing angiogenesis, said the notorious drug is safe as long as the
patient is not pregnant.

   D'Amato, a pharmacologist and ophthalmologist in Folkman's lab, noted that
all chemotherapy drugs cause birth defects and "in terms of safety,
(thalidomide) is better than anything out there." It also has the advantage of
working in pill form.

   Many other drugs, such as those made of proteins, cannot survive stomach
acids and must be injected.

   The greater convenience and lower cost of pills will be important if
anti-angiogenic therapy, as expected, must be given long-term. Other potential
treatments are based on natural substances that keep angiogenesis in check in
healthy tissues. Dr. Webster Cavenee, director of the Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research at UC San Diego, found last year that a gene called P53 --
already known to suppress cancer in other ways -- releases a protein that
counteracts most of the potential triggers of angiogenesis.

   In brain tumors, the gene is mutated and the protein is missing, he said,
supporting the idea that loss of the protein's control over angiogenesis allows
cancer growth. About the same time, a research team from Northwestern University
in Chicago found that a similar substance is missing in skin tumors. Mutations
on P53 are already known to be common to many types of cancer. Several research
centers are working on inserting normal P53 into tumor cells through gene
therapy, while Cavenee and others are trying to produce synthetic versions of
the specific inhibiting molecules released by the gene. Also last fall, Folkman
identified a substance released by mouse lung tumors that usually inhibits
angiogenesis at sites where cancer has spread while the primary tumor is
present.

   The substance, called angiostatin, is very powerful and nontoxic, Folkman
said, but has only been tested in animals so far. Combined approach More
potential anti-angiogenic drugs are expected to surface in the next few years,
then years of testing will shake out the winners and losers. Although each drug
must be tested separately, most researchers agree the effects will be strongest
when several are combined. At Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, Dr.
Beverly Teicher found that using two anti-angiogenic agents together worked far
better than either alone and adding them to traditional chemotherapy was better
still. In 50 percent of the rats and mice Teicher treated, even metastasized
lung cancer was completely cured with a combination treatment. Ultimately, many
researchers agree, anti-angiogenic treatment may be most useful after
conventional cancer therapy eliminates the primary tumor, to prevent tiny
metastasized tumors from growing beyond a harmless few millimeters.

   Tumors can survive without angiogenesis at that size, in effect dormant, by
diffusing blood from neighboring cells. Therefore, anti-angiogenic treatment may
have to last years if not the rest of a patient's life.

   Otherwise, a few dormant cancer cells might resume signaling for new blood
vessels once treatment stopped. In many labs, basic research is continuing to
explore every molecular step of angiogenesis and the chemical balance that
normally holds it at bay, in hopes of finding new targets and designing new
drugs. "After a long time, angiogenesis is becoming a pretty hot topic for
cancer treatment," notes Dr. Joseph R. Bertino, incoming president of the
American Association for Cancer Research.

   "It's big-time now.

   Let's hope something comes out of it."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 4 DIAGRAMS; CAPTIONS: 1. The care and feeding to tumors |
Angiogenesis is the development of new blood vessels, a process triggered by
tumors as they grow. Tumors cannot survive without constantly forming new blood
vessels to supply nutrients and carry off wastes. The blood vessels also become
the transportation system that allows the cancer to spread, or metastasize, to
distant parts of the body. Researchers are experimenting with ways to cut off
the process at many differnt points, to deprive tumors of the blood they need. |
Initiation 2. Invasion & proliferation 3. Maturation 4. Metastasis 5. Starving
tumors: Photos of human tumors grown in chicken embryos show the effects of an
antibody developed at Scripps Institute to block growth of blood vessels. The
bottom two tumors were treated with the antibody; the top two were grwon the
same amount of time without treatment. (E-4) 6. New cancer approach: Researchers
Peter Brooks (left) and David Cheresh continue work in their lab at Scripps
Research Institute to refine proteins they designed to thwart angiogenesis, the
growth of new blood vessels to feed tumors. (E-4); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3,4. SOURCE:
KRT,AMA Encyclopedia of Medicine Graphic | (C) 1995 | Neil Pinchin Design 5.
Scripps Research Institute; Cell 6. Union-Tribune / JIM BAIRD

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             466 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                     January 31, 1995 Tuesday METRO EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS TRY GENE THERAPY TO FIGHT AIDS IN VOLUNTEERS

BYLINE: DANIEL Q. HANEY Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- In the first attempt to fight AIDS with gene therapy,
scientists said Monday they have placed altered genes of the virus into the
blood cells of three infected volunteers.

   The goal is to flood vulnerable cells with slightly askew versions of one of
the virus' own genes, disrupting its ability to manufacture copies of itself.

   Scientists plan to try this approach on 12 people, and they hope to know
within six months whether it works.

   That researchers would consider tinkering with the genetic blueprints inside
healthy blood cells demonstrates their frustration at controlling HIV, the AIDS
virus.

   When gene therapy first became a possibility, experts predicted it would be
used to treat inherited diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, that result from a
bad gene. While that work is still going on, some are now exploring the
possibility of using the same techniques to fight infections by viruses, which
are little more than packets of alien genes.

   The virus has eluded everything scientists have come up with to stop it in
billions of dollars of research. No treatment yet developed can clearly slow its
destruction of the human immune system.

   Because of this, researchers also are cautious about predicting whether their
latest approach will turn out any better.

   Gary Nabel, a researcher at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the
University of Michigan, described his work at an AIDS conference in Washington
sponsored by the American Society for Microbiology.

   The human immunodeficiency virus attacks white blood cells by commandeering
their genetic machinery to make new copies of the virus, killing the cell in the
process. HIV possesses nine genes, which it stitches into the cells' genes.

   One of the HIV genes, called rev, pulls together the newly manufactured viral
genes so they can be packaged into more viruses. Without rev, HIV can infect
cells but not subvert and destroy them.

   Nabel's lab in Michigan makes large amounts of a mutant rev gene. When
inserted into cells called helper T cells, HIV's principal target, the mutant
gene seems to stop viral production. The fake rev blocks the real rev gene from
assembling new viruses.

   The experiment is intended largely to show whether the treatment is safe, and
Nabel said so far it seems to be. But the researchers hope soon to know more.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             467 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    January 31, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BAYLIFE, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 483 words

HEADLINE: A twitch, in time, isn't benign

SOURCE: DONALD M. MURRAY; of the Boston Globe

BODY:


   Most nights after supper, the TV or the hi-fi on, a book in my lap, I start
dancing.

   Jiggle.

   Wiggle.

   Kick.

   Cross leg twitch.

   Reverse cross leg twitch.

   Tremble.

   Tap.

   Tapataptap.

   I have restless legs. Giant hands grab my thighs, then my calves. They
squeeze. Tight. I move my legs. Better.

   Then the hands grab again. Tighter. Tighter. I move my legs again.

   I stand up. Better. But I can only stand so long, looking at TV or reading a
book. I sit down. I shift to another chair. Dance. Pace the living room. Sit
down. Get settled. Dance. If I take a painkiller, it helps. Sometimes.

   I have walked San Francisco, London, Rome, Stockholm. Airplanes are bad.
You'll see the members of the club standing at the rear of the plane, driving
the stewards crazy.

   It isn't pain, not real pain. Not for me. Just discomfort. Enormous,
consistent, persistent discomfort until I twitch, jiggle, squirm.

   In my case I'm usually better if I go to bed. Lying down helps for me. Most
of the time.

   So I abandon Minnie Mae in the living room and go to bed earlier and earlier.

   Of course, when restless legs attack at night I suddenly jump, twitch, kick,
and Minnie Mae rolls to her side of our king-size bed while I high jump, broad
jump, leap, pirouette, twist, turn over, dance, get up and walk, take a
painkiller and eventually go to sleep.

   Of course, Minnie Mae reports that I often dance even when I think I'm
sleeping quietly.

   Restless legs night after night, all night long, are a major cause of sleep
deprivation for many people.

   I have told each doctor I have seen since childhood about my dancing legs.

   Each doctor nods, "Growing pains."

   "What do I do about growing pains?"

   "Grow."

   I grew. In the Army, soldiers fought to avoid having me bunk above them or to
share a foxhole.

   Army doctors said, "Hmmmm."

   Postwar doctors said, "Infantry, huh?

   Sat around in cold mud, huh? Battle of the Bulge, huh? Rheumatism."

   Wrong. Dancing legs.

   I continued to complain at each medical checkup, and my doctors each nodded,
saying, "Yeah, a lot of my older patients have that." End of subject.

   But now I have discovered the Restless Legs Syndrome Foundation of 1904
Banbury Road, Raleigh, N.C. 27608. I joined and have received helpful
information and copies of The Night Walkers Newsletter.

   There is no magic cure, but there is hope for gene therapy in the future, and
there are medications that can help individuals right now.

   We are our own physicians. Minnie Mae will have surgery for her arthritic hip
when she decides the operation is better than the pain and the limitations of
her condition. I will take serious medication for my dancing legs when they make
life too difficult.

   I was unprepared for the guerrilla war of aging and how individual each
person's combat experience would be. What is unbearable to one of us is quite
bearable to another.

NOTES: PRIME TIME

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1995


                             468 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        January 31, 1995 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: FAKE GENES ARE USED IN TEST TO FIGHT AIDS

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY AP science writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In the first attempt to fight AIDS with gene therapy, scientists said Monday
they have fired fake viral genes into the blood cells of three infected
volunteers.

   The goal is to flood vulnerable cells with slightly askew versions of one of
the virus's own genes, hamstringing its ability to manufacture new copies of
itself.

   Scientists plan to try this novel approach on 12 people, and they hope to
know within six months whether it works. That researchers would even consider
tinkering with the genetic blueprints inside healthy blood cells demonstrates
their frustration at controlling HIV, the AIDS virus.

   The virus has eluded everything scientists have come up with in billions of
dollars of research. No treatment yet developed can clearly slow its destruction
of the human immune system. Because of this, researchers are also cautious about
predicting whether their latest approach, for all its novelty, will turn out any
better.

   "With HIV, it's hard to be too optimistic about anything," Dr. Gary Nabel
said. "There are so many ways this virus can defeat us."

   Nabel, a researcher at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the University
of Michigan, described his work at an AIDS conference sponsored by the American
Society for Microbiology.

   Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, said it has potential.

   When gene therapy first became a possibility, experts predicted it would be
used to treat inherited disease, such as cystic fibrosis, that result from a bad
gene. While that work is still going on, some are now exploring the possibility
of using the same techniques to fight infections by viruses, which are little
more than packets of alien genes.

   HIV attacks white blood cells by commandeering their genetic machinery to
make new copies of the virus, killing the cell in the process. HIV possesses
nine genes, which it stitches into the cells' own genes.

   One of these genes, called rev, pulls together the newly manufactured viral
genes so they can be packaged into more viruses. Without rev, HIV can infect
cells but not subvert and destroy them.

   Nabel's lab makes large amounts of a mutant rev gene. When inserted into
helper T cells, HIV's principal target, the gene seems to stop viral production.
The fake rev blocks the real rev gene from assembling new viruses.

   Nabel's group came up with a different approach: They shoot in the genes with
gold bullets.

   First they coat microscopic bits of gold with several thousand copies of the
gene. Then, using a gas-powered gun, they fire them into blood cells that the
patients have donated. The cells, which are not harmed, are then infused back
into the patients' blood streams. he experiment is intended largely to show
whether the treatment is safe.

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1995


                             469 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 31, 1995, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: Health; Pg. Z04

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE HEALTH EDITOR

BODY:


   A SNAP for Napping Drivers

   "The Danger in Driving Drowsy" [Healthtalk, Jan. 10] highlighted a serious
problem that concerns safety experts and highway officials. If the Rev. Bentley
found himself falling asleep while driving on the Pennsylvania Turnpike today,
however, it wouldn't necessarily take a tractor-trailer's blaring horn to wake
him up.

   The turnpike recently developed a Sonic Nap Alert Pattern (SNAP) system that
alerts drowsy or inattentive car and truck drivers when they drift off the
roadway. The cement or asphalt shoulders are grooved to provide sound and
vibration. Before SNAP, drift-off-road accounted for more than half the
accidents on the turnpike; with SNAP, these accidents dropped by 70 percent.

   Other toll agencies and highway departments around the country are using the
system with equally impressive results.

   Neil H. Schuster

   Executive Director

   International Bridge, Tunnel & Turnpike Association

   Washington

   The Alternative Alternative

   "Alternative Medicine Gets Its Own Journal" [Cutting Edge, Jan. 3] stated
that alternative practitioners finally had their own journal, the Journal of
Alternative and Complementary Medicine, published by Mary Ann Leibert.

   I wanted to make your readers aware that there are two peer-reviewed journals
being published in this field. The other one, Alternative Therapies in Health
and Medicine, premieres in March and is published by InnoVision Communications,
a medical publisher on the West Coast. Larry Dossy, MD, is the executive editor.

   The focus of our journal is on integrating alternative therapies with
conventional medicine.

   Bonnie Horrigan

   Journals Director

   InnoVision Communications

   Aliso Viejo, Calif.

   Animals in the Laboratory

   "Winners & Losers -- A Look at the Past Ten Years" [Cover, Jan. 3] was full
of amazing discoveries and technological advances for repairing the injured or
unhealthy human condition. But obviously missing from your list of "winners" and
"losers" was attribution for the major contribution made by laboratory animals.

   New drugs cannot be prescribed to humans until extensive animal safety and
efficacy tests are completed. Lifesaving devices such as the respirators used to
ventilate newborn and premature babies would not be in the neonatal nurseries
without having first been tested and perfected on live animal models. Gene
therapy would still be in the science-fiction stage if it were not for the
extensive work already completed using animals.

   Many animals will be used in the search for therapeutic regimens to cure
tuberculosis or in further attempts to develop a scheme of prevention. There
would be no organ transplants if the process -- from surgical technique
development through control of the immune system's rejection efforts -- had not
already been perfected on animal models. Without animals, we would know almost
nothing of the retrovirus puzzle that is manifest in humans as AIDS, and any
hope of discovering a cure for this scourge would be extinguished.

   These are not developments that can be confidently perfected using the
predictions of human-programmed computers.

   Jack Bley, DVM

   Wheaton

   What's Cosmetic?

   It was refreshing to read "Altered Images" [Medical History, Dec. 13], which
presented plastic surgery in a positive light. However, the author found it
difficult to define the distinction between cosmetic and reconstructive plastic
surgery.

   Cosmetic plastic surgery is intended to enhance or improve upon a normal
physical condition (e.g., a face lift in an older patient with sagging facial
skin). Reconstructive plastic surgery is intended to return a patient to a
normal physical condition (e.g., breast reconstruction following mastectomy for
breast cancer).

   While reconstructive plastic surgery may actually produce an improved
cosmetic appearance, the surgeon's intention is to make the patient "whole"
again. These definitions were formulated by the American Society of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery and accepted by the Health Insurance Association of
America [a trade association of commercial health insurance companies].

   In recent months, an increasing number of health insurance companies have
attempted to redefine what they consider to be a "normal physical condition."
Under this new definition, patients with physical deformities as a result of
cancer surgery, post-mastectomy deformities, facial scars as a result of
trauma/accidents, etc., are denied insurance benefits to correct these
conditions.

   The companies argue that if there is no loss in function, the patient must
accept the deformity as a "normal physical condition" despite an unsightly or
grotesque appearance. This position is a result of health cost reform rather
than health care reform. The patient is the loser.

   Don J. Fontana, MD

   President, National Capital Society of Plastic Surgeons

   Rockville

   Letters intended for publication must be signed and include the writer's home
address and home and business telephone numbers. Letters may be edited. Although
we are unable to acknowledge all letters, we appreciate the time and value the
viewpoints of those who write. Send letters to Health Section, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071 (FAX: 202-334-6471).


GRAPHIC: Photo:

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1995


                             470 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 31, 1995, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: Health; Pg. Z06

LENGTH: 575 words

HEADLINE: Pioneer Survival

BODY:


   Every week she plays golf with her husband. At 48, Anne Stommes of
Framingham, Mass., presents a picture of the trim suburban housewife leading a
quiet life in mainstream America.

   Except that Stommes has cystic fibrosis, a fatal genetic lung disease.
According to the laws of statistics, she shouldn't be alive.

   Stommes is one of America's medical pioneers. Like explorers to the Arctic or
the surface of the moon, she is putting her stake into uncharted territory -- in
her case, the unmapped landscape of survival with CF.

   In the 1940s, most infants with CF died within a year. By 1960, life
expectancy had risen to 10 years. Today, an estimated 30,000 Americans have some
form of the disease. According to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, median
survival is about 29 years. Of the 18,000 patients being treated at centers
certified by the foundation, only 159 are over 45. Stommes started out with a
mild case. She became a secretary and married at 28. Then the disease began to
wear her down. She'd go to church and cough and cough and cough. Finally, her
body became so debilitated by CF that she had to take communion at home.

   What saved her was a double-lung transplant done at Massachusetts General
Hospital in 1992. As she says: "It was a miracle. I was able to get these lungs.
I can live a normal life again."

   While scientists are working on new approaches to treating this disease,
including gene therapy, more patients are turning to transplantation. According
to the latest figures from the United Network for Organ Sharing, about 50
double-lung transplants were performed nationwide between 1987 and 1991. "Until
some form of therapy comes along, lung transplantation represents the only
potentially life-saving procedure," says Robert J. Keenan, director of lung
transplantation at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

   But after the cheering stops, who picks up the bills for the expedition? A
double-lung transplant costs between $ 220,000 and $ 300,000. Drugs to maintain
the transplant can cost $ 10,000 a year. Stommes was lucky: she has good health
insurance. Others are not so lucky. For many medical pioneers, the physical
challenge of beating the disease is matched by the social and economic burden of
living well with a major illness. "It's a significant problem for many of our
patients," says Keenan.

   Most of us don't have to mount such extraordinary medical expeditions as Anne
Stommes and her CF colleagues. But explorers from Robert E. Peary to Neil
Armstrong usually come back with new insights into the mundane places where the
rest of us live -- and so has Stommes.

   "I believe that everyone should have health care coverage. The people who
really need it are the ones who are denied it. I don't know whether the
government should run it, but I think people should have it in between jobs and
it should be affordable," she says.

   For now, the subject of health care reform has slipped into the backwaters of
official Washington. Many changes are taking place in the private sector.
Medical pioneers are not ones to rest with the status quo, whether it's a
problem with their disease or a problem with their health care coverage. After
all, people with cystic fibrosis start waging a medical war from birth.

   "They are terrific fighters and have a great sense of denial. They are used
to taking care of themselves," says Pittsburgh's Keenan. "They won't take no for
an answer."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1995


                             471 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     January 30, 1995 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA BUSINESS; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1367 words

HEADLINE: LAWYERS SWITCH FIRMS TO ADVANCE ATTORNEYS USED TO STAY WITH ONE FIRM
FOR LIFE. NO MORE. ONE PROMINENT LOCAL FIRM LOST 16 PARTNERS IN JUST ONE WEEK.

BYLINE: Julie Stoiber, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It was as significant a defection as the Philadelphia legal community had
seen: In one week, 16 partners left the Center City firm of Wolf, Block, Schorr
& Solis-Cohen.

   Lawyers in town were buzzing, not just about the size of the exodus, but the
stature of some of those involved.

   There was Steven A. Arbittier, a noted construction litigator.

   H. Robert Fiebach, a litigator and immediate past president of the
Pennsylvania Bar Association.

   Alan S. Kaplinsky, an expert in bank-regulatory law.

   E. Gerald Riesenbach, head of Wolf Block's health law department.

   Why did they go?

   "A great opportunity."

   "New opportunities."

   "A unique opportunity."

   There was a time when nothing - not opportunity, money or dissatisfaction -
could make a lawyer leave his firm. But as the Wolf Block situation shows,
mobility is a hard reality in a profession once known for permanence.

   "When I started," said one lawyer who has been with his firm for more than 30
years, "the expectation was you would be with the same firm your whole life."

   "You went to a firm and you stayed there," said a longtime partner at another
Center City firm. "It was like a family. You had a sense of loyalty."

   And then, in the 1980s, law became a business. And a big business at that.

   There were more lawyers and bigger firms. And as once-loyal clients shopped
around, a firm's ability to compete for business became key.

   "The way to go after new clients was to hire a partner (from another firm)
with portable clients to bring with him," said Michael M. Coleman, who gave up a
partnership at Pepper, Hamilton & Scheetz in 1985 to become a headhunter,
matching lawyers with new firms. "The lawyers who are the most marketable are
the ones with the portable practice."

   Lawyers who move from one firm to another are called "laterals", and right
now they are "the growth method of choice," said Thomas S. Clay, of Altman Weil
Pensa, a legal consulting firm in Newtown Square. "Firms have determined that if
they need to add a practice area or beef up a practice area, they don't have
time to do it the old-fashioned way. They do it through laterals."

   Ballard Spahr Andrews & Ingersoll, which snagged six of the partners who are
leaving Wolf Block this week, is such a firm.

   "This firm seeks laterals to fill in areas that are weak or that we don't
have. Or to bring in high-profile people who will keep the firm at the
forefront," said Arthur Makadon, head of litigation at Ballard. "This litigation
department was built with laterals."

   According to a recent article in The American Lawyer magazine, 40 percent of
partners at large U.S. firms came in as lateral hires.

   It sounds so easy. Leave one firm. Join another. Report to the office in the
morning as usual.

   But it's complicated, starting with the reasons lawyers leave their firms in
the first place.

   "Probably one of the most important elements in why lawyers leave law firms
is a certain insensitivity in the leadership of the firm," said Stephen A.
Cozen, of Cozen & O'Connor, who spirited away 10 of the Wolf Block partners.
They decide, "This is not a place I want to be. I don't like the politics. I
don't like the system of management."

   "They might do it because they've lost confidence in the management of the
firm, the direction of the firm, the profitability of the firm, maybe because of
departures at the firm," said Coleman, who runs Coleman Legal Search
Consultants. "Or they may not think the firm is forward-thinking enough."

   "I don't really think many people move for purely economic reasons," said
Stephen C. Braverman, who manages the Philadelphia office of Pittsburgh's
Buchanan Ingersoll. He has 30 lawyers, most of whom moved laterally from
Philadelphia firms.

   Professional gratification can play a role.

   Stephen M. Goodman, one of the most visible corporate lawyers in the city,
has changed law firms twice in the 26 years he has practiced law in
Philadelphia.

   In 1983, he left Goodman & Ewing, which he helped found, and went to Wolf
Block. In July, he left Wolf Block, where he was chairman of the corporate
department, for Morgan, Lewis & Bockius.

   "You set a vision for yourself to maximize your ability to serve clients and
attract clients," said Goodman, who represents emerging-growth companies.
Fulfilling his vision meant going to a law firm that had greater depth and
breadth. To serve a client that is a gene-therapy company, for example, he needs
support from lawyers in other areas of law: intellectual property, complex
financing and FDA approvals.

   "I have never felt that I was able to serve clients and attract clients with
a bigger tool chest than I have now," Goodman said.

   Clay, the legal consultant, thinks the reason that lawyers change firms can
be summed up in one word: money. "You may hear some different spins from
people," he said, "but it's basically dollars. It's overwhelmingly for the
dollars."

   Makadon disagrees. "People who are coming here are not coming here for more
money. They're coming here for a different culture."

   Whatever the reason for the departure, money eventually figures in.

   The old firm stands to lose business and gain empty, expensive office space.
And depending on its partnership agreement, it might have to pay out a chunk of
cash in the form of the lawyer's capital investment in the firm and his or her
share of the profits, Clay said.

   "If four or five significant partners leave and there's a significant amount
of capital to be paid out," he said, "that can put the firm in a bind."

   But the opposite can be true. The partnership agreement might allow the firm
to withhold the partner's share of the profits and delay the return of his or
her capital investment.

   Often, the outcome hinges on whether the parting is amicable or bitter.

   Mark A. Aronchick, a former Philadelphia city solicitor, has switched firms
twice - he left Wolf Block in 1986 and Hangley Connolly Epstein Chicco Foxman &
Ewing last fall - and has also handled cases in which lawyers and firms split.

   "I have represented people in some real donnybrooks," said Aronchick, whose
new firm is Hangley Aronchick Segal & Pudlin.

   "If you're with people who want to do the right thing, you wind up being able
to . . . talk openly with your colleagues about your plans, talk openly about
separation agreements, talk about clients."

   If you're not, watch out.

   "I have seen some absolutely ugly battles over client files," Aronchick said.
"The battles over client files have been much bigger than the ones over money."

   Why?

   "The stuff of lawyers is clients," Aronchick said. "If you don't have
clients, you might as well be a riverboat captain."

   That's why clients - and the fees they might add to a firm's bottom line -
are discussed carefully when a lateral move is being considered. Some firms are
so concerned about whether business will actually move with a lawyer, they call
the clients and ask, Clay said.

   Compatibility is the other big issue with laterals.

   Will the lawyer fit in at the new firm? Is there any business conflict
between the lateral's clients and those of the firm?

   "The most important factor is compatibility," Braverman said.

   Due diligence goes both ways.

   These days, lawyers who are looking around want to know that their new firm
will survive if the expected compression in the legal market takes place,
Coleman said. They ask, "What are the business skills of the leaders? What's the
strategic plan? What direction is the firm taking?"

   Once the questions are answered satisfactorily on both sides, the emotional
work begins.

   "You cry one moment and you're elated the next," Goodman said.

   "Every move is traumatic," Aronchick said. "I've seen lawyers that swing
between exhilaration and depression as the move gets closer."

   And back at the old firm, the other partners are probably wondering whether
they should leave, too.

   "Once it starts happening," Goodman said, "people say, 'Hey, I'm not happy
today. But guess what? I've got options.' "

   And they probably do.

   "Any time someone loses someone of importance," said Clay, "what you're
likely to see is the sharks circling. 'Now who can we go and get from Wolf
Block?' "

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;

PHOTO (2)
1. Steven A. Arbittier, a construction litigator, has left Wolf Block.
2. H. Robert Fiebach is immediate past president of the Pennsylvania Bar
Association.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             472 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1995 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     January 29, 1995, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: City Times; Page 10

LENGTH: 124 words

HEADLINE: COMMUNITY NEWS: EAST:  BOYLE HEIGHTS;
USC GETS BIG GRANT FOR GENETICS LABS

BODY:

   The USC School of Medicine has received a $1.3-million federal grant to build
more laboratories at its Center for Gene Therapy on Alcazar Street.

   Construction will begin March 1 on the $7.5-million Institute for Genetic
Medicine, which will include a 30,000-square-foot research center with 12 new
faculty research programs, more than 150 staff members, a library, conference
rooms and a 150-seat lecture hall. Work, funded through a branch of the National
Institutes of Health, should be completed by December.

   The new laboratories will occupy the former Los Angeles County Flood Control
Building, which is now used as the USC Clinical Sciences Building, in the
northeast corner of the USC Health Sciences Campus at 2250 Alcazar St.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1995


                             473 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1995 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  January 27, 1995 Friday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY SHOWS HOPE IN CLOGGED ARTERY FIGHT

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- A gene that slows cancer growth also may help prevent heart
patients' arteries from reclogging, says a study that provides hope for a
simple, nontoxic solution to this growing medical problem.

   Researchers at the University of Chicago, experimenting with pigs and rats,
showed that coating blood vessels with the gene could cut in half the reblockage
of arteries that commonly occurs after balloon angioplasty.

   Dr. Jeffrey Leiden reports in today's issue of Science that the new treatment
prevents the blockages instead of attacking them once they're formed -- making
it potentially a safer, simpler choice than other proposed therapies.

   Scientists have long wrestled with restenosis, the reclogging of arteries in
40 percent of heart patients who undergo balloon angioplasty.

   In angioplasty, a balloon inflated inside an artery pushes aside a clog to
allow better blood flow. But the process injures the vessel wall, and the body
responds by growing new cells. Some 100,000 Americans a year grow too many
cells, which reclog the artery in four to six months.

   So far, drugs haven't helped. A special device called a stent can hold about
a third of arteries open, but patients risk blood clots or uncontrolled bleeding
when it's used.

   So researchers have turned to gene therapy. Leiden's team became the first to
prevent artery-blocking cell growth, without killing cells, inside living
arteries.

   Team members inserted the retinoblastoma gene, which suppresses cancer cell
growth, into a cold virus genetically modified so it wouldn't spread. They
performed angioplasty with virus-coated balloons on rats, which easily form
restenosis, and pigs, which have coronary arteries very similar to those of
people.

   The gene reduced restenosis between 50 percent and 60 percent, with no side
effects. Artery samples showed the gene took hold in a day and lived for about
two weeks before the virus carrying it died, an interlude Leiden says is long
enough to interrupt the chain reaction that starts restenosis.

   He asked colleagues at the University of Michigan to try the experiment --
and they replicated his findings.

   Leiden's next step is to try the gene therapy in primates. If it works, he'll
seek government permission to test the therapy in people.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             474 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 481 words

HEADLINE: Gene May Keep Arteries of Heart Patients Open

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26

BODY:

   Experiments on animals suggest that a gene that slows cancer growth may
someday also help prevent heart patients' arteries from reclogging.

   Researchers at the University of Chicago, working with pigs and rats, showed
that coating blood vessels with the gene could cut in half the reblockage of
arteries that commonly occurs after balloon angioplasty. In balloon angioplasty,
a catheter is threaded into the coronary artery, and a balloon is then inflated
to open up the obstructed area.

    Dr. Jeffrey Leiden, of the research team at the university, is reporting on
Friday in the journal Science that the new treatment prevents the blockages
instead of attacking them once they are formed, making it a potentially safer,
simpler choice than other proposed therapies.

   "It doesn't kill cells, so you don't run the risk of weakening or altering
the vessel wall," Dr. Leiden said. "And the gene's there one or two weeks, and
then its work is done. It's a real hit-and-run approach."

   Responding to the report, Dr. David Harrison, an artery expert at Emory
University, said: "That sounds very exciting. If you got something like this to
work, it would be a huge breakthrough."

   Scientists have long wrestled with the reclogging of arteries that occurs in
40 percent of heart patients who undergo balloon angioplasty.  The process
injures the vessel wall, and the body responds by growing new cells. Some
100,000 Americans a year grow too many cells, a development called restenosis,
which reclogs the artery in four to six months.

   Drugs so far have not helped. And although a special device called a stent
can hold about a third of arteries open, patients risk blood clots or
uncontrolled bleeding.

   So researchers have turned to gene therapy. Dr. Leiden's team inserted the
retinoblastoma gene, which suppresses cell growth, into a cold virus genetically
modified so it would not spread. The team performed angioplasty with
virus-coated balloons on rats, which easily develop restenosis, and pigs, which
have coronary arteries very similar to humans'.

   The gene cut restenosis by 50 percent to 60 percent, with no side effects.
Artery samples showed that the gene had taken hold in a day and lived for about
two weeks before the virus carrying it died, an interlude Dr. Leiden contends is
long enough to interrupt the chain reaction that starts restenosis.

   Dr. Leiden asked colleagues at the University of Michigan to try the
experiment, and they replicated his findings. His next step is to try the gene
therapy in primates.

   This is not the first gene therapy proposed for restenosis. Another approach,
previously tried in animal studies, slips a modified herpes virus gene inside
arteries to make the blocking cells sensitive to a herpes-killing drug,
ganciclovir. But the drug has numerous side effects, and Dr. Leiden argues that
killing the cells could weaken artery walls.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1995


                             475 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     January 27, 1995 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: STUDY: GENE PREVENTS ARTERY CLOGS IT WORKED IN ANIMAL TESTS. IT MAY
HELP CUT IN HALF THE REBLOCKAGE OF ARTERIES.

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS, This article includes information
from Reuters.

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A gene that slows cancer growth also might help prevent heart patients'
arteries from reclogging, says a study that provides hope for a simple, nontoxic
solution to a growing problem.

   Researchers at the University of Chicago, experimenting with pigs and rats,
showed that coating blood vessels with the gene could cut in half the reblockage
of arteries that commonly occurs after balloon angioplasty.

   Cardiologist Jeffrey Leiden reported in today's issue of the journal Science
that the new treatment prevented the blockages instead of attacking them once
they were formed - making it potentially a safer, simpler choice than other
proposed therapies.

   "It doesn't kill cells, so you don't run the risk of weakening or altering
the vessel wall," Leiden explained. "And the gene's there one or two weeks and
then . . . its work is done. It's a real hit-and-run approach."

   "That sounds very exciting," said David Harrison, an artery expert at Emory
University. "If you got something like this to work, it would be a huge
breakthrough."

   Scientists have long wrestled with restenosis, the reclogging of arteries in
40 percent of heart patients who undergo balloon angioplasty. In angioplasty, a
balloon is inflated inside a clogged artery to open it up and
allow better blood flow. But the process injures the vessel wall, and the body
responds by growing new cells. About 100,000 Americans a year grow too many
cells, reclogging the artery in four to six months.

   Drugs so far have not helped. A special device called a stent can hold about
a third of arteries open, but patients risk blood clots or uncontrolled bleeding
caused by stents.

   "The muscle cells are trying to respond to an injured blood vessel - this is
a universal response to vessel injury. But they get a little overexuberant,"
Leiden said.

   "By temporarily programming these muscle cells not to divide, we can keep
these vessels open and prevent the failure of angioplasty," he said.

   His next step is to try the gene therapy in primates, a yearlong effort. If
that works, he will seek government permission to test the therapy in people.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2002


                             476 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         January 27, 1995 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: NEW GENE TREATMENT FIGHTS RECLOGGING OF ARTERIES, STUDY SAYS

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A gene that slows cancer growth may also help prevent heart patients'
arteries from reclogging, says a study that provides hope for a simple,
non-toxic solution to this growing problem.

   Researchers at the University of Chicago, experimenting with pigs and rats,
showed that coating blood vessels with the gene could cut in half the reblockage
of arteries that commonly occurs after balloon angioplasty.

   Chicago's Dr. Jeffrey Leiden reports in today's journal Science that the new
treatment prevents the blockages instead of attacking them once they're formed -
making it potentially a safer, simpler choice than other proposed therapies.

   "It doesn't kill cells, so you don't run the risk of weakening or altering
the vessel wall," Leiden said. "And the gene's there one or two weeks and then .
. . its work is done. It's a real hit-and-run approach."

   "That sounds very exciting," said Dr. David Harrison, an artery expert at
Emory University. "If you got something like this to work, it would be a huge
breakthrough."

   Scientists have long wrestled with restenosis, the reclogging of arteries in
40 percent of heart patients who undergo balloon angioplasty.

   In angioplasty, a balloon inflated inside an artery pushes aside a clog to
allow better blood flow. But the process injures the vessel wall, and the body
responds by growing new cells. One hundred thousand Americans a year grow too
many cells, reclogging the artery in four to six months.

   Drugs so far haven't helped. A special device called a stent can hold about a
third of arteries open, but patients risk blood clots or uncontrolled bleeding.

   So researchers have turned to gene therapy. Leiden's team became the first to
prevent artery-blocking cell growth, without killing cells, inside living
arteries.

   They inserted the retinoblastoma gene, which suppresses cancer cell growth,
into a cold virus genetically modified so it wouldn't spread. They performed
angioplasty with virus-coated balloons on rats, which easily form restenosis,
and pigs, which have coronary arteries very similar to people's.

   The gene cut restenosis between 50 percent and 60 percent, with no side
effects. Artery samples showed the gene took hold in a day and lived for about
two weeks before the virus carrying it died, an interlude Leiden contends is
long enough to interrupt the chain reaction that starts restenosis.

   Intrigued, he asked colleagues at the University of Michigan to try the
experiment - and they replicated his findings.

   His next step is to try the gene therapy in primates, a yearlong effort. If
it works, he'll seek government permission to test the therapy in people.

   Leiden has also started researching whether the gene therapy could
specifically target cancer cells without causing the massive cell death of most
chemotherapy, and if it could help prevent the restenosis of heart bypasses, leg
and neck arteries.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1995


                             477 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      January 26, 1995 Thursday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1387 words

HEADLINE: AN UNWANTED INHERITANCE;
THE SEARCH CONTINUES FOR BREAKTHROUGH IN CAUSE OF GENETIC DISEASES

BYLINE: GARRET CONDON; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   We may revel in our cultural heritages, and see something of a beloved
grandparent in our own faces. But there are other heirlooms, too. Along with the
genes that give us our hair color and facial features may come mutated genes --
part of our ethnic inheritance -- that can cause disease.

   Every ethnic group has its genetic disorders, or a high frequency of some
diseases (along with a low rate of others). Although it's likely that most human
diseases have some genetic component, disorders such as sickle cell anemia,
Gaucher (pronounced "Go-shay") disease, Tay-Sachs disease, cystic fibrosis and
others are caused almost exclusively by single, defective genes contributed by
both parents.

   The relative simplicity of such diseases -- and the increasing knowledge
about how the genes involved damage the body -- may turn out to be a boon to
those suffering from such illnesses. Treatments expected to emerge from research
into gene therapy will first target some of these inherited diseases in the
coming years.

   Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, says the initial failures helped
scientists to abandon their early cockiness regarding gene therapy and to work
to solve the many previously unforeseen problems. He warns against hoping for
too much too soon, but he predicts a huge impact from the inevitable
breakthroughs.

   "The one it will have a major role in is genetic disease," he says, and he
predicts a selective first wave of breakthrough against some of the single-gene
disorders.

   Of course, the very notion that a disease might be considered ethnic or
racial raises the specter of superior or inferior races. "There used to be a
time when people would not study it [ethnic links to genetic disease] or were
afraid to write about it," says Dr. Elijah Saunders, head of the Division of
Hypertension at the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore.
"There was a time when African- Americans were reluctant to say that there were
any genetic diseases," says Saunders, who is African-American. He says attitudes
have changed and the main criterion is that the science be sound when such
issues are studied and conclusions not be drawn beyond what a given study
suggests.

   Race is not specifically a genetic category because there is no exact and
limited package of genes that corresponds to the many physical traits that
define race. But environment, histo ry and, especially, mating patterns, can
cause certain genes to recur with high frequency within a group. In addition,
higher-than-average rates of diseases like heart disease and diabetes among
minority groups in the United States are thought to be due mainly to nongenetic
factors like poor diet, high stress, risky lifestyles and hazardous environment
-- the effects of poverty, not race.

   Survival advantage

   Disease-causing genes were once thought of only as chromosomal mistakes.  But
researchers now believe that evolution has carried some genes forward because
they also offer -- or once offered -- a survival advantage. The gene that causes
sickle cell disease, for example, offers protection against malaria. Children
who get the gene from only one parent are fortified against malaria; children
who get it from two parents get sickle cell disease.

   So there is no one-to-one correspondence between certain diseases and certain
ethnicities. Although sickle cell disease appears most frequently among those in
and from central Africa, others around the world -- including Italians, Greeks
and Indians -- also get it. Tay- Sachs is one of a number of diseases associated
with eastern European Jews, but it is also found in high concentrations among
some French Canadians and Louisiana Cajuns.  Gaucher disease is another such
"Jewish disease," but Robert Welch of Ellington, of mixed Irish (three-quarters)
and German parentage, has it. "I had about a one-in-a-million shot," he says.

   Screening of high-risk groups has reduced the numbers on some inherited
diseases, early intervention has helped young victims and research into enzyme
replacement therapy has produced some treatment success. With Gaucherdisease, an
enzyme that breaks down a particular fat isn't produced. The fat builds up in
the liver, spleen and bone marrow and can lead to enlarged liver or spleen,
bleeding problems, bone and joint pain, bone erosion and fatigue. In a
4-year-old therapy, a modified form of the enzyme is given intravenously every
two weeks. The treatment is costly -- an estimated $100,000 to $300,000 a year
for a typical patient -- but many find relief. Welch, who had experienced daily
pain, jaundice and severe bone infections, has been pain-free for two years
since starting the treatment at the University of Connecticut Health Center in
Farmington.

   Ideally, geneticists would like to replace the faulty gene with a good one to
provide a cure for this and other inherited illnesses. Robert M.  Greenstein,
director of the Division of Human Genetics in the Department of Pediatrics at
the UConn Health Center, says that gene therapy for Gaucher, in which key cells
will be removed from the patient's blood, given the correct gene and returned,
"is right around the corner."

   Sickle cell disease

   Ditto for sickle cell disease, one of the most common disorders and, in the
United States, a disorder that mainly affects African-Americans -- an estimated
50,000. Junius Adams, health scientist administrator of the Sickle Cell Disease
Science Research Group of the National Health, Blood and Lung Institute,
predicts success within five years against sickle cell disease, one of the most
common inherited disorders.

   About 50,000 Americans -- most of African descent -- have the illness in
which deformed, crescent-shaped (sickled) red blood cells(the result of abnormal
hemoglobin) cause pain, anemia, susceptiblity to infection and other sometimes
serious complications. Researchers must find a way to deliver a new gene to the
victim's stem cells to, in effect, reprogram them to make normal hemoglobin. The
most likely vehicle is a virus, says Adams, which will invade the cell (as
viruses do) and deposit the gene.

   "The technology is now there," he says. "It's just a matter of perfecting
it."

   Delivery vehicle

   But the issue of perfecting the proper delivery vehicle, what scientists call
the "vector" for the new, correct gene, has been a major roadblock, according to
Penn's Wilson. His institute is focusing on cystic fibrosis, the most common
fatal genetic disease in the United States, affecting about 30,000 children and
adults and most common among non-Jewish Caucasians. It causes a sticky mucus to
line the lungs and pancreas. The lungs are easily infected and the impaired
pancreas interferes with normal absorption of nutrients. Few victims survive to
middle age.

   Wilson says the ultimate gene delivery vehicle has not yet been developed --
at least the news hasn't been published. Viruses are lively and can set off an
immune response, but microscopic fat bubbles (liposomes) may be too laid-back.
"We're looking for the 'stealth vector,' " he says. "It's fast, efficient, but
evades the immmune response." Wilson, who has already directed limited human
trials on cystic fibrosis patients to test an earlier virus, is ready to go back
with a second generation version.

   He worries about creating false expectations, but he adds, "this isn't going
to go away."

   Dr. Michael Kaback, professor of pediatric and reproductive medicine at the
University of California at San Diego, agrees that gene therapy for these
diseases is coming, but he doesn't expect treatment in the near future.  Genetic
illnesses of the brain present special gene-delivery problems.  (Tay-Sachs, for
example, causes destruction of the central nervous system and childhood death.)
But he says that even regarding single-gene illnesses, there are many basic
science issues -- including how genes interact with other genes and how they are
affected by their environment -- that need to be further explored.

   "I'm concerned we don't oversell this idea too rapidly," he says."People are
going to get angry with scientists for making promises they didn't keep."



GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (color), Michael McAndrews / The Hartford Courant

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1995


                             478 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           January 26, 1995 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B08

LENGTH: 219 words

HEADLINE: BUBBLES UP THE NOSE: EXPERIMENTAL ROUTE AIDS STUDY OF CYSTIC
FIBROSISResearch Notebook

BODY:

   Thursday, January 26, 1995 BUBBLES UP THE NOSE: EXPERIMENTAL ROUTE AIDS STUDY
OF CYSTIC  FIBROSIS

   Research Notebook

   Scientists used microscopic bubbles of fat to implant genes in the  noses of
cystic fibrosis patients, an advance that raises hopes of treating  the disease
through gene therapy.

   Researchers previously had used viruses to deliver genes, but some
scientists say bubbles may work better.

   In cystic fibrosis, the lungs are clogged by a sticky mucus that leads to
fatal infections. The disease is caused by a faulty gene. Gene therapy is  aimed
at delivering a working copy of this gene to the lungs, but scientists  use
nasal tissue for initial experiments because it is more accessible.

   In the new procedure, working copies of the gene were attached to the
bubbles and sprayed repeatedly into the noses of nine patients. The gene was
successfully implanted in at least seven patients and found to be active in
five.

   Researchers found that the procedure partially corrected an abnormality in
electrical charge that is seen in tissue from cystic fibrosis patients, but  the
effect disappeared within a week.

   The researchers, mostly from London and Edinburgh, reported the work in the
January issue of Nature Medicine. They said the procedure probably needs
improvement before it could be a useful treatment.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             479 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 22, 1995, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 80

LENGTH: 1459 words

HEADLINE: Taking gene therapy to the market;
Biotech start-ups, drug firms try new approach;
EMERGING BUSINESS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Mother Nature may oversee your gene pool, but biotechnology start-ups, like
Millennium Pharmaceuticals, are acting like lifeguards, diving in, hoping to
lift out sections of individual genes and the pathways that cause such major
diseases as cancer and diabetes and baldness.

   In turn, large pharmaceutical firms are reaching out to these genetic
research-oriented companies, looking to exchange millions of dollars for the
right to develop, test, manufacture and distribute a new generation of drugs,
diagnostic tests and vaccines.

   The result could reshape medicine and the drug industry, as biotech
researchers uncover the genetic roots of diseases, how they start, and their
progression. Drug makers, long criticized for developing me-too drugs that
simply identify and treat symptoms, would have breakthrough pharmaceuticals that
promise to be more effective than current drugs and far less toxic.

   "There has never been so much interest in genetic research from the big drug
companies as now," said Mark Levin, the 44-year-old former venture capitalist
who is president of Cambridge-based Millennium, which raised $ 26 million in
debt and equity financings.

   Unlike the grand dreams of the 1980s when scientist/entrepreneurs hoped to
challenge the established drug companies by creating genetically engineered
drugs that they would manufacture and distribute, companies like Millennium,
formed in the past three years, are largely think-tanks, providing research and
development and handing off production, clinical testing and regulatory approval
to giant pharmaceutical firms.

   Levin and other executives among the small group of genomics companies say
pharmaceutical firms, concerned about their long-term future, are knocking on
their door regularly to strike up deals on specific diseases.

   Starting with publicly available information from the Human Genome Project, a
government-sponsored effort to map all 100,000 human genes to their chromosomal
locations, Millennium and other gene-hunting companies have developed methods of
analyzing gene fragments responsible for specific diseases. Using automated
equipment to identify genes involved in the biochemical pathways of certain
diseases, along with powerful computers to gather, store and analyze publicly
available information with internally generated data, Millennium and the other
genomic companies hope to pinpoint the genetic roots of specific diseases.

   From his fifth floor office, in the former Model T Ford Motor Co.
manufacturing facility overlooking Cambridgeport, Levin explains that his
100-employee company is studying the causes of obesity, adult-onset diabetes,
asthma, heart diseases, certain cancers and osteoporosis.

   Last spring the company, whose scientific founders include some of the
leading authorities in genetics from Harvard University Medical School and the
University of Paris, signed a $ 70-million deal with Hoffman-LaRoche to discover
the genes responsible for obesity and adult-onset diabetes.

   Still other companies have developed proprietary databases of genetic
information that they are selling to large pharmaceutical firms.

   But some key drug makers say genetic data should remain open, and should not
be kept proprietary. Last fall, Merck & Co., one of the nation's largest drug
makers, signed a multimillion-dollar agreement with Washington University of St.
Louis to isolate and sequence human genes. The school would publish the
molecular sequences of isolated genes, which would be available to the public.

   Levin maintains that knowing gene sequencing is not enough, noting that
genomics companies have to go further and identify the function and provide
their corporate sponsors with a lot more information to develop a potential
drug. The company, which includes geneticists, biochemists, engineers and
molecular biologists, is one of the biggest among a group of genomics companies.

   The largest company, Human Genome Sciences of Gaithersburg, Md., is looking
to decipher and isolate a broad array of genes. Its ambitious undertaking is
being financed by SmithKline Beecham, which has vowed to spend a record $ 125
million a year for product rights along with a seven percent equity stake.

   So far Human Genome Sciences has indentified more than 80,000 unique
sequences, found 248 genes linked to specific illnesses and has filed 70
patents. In the emerging field of genomics, it has been called the Microsoft of
genetics.

   Microsoft's president, William Gates, is a $ 5 million investor in another
genomics company, Darwin Molecular Corp. of Bothell, Wash., which is looking to
find new drugs to treat cancer, AIDS and autoimmune diseases through genetic
research. Last October the company signed a $ 16.5 million deal with
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, the French drug maker, to develop gene therapy for cancer.

   "A lot of companies underestimate the difficulty of using this genetic
information to effectively get to a therapeutic product," worries David J.
Galas, Darwin Molecular's president and chief scientific officer, who previously
ran the Department of Energy's human genome project, the $ 3 billion
international effort to map the entire genome.

   "A lot of genomics has been oversold," he added.

   "Believing that getting the key genes buys you a therapeutic is absolutely
off the mark. Besides genetics, you need chemists, engineers, molecular
biologists to create a team approach. Two years from now you won't necessarily
see more genomic companies, but more integrated companies putting together
different technologies including genomics."

   Millennium's rival, Sequana Therapeutics, of La Jolla, Calif., is also
searching for the genetic causes of diabetes, under a long-term agreement with
Glaxo Inc., the Research Triangle, N.C., American subsidiary of the British
pharmaceutical company.

   "What we tell our partner, Glaxo, is that of the genetic targets for a
specific disease, this is the one or two that you ought to focus on, which we
think are causing the disease at the molecular level," said Kevin Kinsella,
Sequana president.

   "We don't do clinical trials or production. We say here are the mutations,
which is superb information that pharmaceutical companies can use to cut down
drug development - hey, it can't get better than that."

   Millennium, however, plans to go the extra step, coming up with specific drug
candidates in the form of proteins, that Hoffman-LaRoche will use as starting
points. Indeed, the big drug company considered both genomic companies before
choosing Millennium.

   "We felt that the people at Millennium were the only ones who clearly spelled
out not only the gene identification but also gene function, and biochemical
pathways most appropriate for a drug candidate," said Michael Steinmetz,
Hoffman-LaRoche vice president of clinical affairs and development. "Companies
like Sequana saw themselves as molecular geneticists who would be able to clone
and idenfify genes, but then turn over to the pharmaceutical companies for the
functional work and appropriate drug discovery.

   Steinmetz, based at company headquareters in Nutley, N.J., said he liked the
scientific team at Millennium but also acknowledged that having a genomics
company in the Boston area rather than 3,000 miles away in California was also a
factor.

   With no existing drugs on the market to treat either disease, the huge
pharmaceutical maker is hoping to parachute into both markets with drug
therapies that could potentially eliminate insulin dependency and help obese
people lose weight - the latter potentially denting the multibillion-dollar diet
pill business.

   Most biotech companies are focused on developing drugs, but Millennium and
the other newcomers take a different approach to drug discovery. Currently, most
research and development is a hit-or-miss process of combining new compounds and
then testing them for how well they work to treat a particular malady. The
genomics companies, with their more precise knowledge of various disease states,
can tailor drugs to specific diseases. They hope to earn big profits with their
partners, the pharmaceutical companies.

   One company hoping to follow in Millennium's footsteps and break into the
commercial ranks is Genome Therapeutics Inc., of Waltham, formerly known as
Collaborative Research. It is using federal grants from the Department of Energy
and the National Institutes of Health to pursue industrial genetic research.
However, it has found the genes responsible for the bacteria, called
helicalbactor pylori, that causes ulcers.

   "We've been academically oriented, but that's changing," said Robert
Hennessey, the company's president and a former pharmaceutical executive. "We
have the tools and the skills to be a player too."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Mark Levin, Millennium chief: "There has never been so much
interest in genetic research from big drug companies." GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/FRANK
O'BRIEN

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1995


                             480 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                    January 15, 1995, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MAGAZINE, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 3934 words

HEADLINE: THE MATTINGLY MYSTERY
A family waits and hopes as researchers try to find the cause of their crippling
disorder

BYLINE: Douglas Birch

BODY:


   Andrew Mattingly Jackson Jr. whirs his three-wheeled electric cart into a
paneled dining room in a nursing home in Silver Spring, hurrying to join a
gathering of his relatives.

   Waiting for him is John Philip Mattingly, a resident of the home. He nudges
his right hand against the control stick of his electric wheelchair, spinning to
greet Mr. Jackson face to face. One by one, the rest arrive: Anna Mae in her
wheelchair; Jay with his cane and plastic ankle braces; Bonnie and then Janet,
both with a telltale hesitation in their step.

   They've come to share news about children and spouses and jobs. And about the
tragic legacy they all share.

   For seven generations, the descendants of George Washington Mattingly, born
in St. Mary's County in 1792, have been shadowed by a baffling illness that can
slow, hobble and finally cripple sufferers.

   Now investigators at Johns Hopkins University and the University of
Pennsylvania, using the recently developed tools of molecular genetics, are
trying to solve that mystery. They're hunting for the gene that causes the
disorder, which affects at least 70 of about 150 known descendants of George
Mattingly.

   And, while it may take a year or longer, they expect to find it.

   Over the past century, the family disorder has remained beyond the reach of
scientific breakthroughs in medicine: in antibiotics, surgery and vaccines.
That's because the disorder is not caused by a viral infection, trauma or
outside cause. It lies within.

   But the current revolution in genetics offers younger Mattinglys a measure of
hope.

   Discovery of the gene will probably yield a test that will alert potential
victims. One day, it could lead to a treatment, or even a cure.

   Unlike some other inherited neuromuscular diseases, the Mattingly disorder
does not shorten a person's lifespan. Still, family members could face some hard
questions. If a prenatal test were positive, should parents terminate a
pregnancy? Would teen-agers or young adults with no symptoms really want to know
they face paralysis?

   Today, these issues are purely hypothetical. The Mattinglys are eager to see
the Hopkins-Penn team track down the gene.

   None seems more eager than Andrew Mattingly Jackson Jr., a 67-year-old
retired Black & Decker manager from Hampstead.

   "I'm getting to the point where I have to have an aide to dress and undress
me, to shower me, to lift me off and on the john," says Mr. Jackson, talking
with a reporter during a break in the gathering. "I can't bring food up to my
face. I have very little use of my hands."

   He grows silent, then raises his stricken hands, palms upward.

   Mr. Jackson first sought treatment in 1947, after he struggled to climb
ladders while serving aboard a Navy ship. At the Pensacola Naval Hospital, he
was misdiagnosed with a lethal illness -- amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
or Lou Gehrig's disease -- and discharged.

   A few months later, a Johns Hopkins physician told him he had
Charcot-Marie-Tooth, or CMT -- a nonfatal, inherited, muscular disorder.

   In 1963, researchers at the National Institutes of Health launched the first
full-scale study of the Mattinglys' ailment. They, too, labeled it a form of
CMT. Hopkins physicians conducted another, more limited study 13 years later, in
1976.

   In these early research efforts, scientists lacked the modern tools to track
down the ultimate cause of the disease -- the gene itself. But they were able to
catalog its effects and compile a partial family tree that traced the illness
among Mattingly descendants, confirming its genetic basis.

   After his discharge from the Navy, Mr. Jackson started his own family. He had
two sons.

   One, Dwight David Jackson, inherited the disorder.

   "We noticed something wrong with him when he was 7 or 8 years of age," Mr.
Jackson recalled. "That kind of devastated me. I was thinking of what lay in
store for him."

   Mr. Jackson's concern for his son accelerated as his own strength ebbed.

   He attended meetings of CMT sufferers. He expanded the NIH's Mattingly family
tree, now an 86-page catalog of births, deaths and marriages spanning more than
300 years. He pored over newsletters published by a CMT support group, and wrote
articles for it.

   Jay Lane, 42, of Takoma Park, learned that he had the family illness in 1990
while reading an article Mr. Jackson wrote in a newsletter for CMT sufferers.

   "It all clicked then," Mr. Lane said. "My grandmother was from St. Mary's
County, born and raised there, and she was a Mattingly. I just called him up and
said, 'Hey, we could be related. Could we have the same thing?' "

   Mr. Jackson wrote letters to Mattinglys all over the country and in England
in an unsuccessful search for affected relatives. (Thomas Mattingly, the first
member of the family to arrive in St. Mary's County, emigrated from England in
the 1600s.)

   Astonishingly, the afflicted descendants now all seem to live in Maryland.
Branches of the family living in Texas and the Midwest, including that of pro
baseball player Don Mattingly, apparently are not affected.

   As he learned more about CMT, Mr. Jackson began to suspect that the Mattingly
disorder was different. Few, if any, CMT sufferers wind up in wheelchairs. And
CMT deadens sensory nerves as well as motor neurons, numbing the limbs. The
Mattinglys don't lose any sensation.

   Four years ago, Mr. Jackson retired from Black & Decker in Towson and turned
all his energies on the illness.

   "My biggest concern now is to find something that's going to help my son,"
Mr. Jackson said.

   About two years ago, Mr. Jackson persuaded two Hopkins neurologists, David
Cornblath and John Griffin, to undertake new research. They in turn recruited
Dr. Philip Chance, a pediatric neurologist at the University of Pennsylvania
specializing in genetic illnesses.

   To help the scientists, Mr. Jackson arranged for a family reunion last June
on Solomons Island, where researchers conducted interviews, physical exams and
drew more than 100 blood samples so that DNA could be extracted.

   Now they are using that data and the samples to hunt for the gene.

   The Mattinglys are closely watching the search.

   Janet Michelle Lane, a 34-year-old member of the Mattingly clan who works at
Montgomery College in Rockville, has had trouble walking since childhood. Now
she is thinking about what will happen when she has a family of her own.

   "We don't want to pass this on to our children," she says.

   "My mother's hands are like fists, clubs," says her brother, Jay Lane, a
mechanic with Prince George's County schools.

   He holds up his own thin, delicate fingers, which curl slightly. "It
deteriorates little by little."

   Dr. David Cornblath flips through medical studies in his narrow office,
located deep inside the Hopkins Hospital complex. He seems quiet, direct and
intense.

   He has scoured the reference books, read reports in medical journals dating
to the 1890s, and talked to genetics experts.

   And he's come up with a theory. He suspects that the Mattingly disorder is
probably a variety of juvenile-onset ALS.

   Both likely attack the body's motor neurons, which link the brain to the
muscles. As these neurons die, they stop stimulating the muscles, which waste
away.

   Both disorders are caused by a dominant gene.

   About 100,000 genes lie scattered through the 23 pairs of chromosomes packed
into every human cell. Each chromosome is a gossamer coil of DNA, the chemical
code that acts as a blueprint for the body. In each pair, one chromosome comes
from the mother, one from the father.

   In general, there are two types of genetic illness, dominant and recessive.
To develop a recessive genetic illness, victims must inherit two copies of the
same faulty gene, one from each parent. An example of such an illness is cystic
fibrosis, which causes chronic lung infections.

   In a dominant illness like the Mattinglys', victims need inherit only a
single defective gene from one parent. Each child born to an affected parent has
a 50-50 chance of inheriting that gene.

   In both the Mattingly ailment and ALS, parts of the body controlled by the
longest motor neurons -- the feet, lower legs and hands -- are the first
paralyzed. In both, men seem to be more severely afflicted than women.

   That's where the similarities end.

   ALS, or Lou Gehrig's disease, named for the New York Yankee first baseman who
died of the illness in 1941, usually strikes people over 50, spreads rapidly,
and kills its victims in two to four years. Death generally results from a
paralysis of the muscles that control breathing and swallowing.

   The Mattingly disorder, while tragic, is neither swift nor deadly.

   It starts around the ankles. Children may have trouble running and tend to
trip over steps, curbs or their own feet. By the time the weakness reaches the
midcalves, victims also begin to lose strength in their hands. They have trouble
fastening buttons and turning keys in locks.

   In their 30s, they may need ankle supports. In their 40s or 50s, canes. Then
wheelchairs. But the disorder never reaches their necks and chests.

   The Mattingly disorder, it seems, is always inherited. But only about 5
percent to 10 percent of the estimated 30,000 Americans with ALS have the
inherited or "familial" form. Most have so-called "sporadic" cases. Their cause
is unknown.

   In 1993, researchers discovered that some with familial ALS have a defect in
something called the SOD-1 gene, which produces an enzyme called the superoxide
dismutase.

   The enzyme neutralizes "free radicals," corrosive molecules produced by the
body's normal metabolism. Unless the body's defenses intercept them, these
molecules can rip through healthy cells.

   After extracting the Mattingly family's DNA this summer, the Hopkins-Penn
team sent samples to Harvard researchers for analysis. There was no sign of the
SOD-1 gene.

   That hunch was unfounded.

   Still, scientists suspect the Mattingly disorder is a previously unknown form
of another genetic ailment.

   They just haven't been able to find the link.

   "What's unusual about it is, if you go back in the literature and look at
juvenile ALS, or other early-onset motor systems diseases, there are virtually
no cases that are anything like this," said Dr. Cornblath.

   In a University of Pennsylvania laboratory with blond wooden cabinets and
glass walls, a cardboard box sits on a counter. Inside the box are about 100
spike-shaped plastic vials that contain the DNA of two-thirds of the living
descendants of George Washington Mattingly.

   Wielding a device that looks like a cross between a syringe and a squirt gun,
neurologist Mena Scavina removes tiny drops of DNA from the vials.

   Dr. Philip Chance, 41, watches from a stool.

   Since 1992, working alone or in collaboration with others, Dr. Chance has
nailed down the genetic basis of five different inherited peripheral nerve
disorders, including four varieties of CMT.

   He has a personal stake in his work.

   In high school, the soft-spoken Tennessee native was diagnosed with an
inherited form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth, ending his hopes of becoming a
professional musician.

   The muscle wasting caused by CMT has left his wrists slim, his fingers
delicate. "If you want to be a symphony clarinetist," he said, "you don't want
CMT."

   To start the hunt for the Mattingly gene, Dr. Chance examined segments of
chromosomes where the genes for other inherited neurologic illnesses reside.

   That process ruled out the most common forms of CMT, familial ALS and
juvenile-onset ALS.

   Now the researchers are conducting a chromosome-by-chromosome search.

   "It's kind of a fishing expedition," Dr. Chance said.

   In a vast ocean.

   Think of each chromosome as a spiral staircase of DNA, with two interlocking
molecules that form each step. There are 6.6 billion of these steps in the 46
chromosomes in every human cell.

   These molecules are called nucleotide bases. There are four of them: A (for
adenine), T (for thymine), G (for guanine), and C (for cytosine). One step might
consist of the pair AT, for example, for adenine and thymine.

   Like the software that runs computers, genes are simply a form of
information. They code that information into strings of bases that serve some
function, such as ordering the production of a protein.

   They are very small and difficult to find.

   Unwound and stretched out, a single cell's worth of DNA would be about 6 1/2
feet long. That strand would be more than 37,000 times thinner than the human
hair.

   Imagine that this cell's worth of DNA was long enough to stretch across the
United States. An average-sized gene, consisting of 30,000 base pairs, would
span only about 31 feet.

   Genetic defects can be caused by the substitution of one base pair for
another, called a point mutation. On our continent-spanning DNA, that mutation
would cover only 1/160th of an inch.

   Dr. Chance and his University of Pennsylvania team must genetically map the
disorder -- that is, identify which chromosome it's on and roughly where on the
chromosome it's located. They're looking for signposts called "markers": some
detectable trait usually inherited with a disease.

   Color blindness can be such a signpost. In some families, it is inherited
along with hemophilia. That's because the gene that causes one lies very close
to the gene that causes the other.

   But markers tied to obvious traits are rare. To track down most genes,
investigators have to use much harder-to-see signposts, patterns in the
sequences of bases.

   Over the years, scientists have pinpointed a whole series of these signposts,
which are short base sequences.

   There are about a thousand of them, more or less evenly spaced along the
chromosomes.

   What makes them useful is that, while they are found in the same general
location in everyone's chromosomes, they vary slightly from individual to
individual.

   For example, one person might have 20 copies of the sequence CA (a cytosine
followed by an adenine) at a specific spot. A second, unrelated person might
have 30 copies of CA at about the same spot. A third may have 40, or 100, or
whatever.

   Here's how researchers follow the signposts:

   Say a Mattingly man with the family's disorder has 20 repeats of CA at a
specific site on a particular chromosome. Say his wife has 40 repeats in the
same spot.

   Using special chemicals called restriction enzymes, researchers can snip
segments that include the CA markers from the couple's DNA samples.

   With simple laboratory techniques, researchers can compare the lengths of
these segments. The husband's will be shorter, because he carries fewer repeats
of CA.

   Suppose this 20-repeat marker shows up in some of the couple's children, but
only in those who inherit the disorder from their father. All the healthy
children share the mother's 40-repeat sequence.

   Maybe the 20-repeat marker is inherited along with the gene for the Mattingly
disorder, and the gene lies near it. But maybe it is just a coincidence. Look at
the next generation, then the next and then at other branches of the same
family.

   If the 20-repeat marker keeps popping up in people with the disorder, you've
mapped the general location of the gene.

   "It's the kind of thing that given enough time you'll figure out," Dr. Chance
said. "It's just a question of whether we will hit it on the 10th marker we
study, or will it take 100 markers?"

   Even then, researchers will know where the gene is only within a few million
base pairs.

   "You use more and more markers to zero in on, progressively, a smaller
interval," Dr. Chance said. "It's like you're interested in finding someone. You
find the city, the part of the town, then the block, then the room, then the
part of the room."

   Once the suspect gene is cornered, so to speak, researchers have to figure
out how it differs from a healthy gene.

   Some mutations are easier to spot than others. Some are caused by the
addition or deletion of scores or hundreds of base pairs. Others are caused by
the change in a single base pair.

   To spot tiny errors, researchers must use their most powerful biochemical
magnifying glasses, and make a base-by-base comparison of the gene under
scrutiny with a normal one.

   Once they find the error, they must still figure out the defective gene's
modus operandi.

   Does the Mattinglys' faulty gene fail to produce a chemical that protects the
motor neurons? Or does it produce too little of the chemical? Too much? Does it
tell the body to make a chemical that attacks the neurons?

   Using their discovery, researchers will probably devise a prenatal test and
will launch a search for treatments.

   "But the ultimate goal is to use the research as an approach to gene therapy,
" said Dr. Chance.

   That means a corrected version of the gene might one day be inserted into
afflicted Mattinglys. Or a gene might be introduced to counteract the
destructive effects of the faulty gene.

   It wouldn't be simple. It may, in fact, be impossible. Still, that's what
scientists are aiming for.

   Dr. Nancy Wexler stands before the molecular biologists and medical
geneticists gathered at a Washington hotel for the annual Human Genome
Conference and raises an issue that may confront the Mattinglys.

   "If you say, 'Do you want to be tested?' " she said, "that is not a neutral
question."

   Dr. Wexler's mother and three of her maternal uncles all died of Huntington's
disease, a late-onset brain disorder that triggers uncontrollable shaking and
confused thinking. It is always fatal.

   A professor of clinical neuropsychology at Columbia University, Dr. Wexler
herself has a 50 percent chance of inheriting the illness. At 50, she is about
the same age as her mother was when the first signs appeared. She has declined
to say whether she has been tested.

   Her family's experience inspired her, 15 years ago, to go to the Lake
Maracaibo region of Venezuela, home of the world's largest concentration of
Huntington's victims.

   Like Andrew Mattingly Jackson, she organized an effort to collect medical
histories and blood samples from victims and their families. Using that data and
DNA, researchers mapped the Huntington gene to a general location on chromosome
4 in 1983. Scientists finally isolated the gene itself 1993.

   Families with inherited illnesses are "enormously committed to having these
genes found," she said. When radio stations reported the discovery of the gene
for Lou Gehrig's disease, she said, members of these families "pulled off the
road to cry with jubilation."

   Treatments and cures, meanwhile, are elusive. Usually, the first practical
benefits are a pre-natal test and tests to identify people destined to develop
the illness.

   These tests have been available for Huntington's disease for about a decade.
But Dr. George Annas, professor of health law at Boston University, said 94
percent of the people who are at risk for the disorder, and who seek genetic
counseling, decide they'd rather not know.

   Sometimes, Dr. Wexler said, medical professionals mishandle the information.
One person with a history of psychiatric problems was told, over the phone, that
a test for Huntington's was positive. He committed suicide, she said.

   While the Mattingly illness isn't fatal, it can be devastating. Family
members may face many of the same issues.

   Parents who learn, after having children, that they have any inherited
illness may feel guilty about having put others at risk, Dr. Wexler said.
Children who have no symptoms, but are told they carry the disease gene, can
feel confused or stigmatized.

   Researchers point out that genetic tests can be a tremendous relief to people
who find they are not at risk. Others may want to know about their health status
so they can better plan their lives. Some couples who would never have had
children now do so, because of prenatal screening.

   But Dr. Wexler says that doctors and others tend to push testing as a kind of
treatment even where it's not helpful.

   "People are told, 'If you're worried about getting it, go take a test," she
said. "That's the American way."

   Back in the nursing home, John Philip Mattingly, one of the oldest and most
seriously afflicted members of the family, sips ice water and recalls, in a
raspy voice, the lineage of his illness.

   "My father had it," says the 72-year-old former bacteriologist with the state
Department of Agriculture. "He was in a wheelchair for 25 years. Dad had five
brothers, and two of them had it."

   As a boy, John Philip often stumbled and fell. As he reached manhood, his
feet and hands began to weaken. For years, he thought his problems were the
result of a childhood bout with scarlet fever.

   He didn't discover until he was middle-aged that his slow-motion tumble into
paralysis was part of the Mattingly family legacy. "In those days, we did not
know anything about this condition," he said. "It really was a mystery."

   Mr. Mattingly's cousin, Anna Mae Wuenschel, sits in a wheelchair, pushed by
her husband.

   Over the past two years, the 72-year-old retired State Department employee
has broken her right hip and her right leg in separate falls at their Silver
Spring condominium.

   When she was 35, she thought the weakness in her joints was arthritis. By the
time she was 53, in 1975, she was tripping every afternoon.

   The State Department sent her to the NIH for treatment. Doctors there didn't
realize that she was a member of the extended Mattingly clan. They couldn't find
anything wrong.

   About five years ago, she was told she had the same disorder as her cousin,
John Philip Mattingly. And, she discovered, her son had it as well.

   She wishes there had been a test when she was younger.

   "I would want to know," she said. "If I'd have known I had this, I would have
traveled more. I love to travel."

   There was one thing she would not have done.

   "I would not have had children," she said. "I don't think it would be fair.
It's bad enough now, the way the family is, without passing it on further."

   Bonnie Mattingly Beardsley, who is now 46, sees things differently.

   One day in 1974, she drove to the NIH. The same neurologist who diagnosed her
father, John Philip Mattingly, asked her a few questions and watched her flex
her ankles. He quickly confirmed her fear: She had the same genetic ailment. She
was five months pregnant with her first child.

   "I teared up and said, 'What about my baby?' " she recalled.

   A 50-50 gamble, the doctor said. "Do you want this baby?" he asked.

   "I do very much," she said.

   "Then go home and have a happy baby, and what comes, comes," he said.

   Her toddler, Nick, looked "fat, round, happy, healthy," she said. But she
noticed he couldn't stand from a squat without pushing off with his hands. Her
doctor confirmed her fear: He had the Mattingly disorder.

   All his life, she said, Nick has been willing to struggle. He struggled to
wrestle in junior high school, and failed. He struggled to become an actor, and
succeeded.

   Today he is enrolled in a Florida college, spending the year in London in an
acting program.

   Ms. Beardsley never regretted her decision to have Nick. Later she gambled
and had another child, a daughter, who was not affected.

   "It comes back to the basic premise that, just because everybody doesn't walk
the same, their life is still valuable," she said.

   "I wish I didn't have" the disorder, she said. "I wish my son didn't have it.
It bothers me a lot. I'm starting to feel my world is limited by it, and that
really bothers me, bugs me, irritates me.

   "But I'm still glad I'm here."

   DOUGLAS BIRCH is a reporter for The Sun.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO 1, Photography by Barbara Haddock Taylor, The Mattingly
family finds get-togethers easiest at the Silver Spring nursing home where John
Philip Mattingly resides. Seated from left to right: Andrew Mattingly Jackson
Jr., Anna Mae Wuenschel and John Philip Mattingly. Standing: Janet Lane, Jay
Lane and Walter Wuenschel (Anna Mae's husband). All of the family members
pictured suffer some degree of the nerve disorder.; COLOR PHOTO 2, Photography
by Barbara Haddock Taylor, Andrew Mattingly Jackson Jr. (left) and John Philip
Mattingly chat at John's nursing home. There are at least 70 members of the
Mattingly clan affected by the disorder.; COLOR GRAPH, SUN STAFF GRAPHIC,
Lineage of Andrew Mattingly Jackson Jr.; COLOR PHOTO 3, Photography by Barbara
Haddock Taylor, University of Pennsylvania researchers William Lensch and Dr.
Mena Scavina examine an autoradiograph of the Mattingly family DNA.; COLOR PHOTO
4, Photography by Barbara Haddock Taylor, Dr. David Cornblath, a neurologist at
Johns Hopkins Hospital, has been studying the Mattingly disorder for a couple of
years. He suspects that it probably is a variety of juvenile-onset ALS (Lou
Gehrig's disease).; COLOR PHOTO 5, Photography by Barbara Haddock Taylor, Anna
Mae Wuenschel, 72, discovered she had the disorder about five years ago. She
wishes there had been a test for it when she was younger.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1995


                             481 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           January 12, 1995 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B16

LENGTH: 278 words

HEADLINE: INJECTIONS OF GENDER MATERIAL REDUCE HIGH BLOOD PRESSURERESEARCH
NOTEBOOK

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Thursday, January 12, 1995 INJECTIONS OF GENDER MATERIAL REDUCE HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE

   RESEARCH NOTEBOOK

   With a single injection of synthetic genetic material into the brains of
rats, researchers at the University of Florida's College of Medicine have
significantly reduced blood pressure for up to a week.

   Dr. Ian Phillips, director of the Hypertension Center, said the studies in
genetically hypertensive animals indicate that gene therapy could prove to be
an effective, safe means of controlling high blood pressure -- a leading cause
of heart attack and stroke.

   ``Through our experiments in rats, we have shown we can block the normal
sequence of genetic events that lead to hypertension originating in the
brain,'' Phillips said. The therapy interrupts the process by which nerve  cells
produce a hormone called angiotensin. When overproduced, the hormone  constricts
blood vessels, slows blood flow and causes blood pressure to rise.

   ``We are not proposing brain injections for human patients, but we hope to
develop a way to deliver gene therapy that would inhibit angiotensin  production
at the site where excess synthesis occurs in the brain and provide  long-lasting
control of blood pressure.''

   Details of the experiments will be published in March in the journal
Hypertension.

   The research team is investigating the use of a non-replicating virus -- a
virus incapable of transmitting disease -- as a vehicle for transporting
synthetic antisense DNA into the chromosomes of nerve cells. Their ultimate
goal is to design a therapy that would induce these cells to produce their own
antisense DNA that would generate long-term control of angiotensin  production.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             482 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           January 10, 1995, Tuesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Section A; Page 15

LENGTH: 722 words

HEADLINE: Medicine needs dose of history

BYLINE: Abigail Trafford

BODY:

   Two hundred years ago, the most popular medical treatment was bloodletting.
Doctors and patients alike swore by it. They believed that draining blood purged
the body of ill health. The fact that many people, including George Washington,
died of this treatment did not diminish its reputation. Bloodletting held sway
as state-of-the-art medicine for more than 2,000 years.

   It is easy for us to scoff at the medical buffoonery of the past. After all,
this is the golden age of medical science with gene therapy and transplants,
diagnostic body scans and laser surgery.

   But history should make us humble. "Historians will look back on the medicine
of the 1990s as absolutely ridiculous - just as we look back on the medicine of
the 1790s," says medical historian Howard G. Wilcox of the Veterans
Administration Medical Center in Spokane, Wash.

   Which favored remedy today will become tomorrow's futile strategy? History is
replete with examples of treatments and technologies that fall from favor. Yet
certain attitudes toward health and medicine seem impervious to change.

   Reliance on experts: State-of-the-art therapies always have the backing of
the best and brightest in the medical establishment. Bloodletting, for example,
was promoted by all the great physicians, from the ancient doctor Galen who
treated the Roman gladiators to American colonial leader Benjamin Rush.

   Once a therapy is officially endorsed by the experts, it takes on a life of
its own. Who would question the wisdom of the great medical authorities? As long
as the medical establishment endorses a treatment, it is very hard for it to go
out of fashion.

   Rationalizing the bad outcome: With established therapies, doctors and
patients have a host of reasons why the treatment sometimes doesn't work. After
all, no treatment is perfect, and every one has side effects. In this way, the
best and brightest can explain why some patients do worse or die after being
treated.

   What they don't do is question whether there is something fundamentally wrong
with the treatment itself.

   Bloodletting was obviously fatal in many instances. The favorite
rationalization was that physicians weren't aggressive enough in their use of
the therapeutic technology.

   This line of thinking has a familiar ring. What about today's desperately ill
patients who are offered high-risk, last-resort type treatments? Just as in
earlier bloodletting times, the health-care community is "undertaking forms of
therapy where no objective evidence exists that the patients do any better,"
says Wilcox.

   Improving the technology: Advances in medicine are often improvements on old
strategies. The logic is impeccable: Once a treatment is considered a good
remedy, improving the treatment can only make it a better remedy. Bloodletting
technology is no exception. The first great improvement was engineered by the
ancient Galen, who cut off the tails of leeches so that the slimy little
creatures would never feel full and would therefore suck out more blood.

   How many new treatments today are merely improvements on existing remedies?
From the times of Galen, the goal in science has too often been to build a
better mousetrap; it is not to question the fundamental approach to disease.

   Yet history cautions us about hubris in health. In the past 50 years, a
number of entrenched therapies have bitten the dust. "Things were done in the
name of medicine that were clearly wrong - but we didn't have the science,"
notes physician M. Roy Schwarz, who is in charge of science, education and
patient care at the American Medical Association. "The retroscope makes people
look foolish."

   Medical science is certainly more rigorous today. Blue-ribbon panels are
formed to measure the effectiveness of common procedures. The mapping of all the
genes in the body promises to unleash a biological revolution that radically
redefines the origins of disease.

   But a dose of humility may be what the doctor of history will order.

   Consider: Those blood-sucking leeches are making a comeback. Their saliva
contains important blood-thinning substances, and the creatures are being used
like medical instruments to heal wounds. Who knows? Galen's leeches may one day
be restored to their former medical glory.

   Abigail Trafford is a syndicated columnist who writes on health and medicine.

GRAPHIC: Illustration: Engraving of bloodletting during the middle ages./
British Museum, ca. 1475-85

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1995


                             483 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 10, 1995 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 312 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO and CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Bedford Property Investors Inc. of Lafayette said it will acquire the real
estate portfolio of Mission West Properties of San Diego for about $10.9 million
cash.

   As part of the deal, expected to close in the next several months, Bedford
will assume about $34.1 million in debt.

   Mission West owns office and industrial buildings in Southern California and
Arizona. GTI Corp. of San Diego announced it has completed its purchase of 72
percent of the outstanding common shares of Promptus Communications Inc. for $19
million in cash.

   Promptus supplies access to high-speed digital networks for
video-conferencing, data transfer and other services.

   GTI makes network products, electronic components and products for the
communications, electronics and semiconductor industries. Monroe E. Trout, San
Diego, chairman emeritus of American Healthcare Systems, is one of 10 recipients
of 1995 Horatio Alger Awards for lifetime achievement.

   Other Californians: Quincy Jones of Los Angeles, chief executive of Qwest
Records; and Herbert F. Boeckmann of Sepulveda, owner and president of Galpin
Motors Inc. Kunnan Golf president Bill Price reported company sales of $14.1
million for the year ended Nov. 30, up 44 percent from the $7.9 million in 1993
sales.

   Sales of Kunnan's metal-composite clubs fed gains in each quarter for the
privately held San Diego company, he said. Vans Inc. of Orange opened its first
Vans concept store as a section of Burdine's flagship store in the Dadeland Mall
in Miami, Fla. Vans president and chief executive Christopher G. Staff said he
expects the concept to expand to other divisions of the Federated Group of
stores. Viagene Inc. has obtained a worldwide, nonexclusive license from Biogen
Inc. for the use of the hepatitis B virus genes in gene-therapy treatments for
chronic HBV infection, a viral disease afflicting 500 million people annually
worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             484 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 10, 1995 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 683 words

HEADLINE: Little golfer has a giant will to beat handicap;
Cystic fibrosis victim's spirit inspires others

BYLINE: BARRY M. BLOOM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The youngest golfer on the San Diego Country Club course yesterday is a
symbol of endurance to cystic-fibrosis patients everywhere. As a salute to his
waging a successful battle against the disease, 10-year-old Jon Villani has been
named mascot of the first Cystic Fibrosis Skins Challenge, a benefit tournament
hosted by golf pro Billy Casper. Yet, playing the game is important, too, for
the mascot. On the 11th hole, Jon uses his pitching wedge to launch a high
arching shot from 70 yards away -- directly into the cup.

   Jon raises his arms skyward and leaps into his father's arms to celebrate the
sporting miracle. The real miracle is that Jon is alive, relatively well and
able to compete. "His goal now is to stay out of the hospital," says Pat
Villani, Jon's father.

   "The last year has been a good one for him.

   He's getting better and better." Jon has been afflicted since birth with the
deadly genetic disease that constantly fills his lungs with life-threatening
gunk. Last January, he was one of the first children authorized to take
Pulmozyme, an experimental drug that liquifies the thick, choking mucus, making
it easier for cystic-fibrosis sufferers to breathe. The Villanis were told at
the time that the new drug is not a cure.

   In a best-case scenario, the drug, produced by Genentech and more commonly
known as DNase, could help Jon survive until life-saving gene therapy is
approved by the Food and Drug Administration. In a worst-case scenario,
Pulmozyme could have an adverse effect, sending Jon back to where he began --
confronting the finality of death instead of a tough lie on the golf links. So
far, the drug's triumph has been Jon's triumph. "It's wonderful watching him out
here in the sunshine," Casper said.

   "You couldn't find a healthier spot for him.

   I have a friend who says every day you play golf or fish it adds 10 minutes
to your life." A year ago, Jon's playing 18 holes -- as he did yesterday -- was
only a dream. He was in and out of the hospital and his family was forced to
rush home early from a vacation because his breathing capacity deteriorated
dangerously.

   CF patients also have a difficult time maintaining body weight, and Jon had
faded to below 50 pounds. Jon's condition was complicated by a fungus that also
began clogging his lungs.

   He was placed on steroids, a therapy that continues and that seems to have
limited the fungus infection. However, it was a year of inhaling Pulmozyme each
day that had a major impact for the better on Jon. He now weighs 68 pounds and
he has not had a hospital stay since March.

   "And that was for a tuneup," his father says. "(The drug) allowed him to turn
the corner," Pat Villani adds.

   "He can sleep regularly.

   He can eat better.

   It has had a major, positive influence on his life.

   He's filling out.

   In the last year, he has just blossomed." Jon's rebound also has had a
profound effect on his family.

   There is now room for the normal passages of life.

   His parents no longer lie in bed at night listening with agony to his endless
spells of coughing. There are family parleys about mundane matters like school
projects and after-school sports, no longer ruled out by the ravages of the
disease. In the fifth grade now, Jon has chosen to forsake Little League
baseball this spring for additional rounds of golf practice.

   His goal is to play in junior tournaments this summer. Yesterday also was a
big day for the local cystic-fibrosis chapter. According to director Kae Meyer,
the 92 players raised $40,000, most of which is earmarked for CF research.
"We're so close, I can taste it," Meyer says.

   "It's a little frustrating. I'd like more players out here.

   I just want to cure this disease." Jon Villani is so close he can now
experience the pain of life's little failures.

   He misses the green on the 13th hole, and in trying to recover, hits a tree.

   Jon's expression, in contrast to his exuberance of two holes earlier, is one
of misery.

   Then he quickly recovers. He and his father are enjoying a golden day,
playing in the same foursome. He is hardly coughing. "Poppa," Jon says, "thanks
very much for getting me involved in golf."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. He's out to sink cystic fibrosis: Because of a new
medicine, Jon Villani is able to play a round of golf, as he did yesterday at
the San Diego Country Club in Chula Vista. 2. GETTING A BEAD ON GETTING BETTER |
Pat Villani squats down behind his son, Jon, as the 10-year-old lines up his
next shot at the San Diego Country Club course in Chula Vista. Wasting away a
year ago with the deadly effects of the genetic disease cystic fibrosis, Jon is
now able to play a complete round of golf only because of a new medicine he's
been inhaling daily since last January. (B-1); PHOTOBY: 1,2. Union-Tribune /
JOHN GASTALDO

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             485 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1995 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             January 9, 1995 Monday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-4

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: Health Family Tree screens for risk factors

BYLINE: BILL SLOAN, Health & Fitness News Service

BODY:

   Dr. Roger R. Williams, professor of internal medicine at the University of
Utah School of Medicine in Salt Lake City, urges Americans to take notice of
what is happening within their own families. "If your father had a heart attack
in his 40s or 50s, or if your mother had one even in her 60s," he says, "there's
a good change that you're a candidate for an early heart attack, too.

   If your brother or sister has abnormally high cholesterol or blood pressure,
you may be similarly affected." One positive outgrowth of Williams' research has
been the Health Family Tree project, which has been used effectively in Utah and
Texas to screen thousands of high school students for family-oriented risk
factors. "The cost of screening and educating young people to the risks through
this program is only about $10 per student," Williams says, "and it also
pinpoints people who are predisposed to other major diseases such as some types
of cancer.

   So far, Health Family Tree questionnaires have been distributed in six states
and several foreign countries, and we've been able to collect a lot of valuable
data from them.

   Now what we need is someone who's willing to spend the money to expand this
program." Eventually, gene therapy may reduce or eliminate some of the added
risks for the endangered 5 percent.

   But meanwhile, each time researchers find another family in which "400-plus
cholesterol levels and obituaries are commonplace," Williams says, it provides a
potential gold mine of valuable new life-saving information. "We urge anyone
whose cholesterol level is more than 360 and whose triglycerides are normal to
contact us at Cardiovascular Genetics, 161 Chipeta Way, Salt Lake City, UT
84108," he says.

   "We'll send you questionnaires to fill out and help you live longer." As more
is learned about inherited health risks -- both these affecting the
cardiovascular system and those related to other serious diseases -- medical
authorities are urging Americans to take note of what is happening in their
families. The American Heart Association recommends keeping a written record of
health problems affecting aunts, uncles, cousins and grandparents, as well as
parents and siblings, either through a Health Family Tree or a homemade chart --
and sharing it with family physicians. "Over time," says Williams, "this kind of
simple step can provide information that will help your family -- and thousands
of others -- escape premature death or disability."

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             486 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 8, 1995, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 57

LENGTH: 1952 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme's plans to beat obsolescence;
EMERGING BUSINESS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp. does not expect to receive the final go-ahead to begin drug
manufacturing at its new $ 130 million Allston plant until sometime early next
year. But president Henri Termeer is already focused on research that will make
the plant's main product obsolete.

   "You have to think that far ahead and beyond," said the Netherlands-born
businessman, walking briskly through the corridors and past glass-partitioned
"bioreactors" at the Allston facility.

    Indeed, Ceredase, Genzyme's pricey bioengineered drug for Gaucher's disease,
and it's genetically engineered successor Cerezyme, is not a cure. But the
treatments are enormously successful for patients with the inherited disorder
who suffer from enlarged spleens, anemia, severe bone pain and excessive
bruising. Gaucher's symptoms affect some 5,000 people worldwide.

   So, while the US Food and Drug Administration is validating the new plant's
procedures for manufacturing Cerezyme, Genzyme is working with scientists at the
University of Pittsburgh and IntroGene B.V., a privately held biotech firm in
Rijswijk, the Netherlands, to develop gene therapy technology that would
ultimately eliminate the need for the current drugs. The gene therapy would
provide a long-lasting correction of the genetic defect associated with
Gaucher's.

   "In some ways we are investing in the obsolescence of Cerezyme," said
Termeer, who does not expect a gene therapy solution to Gaucher's to be
available for seven to 10 years. "We hope to leapfrog our own technology."

   This life-cycle approach seems to energize Termeer. In a wide-ranging
interview last week, he talked of how the Gaucher's disease work and a host of
other novel projects are putting the company on course to becoming a diversified
health care company as others in the biotech industry are struggling for
survival.

   And while many Genzyme watchers praise Termeer's diversification moves, some
critics say the company has overvalued the potential market size of some of its
forthcoming products. They also say it is too early to judge the company's
ambitious plans and recent acquisitions.

   In just the last year Genzyme Transgenics, a majority owned subsidiary,
acquired TSI Corp., a financially troubled drug-testing firm in Milford, and
purchased a farm in Spencer for 550 goats imported from New Zealand to produce
human proteins harvested from goat's milk. These proteins will be used in
potential new medicines. Genzyme bought Sygena Ltd., a peptide and fine chemical
firm in Basel, Switzerland.

   The company is also planning to spend more than $ 400 million in the coming
years - nearly double the entire cost of Ceredase's development - for a gene
therapy solution to treat cystic fibrosis, a debilitating genetic disease that
affects 30,000 Americans and an equal number overseas.

   Genzyme, strengthening its diagnostics business that does prenatal testing,
began testing a prenatal blood test for quickly determining Down's syndrome.
Called fetal cell separation, the test promises to eliminate the 1-in-200 risk
of miscarriage from amniocentesis, in which the womb is punctured to remove
fetal cells.

   Last summer Genzyme ratcheted up its acquisitions by buying a natural skin
and cartilage company, BioSurface Technology Inc. of Cambridge, and merging it
with several other promising product companies into a separate division, Genzyme
Tissue Repair.

   To finance the new division, Termeer set up a separate class of stock that
reflects the group's value but does not impinge on Genzyme's earnings. Genzyme,
which spent $ 10 million to launch the unit and will fund $ 30 million more over
the next 3 1/2 years, used a similar strategy to establish Genzyme Transgenics,
which owns the goat farm.

   However, early investors in some of these spinoffs have suffered as stock
prices have dived. Genzyme Transgenics, which originally raised $ 12 million at
$ 8 a share in 1993, is now trading in the 1 3/4 range.

   (A check of Genzyme's stock price can be nettlesome to the uninitated, as
there are several listings, including Genzyme Transgenics, Genzyme Tissue
Repair, overseas and warrants listings. Genzyme General Division is the bulk of
the company's operations, and the stock is trading around $ 30 a share, down
substantially from previous years.)

   On Wall Street, some analysts give Termeer high marks for the company's
diversification, while others question whether Genzyme is overextended.

   "The problem for Genzyme is that they have become a very diversified company,
and while it is hard enough for big pharmaceutical firms to integrate divisions
that fit well, Genzyme may face difficulties putting together operations that
are hard to put together," said Alex Zisson, biotechnology analyst at Hambrecht
& Quist. "Termeer has a done a great job acquiring and licensing other
technologies and compounds, but given the long development cycle, it is too
early to tell how successful he will be."

   Linda Miller, PaineWebber biotech analyst, maintains that Genzyme is a health
care company with autonomous businesses, closer to the structure of Chiron
Corp., the diversified Emeryville, Calif. biopharmaceutical firm, than Biogen
Inc. or Genentech Inc., two predominantly drug development-oriented firms.

   "Positioning Genzyme as a health care company represents lower risk for the
investor and the company," she added. "Genentech and Amgen write checks to
acquire companies and in-license technology rights, while Henri has taken a more
operations and control roll by assembling companies, putting in management teams
and creating divisions. Both approaches work, but Henri's average check is
probably smaller."

   Other observers are skeptical, noting that while Termeer has sown the seeds
for some very challenging diversification projects that will cushion the company
if a promising biopharmaceutical fails, Genzyme is still heavily depending on a
single product, Ceredase/Cerezyme.

   Genzyme's sales this year are expected to top $ 350 million - up from $ 270
million - with Ceredase accounting for $ 190-200 million, or around 55 percent
of the firm's revenue. Termeer sees Ceredase/Cerezyme sales leveling off at
around $ 250 million as most of the company's new sales are coming from Europe
and Asia.

   To be effective, Ceredase/Cerezyme must be taken initially in high doses at
prices exceeding $ 150,000 a year, followed by a maintenance program of monthly
infusions for the rest of the patient's lives at a cost of around $ 60,000 per
year.

   Indeed, Genzyme has received some harsh criticism both for the drug's high
price - as much as $ 350,000 - when it was first introduced - as well as for its
overly aggressive efforts to sell directly to patients.

   Beyond Ceredase, Genzyme's pipeline of forthcoming drugs contains no major
blockbusters - a strategy that limits the company's major risks, say some Wall
Street analysts.

   So far, Genzyme, unlike its neighbor Biogen, has not experienced any major
disappointments in near-term drug development projects.

   "We haven't slipped yet," chuckled Termeer.

   With the success of Ceredase, there is keen interest in Genzyme's next major
product, hyaluronic acid, a surgical coating solution designed to reduce
postoperative adhesions and reduce the need for secondary operations. One form
of this product is intended for use as an orthopedic surgical aid to reduce pain
and inflammation after arthroscopic surgery. Genzyme is expected to announce the
results of a pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial in the next few months.

   "We think the market for this drug will be four times the size of Ceredase,"
said Termeer, of the estimated $ 1.3 billion market, noting the hyaluronic acid
could be used by virtually all surgeons.

   Not everyone is so optimisitc, noting that unlike with Ceredase, Genzyme has
several competitors with hyaluronic acid, including Focal Inc., a 3 1/2-year-old
Cambridge biotech company, and several major pharmaceutical firms. Moreover,
there are other products being developed to accomplish the same postsurgical
goals.

   "The list of substances is quite large," noted Michael Ehrenreich, president
of Ehrenreich & Co Securities Corp., a New York firm specializing in biotech
issues. Genzyme also faces difficulty convincing surgeons to adopt new
prodcures, Ehrenreich said.

   Even if hyaluronic acid is successful, Ehrenreich estimates that Genzyme will
generate only $ 150 million in annual revenues five years after formal approval.
"Hyaluronic acid is unlikely to be universally or fully effective in
postoperative adhesions prevention and will, therefore, eventually have to split
the market with several other products," he added.

   But Termeer disputes these claims, insisting the market is huge and Genzyme
could be the first to field a product.

   "We will beat everyone by at least five years," Termeer said confidently.

 $ 400m planned for cystic fibrosis research

    Genzyme Corp., which spent nearly $ 250 million to develop a single drug for
Gaucher's disease, is planning to spend more than $ 400 million for a gene
therapy solution to cystic fibrosis, the lethal disease that affects about
60,000 people worldwide.

   By contrast, most biotech-developed drugs are projected to cost in the $ 125
million to $ 160 milllion range.

   Cystic fibrosis - a genetic disease of the pancreas and lungs that makes
breathing and food digestion very difficult due to a buildup of thick mucous -
has no cure. Patients often die by age 30.

   Genentech Corp. of South San Francisco has the only government-approved
treatment, Pulmozyme. It is the first new cystic fibrosis treatment in 30 years
and helps patients breathe easier. Priced at around $ 10,000 per year, the drug
has been on the market for barely a year. Several other biotechnology and
pharmaceutical companies are also developing cystic fibrosis treatments.

   Henri Termeer, Genzyme's president, says his company's proposed genetic
therapy approach would prolong life, possibly doubling the life expectancy. Thus
patients, who would be working and leading productive lives, could afford to pay
significantly more for a life-prolonging drug than for Pulmozyme, he said.

   To fund its ambitious program without denting Genzyme's balance sheet,
Termeer established Neozyme II, a separate public company that raised $ 85
million. Those non-Genzyme funds pay for research and development and early
clinical trials conducted by Genzyme staff.  So far, $ 36 million of Neozyme II
funds have been spent on cystic fibrosis with the balance, nearly $ 50 million,
to be spent in the next two years.

   In addition, an earlier fund, Neozyme I, that was used to fund other Genzyme
projects, provided an additional $ 23 million for the cystic fibrosis project.
All together, Genzyme has $ 108 million available in pooled funds.

   However, the research is owned by Neozyme investors - not Genzyme. Thus, if
the risky development of a gene therapy program for cystic fibrosis fails, only
the Neozyme shareholders lose out. But if the research and subsequent clinical
trials prove successful, Genzyme can acquire it from Neozyme II. That will cost
Genzyme $ 280 million, said Termeer, and assumes the proposed product gets US
Food and Drug Administration approval.

   Only then could Genzyme begin commercially manufacturing the gene therapy
products. Still, to produce needed small quantities of the drug, Genzyme is
spending its own money on a pilot manufacturing plant in a former Prime Computer
Corp. building in Framingham. That recently completed facility cost $ 12 million
of Genzyme's funds. That would put Genzyme's potential cost at $ 292 million.

   Add to that, $ 100 million for a full-scale biomanufacturing bunology major
story name-termeer

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1995


                             487 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 6, 1995, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 78

LENGTH: 107 words

HEADLINE: Biogen, Viagene in pact;
BUSINESS, BRIEFLY

BODY:

    BIOGEN INC. of Cambridge, which has developed genetically engineered
hepatitis B virus antigens that are the key components used in vaccines marketed
by several major pharmaceutical companies, has licensed its hepatitis B gene
technology to Viagene Inc. of San Diego. The small firm wants to develop a gene
therapy treatment for the chronic viral infection. Under the agreement, Biogen
will receive a license fee and royalties from the California biotech firm, but
retain certain marketing rights. A significant portion of Biogen's revenues
comes from royalties on hepatitis B vaccines sold by SmithKline Beecham and
Merck & Co.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1995


                             488 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1995 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 6, 1995, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 681 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough reported in isolating blood cells for marrow transplants

BYLINE: By Usha Lee McFarling, Globe Staff

BODY:

    A new technique for isolating human stem cells, the bone marrow cells that
mature into a variety of blood cells, including oxygen-bearing red cells and
infection-fighting white cells, was reported today by Harvard medical
researchers.

   The procedure, developed at the Harvard Medical School lab of Dr. David
Scadden, could improve outcomes for bone marrow transplants in cancer patients
and lead to genetic therapies for sickle-cell anemia and AIDS. It could also
inspire novel medical therapies using customized immune cells, which would be
tailored to attack or resist specific diseases.

   Dr. Jerome Groopman, chief of hematology and oncology at the Deaconess
Hospital, called Scadden's technique an "elegant and clever strategy" that could
prove useful to scientists working on a number of diseases.

   Scadden, who specializes in blood disorders, cancer and AIDS, was looking for
a therapy for AIDS, a way to protect cells from the ravages of the HIV virus.
One approach would be to inject protective genes into stem cells, which should
make them - and their descendants - resistant to HIV.

   But stem cells are hard to find.  In the soup of red blood cells, immune
cells and platelets that make up bone marrow, just one of 100,000 cells,
scientists estimate, is a stem cell.

   And under the microscope, stem cells that are not yet committed to a course
of development look almost identical to cells that have begun to change into
platelets, killer cells or other marrow components.

   "Stem cells are elusive," said Scadden. Fishing for them in "a sea of similar
looking cells," he said, researchers have tried several approaches over the past
decade. They shot marrow cells with lasers to reveal the differences in cells
and used proteins that bind to non-stem cells to pull them out, leaving behind
the stem cells.

   Those techniques, though, usually yielded samples in which only 5 percent are
stem cells. The most successful attempt netted a mixture that was 20 percent
stem cells.

   Scadden and his colleagues wanted a higher concentration of stem cells to use
in their AIDS research, so they invented a new way to isolate the cells. That
technique, described in today's issue of the journal Science, yields a potion
where three out of four cells are the prized stem cells.

   Scadden's technique takes advantage of the cells' resting phase, just before
they begin to differentiate. Stem cells already on their future paths can be
"turned on" using hormones known to stimulate cells. Then, cells that are "on"
are given a drug that affects only active cells and leaves the quiet stem cells
untouched.

   "We made cells we didn't want to commit suicide," said Scadden, predicting
that the technique would be further refined by others.

   The labor-intensive, weeklong process "requires a lot of TLC," Scadden said.
He credited Anna Berardi, a scientist in his lab, with supplying much of the
technical expertise demanded by the experiments.  Other co-authors are Anlai
Wang, James Levine and Peter Lopez.

   The two most important applications of Scadden's work, Groopman suggested,
are bone marrow transplants and AIDS therapies.

   Having greater concentrations of stem cells in a bone marrow transplant would
increase the chances that the transplant would replenish a cancer patient's
blood and immune systems.

   Better purification means that scientists can remove more of the cancer cells
contaminating the bone marrow of cancer patients. Today, cancer cells are often
returned to patients who are transplanted with their own bone marrow.

   And in trying to create genetic therapies for AIDS and other diseases using
stem cells, scientists will be more successful if the genes they are injecting
get into stem cells and are not wasted on other cells in dilute samples,
Groopman said.

   Scadden is more reticent about predicting how his work will translate into
patient care, but he, too, is eager to see therapies improve.

   "I see patients," said Scadden, who treats people with cancer and AIDS at
Deaconess.  "I have a weekly reminder of the urgency to move on this."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO DIAGRAM, Dr. David Scadden, a specialist in blood disorders,
examines a flask of bone marrow cells yesterday at Deaconess Hospital. / GLOBE
STAFF PHOTO / DAVID L. RYAN

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1995


                             489 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

HEADLINE: Crucial Advance Made in Blood Cell Research

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Researchers reported today that they had found a simple way to isolate human
stem cells, the elusive progenitors of all the body's red and white blood cells.
The method could quickly replace the current cumbersome methods and facilitate
studies of these pivotal cells, which are needed for gene therapy and bone
marrow transplants.

   The trick, discovered by Dr. David Scadden and his colleagues at New England
Deaconess Hospital in Boston, was to exploit the fact that stem cells are
quiescent and do not grow in circumstances when other marrow cells do. Dr.
Scadden's group forced those other cells to grow and, as soon as they started to
divide, forced them to commit suicide, leaving behind mostly stem cells.

    About 1 in 5 cells was a stem cell with this method, whereas other methods
typically ended up with a soup of marrow in which just 1 in 50 or 1 in 100 cells
was a stem cell.

   The new method, reported in the journal Science, comes on the heels of
decades of efforts by researchers throughout the world to find a way to fish the
tiny stem cells out of the huge pool of marrow cells where they live. Although
human marrow contains about 10 billion cells at any one time, just 100,000 of
them are stem cells, Dr. Scadden said. They are of immense interest because they
form a pool of immortal cells that develop when needed into red or white blood
cells. Some stem cells will multiply and transform themselves into colonies of
these specialized cells; others will divide and remain stem cells, replenishing
the stem cells that were lost.

   Researchers want to isolate stem cells to understand how blood cell
production is regulated and to use them for gene therapy.

   On a basic science level, investigators said, the stem cell system is
awesome. For example, Dr. Scadden said, stem cells routinely send enough of
their members down the path to become a type of infection-fighting white blood
cell that ingests bacteria to create 1 billion of these white blood cells, or
neutrophils, each day.

   Each neutrophil lives just 7 to 10 hours. Normally, the neutrophils circulate
in the blood and percolate through the tissues as a sort of surveillance force.
But when an infection begins, the stem cells go into overdrive, developing into
neutrophils so quickly that at least 10 billion a day are made, Dr. Scadden
said.

   Because stem cells are immortal -- in contrast to most cells, which undergo a
fixed number of divisions and then die -- they are the targets for many gene
therapy studies in which the goal is to add new genes that will last a lifetime.
Dr. Scadden and others, for example, want to add genes to stem cells that would
make them resistant to the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS. If
they succeed, a person with an HIV infection could grow a new immune system that
was impervious to the virus. Others are trying to add genes to healthy stem
cells of cancer patients, to make them resistant to chemotherapy. Still others
want to treat diseases like sickle cell by adding genes to marrow stem cells.

   For all those theoretical and practical reasons, said Dr. Jerome Groopman, a
hematologist at Deaconess who was not part Dr. Scadden's group, "there has been
a very, very intense concerted effort to devise strategies to isolate stem
cells."

   So intense is the interest in isolating stem cells that the pharmaceutical
company Sandoz paid $391.8 million in 1991 for 60 percent of a company,
Systemix, with a patent on a complex isolation procedure developed by Dr. Irving
L. Weissman of Stanford University.

   But Dr. Stephen Emerson the chief of hematology at the University of
Pennsylvania, said that the new method "if anything, would make complex
immunologically based techniques like the Systemix approach even less
important."

   Dr. Scadden said Deaconess Hospital had filed for a patent on his method.

   Dr. Scadden said he reasoned that it might be possible to exploit the
tranquil nature of stem cells to isolate them. More developed cells of the bone
marrow grow furiously in response to certain hormones, but the stem cells simply
remain dormant. So he decided to add these hormones to the marrow cells along
with a chemotherapeutic drug, 5-FU, that kills dividing cells.

   As predicted, the vast majority of the marrow cells began to grow, and
immediately died because of the 5-FU. The cells that remained tended to be tiny
and composed mostly of a nucleus, with a halo of cytoplasm around them. They
looked like stem cells. And, Dr. Scadden and his colleagues found, they behaved
like stem cells, too. The researchers could stimulate them with hormones to
develop into red or white blood cells.

   Hematologists said that the new method was simple enough to enable many
laboratories to start studying stem cells in earnest, looking for hormones that
make them grow and divide and understanding how they are signaled to develop
into red or white blood cells.

   "It's a really powerful technique," said Dr. Gerald Spangrude, a researcher
at the University of Utah who previously worked with Dr. Weissman, developing
the method in mice that Dr. Weissman used to isolate human stem cells.

   Dr. Emerson, at Pennsylvania, said the new method "looks beautiful" and
"should be widely utilized."

   Dr. Scadden said he hoped to use the new method immediately in research on
gene therapy for HIV.

   He said he was "not confident that this approach is the final thing," but he
added that it offered a new way to think about isolating stem cells and opened
the door to a host of studies that once seemed infeasible.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1995


                             490 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1995 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         January 6, 1995 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: ISOLATION OF KEY CELLS SIMPLIFIED

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA 1995, The New York Times

BODY:

   Researchers reported Thursday that they had found a simple way to isolate
human stem cells, the elusive progenitors of all the body's red and white blood
cells. The method could quickly replace the current cumbersome methods and
facilitate studies of these pivotal cells, which are needed for gene therapy and
bone marrow transplants.

   The trick, discovered by Dr. David Scadden and his colleagues at New England
Deaconess Hospital in Boston, was to exploit the fact that stem cells are
quiescent and do not grow in circumstances when other marrow cells do.

   Scadden's group forced those other cells to grow and, as soon as they started
to divide, forced them to commit suicide, leaving behind mostly stem cells.

   About 1 in 5 cells was a stem cell with this method, whereas other methods
typically ended up with a soup of marrow in which just 1 in 50 or 1 in 100 cells
was a stem cell.

   The new method, reported in the journal Science, comes on the heels of
decades of efforts by researchers throughout the world to find a way to fish the
tiny stem cells out of the huge pool of marrow cells where they live.

   Although human marrow contains about 10 billion cells at any one time, just
100,000 of them are stem cells, Scadden said.

   They are of immense interest because they form a pool of immortal cells that
develop when needed into red or white blood cells.

   Some stem cells will multiply and transform themselves into colonies of these
specialized cells; others will divide and remain stem cells, replenishing the
stem cells that were lost.

   Researchers want to isolate stem cells to understand how blood cell
production is regulated and to use them for gene therapy.

   On a basic science level, investigators said, the stem cell system is
awesome. For example, Scadden said, stem cells routinely send enough of their
members down the path to become a type of infection-fighting white blood cell
that ingests bacteria - to create 1 billion of these white blood cells, or
neutrophils, each day.

   Each neutrophil lives just 7 to 10 hours. Normally, the neutrophils circulate
in the blood and percolate through the tissues as a sort of surveillance force.
But when an infection begins, the stem cells go into overdrive, developing into
neutrophils so quickly that at least 10 billion a day are made, Scadden said.

   Because stem cells are immortal - in contrast to most cells, which undergo a
fixed number of divisions and then die - they are the targets for many gene
therapy studies in which the goal is to add new genes that will last a lifetime.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1995


                             491 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1995 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           January 5, 1995, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 224 words

HEADLINE: BIOMEDICAL FIRM MOVING STAFF TO COLUMBUS

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   Progenitor Inc., a biomedical firm headquartered at 1507 Chambers Rd., will
move most of its research operations to Columbus this month, according to Ralph
Snodgrass, vice president for research.

   Seventeen staff scientists are involved in the move, which will begin in two
weeks, Snodgrass said. Seven researchers in the company's gene therapy and
developmental biology group will remain in Athens, Ohio, at the Ohio University
Innovation Center, he said.

   Progenitor, a subsidiary of Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Boston, was
established in 1992 to commercialize cellular and genetic therapies developed at
OU's Edison Biotechnology Center. Five administrative employees now work at the
Chambers Road site, but there is ample room available for the new research
facilities, Snodgrass said.

   Research groups being moved are working to develop universal donor cells
which can be genetically engineered to fight disease without being rejected by
the patient's immune system.

   Progenitor is also studying the use of such donor cells to construct
''mini-organs'' which, when inserted inside the body, would produce specific
proteins needed by the body, such as insulin in diabetics.

   The company in November received a $ 2 million grant from the U.S. Department
of Commerce to develop the technique for use in vascular surgery.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1995


                             492 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1995 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            January 5, 1995 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: COMET COLLISION TOPS SCIENCE NEWS

BODY:

   Thursday, January 5, 1995 COMET COLLISION TOPS SCIENCE NEWS

   Summary: In 1994, researchers found a 4.4 million-year-old ancestor  and a
breast-cancer gene, as well as ideas on the universe

   From cosmic crack-ups to the discovery of a gene for breast cancer, 1994  was
an eventful year in science. Here's Discover magazine's list of the top 10
science stories for the past year:

   1. Jupiter-comet collision: Virtually every major telescope in the world  was
trained on Jupiter as the first of 22 chunks of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9  smashed
into the giant planet July 16 with the force of a 200,000-megaton  hydrogen
bomb.

   2. Our new ancestor: Researchers from the United States, Japan and Ethiopia
found a new species of hominid from the Afar region in Ethiopia that is older
than the famous 3.2-million-year-old Lucy. The discoverers named it
Australopithecus ramidus. At 4.4 million years of age, it is now the oldest
human ancestor that is not also an ape.

   3. Breast-cancer gene: A 45-member team of researchers from the University
of Utah Medical Center found a gene -- BRCA1 -- that may account for about  half
of the breast cancers that are inherited.

   4. Fusion milestone: The 11-year-old Tokamak fusion reactor at Princeton
University produced a record 9.3 million watts of power in May, then raised  the
record to 10.7 million watts in November. A commercial reactor still is  decades
away, but the promising results give researchers hope for the future.

   5. Trip to the moon: The United States returned to the moon after a 22-year
hiatus. An unmanned, relatively inexpensive spacecraft named Clementine mapped
the entire moon. It revealed that spotty ice caps may exist, and its  topography
is more rugged than originally believed.

   6. Radar view of Earth: When the space shuttle Endeavour orbited Earth in
April and October, it pointed a sophisticated new radar at the planet. Instead
of transmitting microwaves at a single frequency like conventional radar, the
new instrument uses three. The result is that scientists can see three
different versions of the same picture.

   7. Black hole: Astronomers using the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope in
May peered into the core of M87, a giant galaxy about 50 million light-years
from Earth. They found the first direct evidence of a black hole.

   8. Lost city: Archaeologist Jeffrey Wilkerson announced in February the
discovery of the lost city of Veracruz, which was buried under silt and banana
plantations near the village of El Pital, 500 miles south of the U.S. border  on
Mexico's Gulf Coast. He mapped locations of more than 100 major buildings  as
tall as 120 feet surrounded by tens of square miles of fields and villages. The
city reached its peak about A.D. 300, several centuries before most of the great
Mayan cities to the south.

   9. Gene therapy: The promise of gene therapy has been slow to deliver. But
in April, a team from the University of Pennsylvania described how they  treated
a patient with a rare disease that causes astronomical cholesterol  levels.
Using gene-fixing therapy, the research team gutted the  disease-causing virus
of all its harmful genes, and pumped millions of  repaired genes back into the
patient's liver. The patient's cholesterol levels dropped, and for the first
time she could respond to cholesterol-reducing  drugs.

   10. Whales with sole: Scientists found the first direct fossil evidence  that
whales once had hind legs and feet and retained smaller but functional  versions
of them for more than 10 million years after they left the land for a life at
sea. A 40 million-year-old fossil whale called Prozeuglodon found near Cairo,
Egypt, indicated the whale carried a pair of 6-inch legs near the end  of its
15-foot body, vestiges of the whale's land ancestry.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             493 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    January 3, 1995, Tuesday, Final Edition
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z1

LENGTH: 7304 words

HEADLINE: Winners & Losers;
A Look At The Past Ten Years

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Abigail Trafford

BODY:

   A DECADE IN HEALTH

   If the Health section were publishing 200 years ago, the medical treatment at
the top of our list of winners would be bloodletting. For two millennia, this
state of the art therapy held sway. Doctors believed that draining blood could
carry away ill health from the body. Often this was done with blood-sucking
leeches. The ancient physician Galen perfected the technique by cutting off the
tails of leeches so that the slimy little creatures would never feel full and
would therefore suck out more blood.

   The treatment became vastly popular in colonial America, where many a
health-conscious consumer would have a vein lanced and let the good blood flow.
To support our selection of the top hits of 1795, we'd quote a long line of
distinguished experts like Philadelphia's colonial leader Benjamin Rush. "I
would rather die with my lancet in my hand than give it up," he said.

   The fact that many people, including George Washington, died from this
treatment did not deter patients or physicians. After all, we probably would
have written, no treatment is perfect. There are always risks and side effects.
If there were a bad outcome, perhaps the doctor should have been more vigorous
in applying the treatment.

   This is the difficulty in choosing winning and losing health strategies in
"real time." Which favored remedy today will be considered a futile stratagy
tomorrow? "History is replete with such instances," notes physician M. Roy
Schwarz, in charge of science, education and patient care at the American
Medical Association. "The retroscope makes people look foolish."

   "Historians will look back on the medicine of the 1990s as absolutely
ridiculous -- just as we look back on the medicine of the 1790s," adds medical
historian Howard G. Wilcox of the Veterans Administration Medical Center in
Spokane.

   So it is with some caution that we have applied the journalistic retroscope
to the past decade and chosen the top 10 winners and losers in health. In every
age, people thought they were doing the best they could to guard their health --
from wearing earrings to repel agents of disease in ancient Egypt to calling on
the slimy leech to purge the body of the wrong stuff.

   The goal of practitioners and consumers across millennia has been to achieve
good health through luck (what today would be called strong genes), common sense
(healthful habits), preventive measures (immunizations) and effective treatment
(antibiotics, laser surgery).

   The Health section was started because you, the reader, wanted more news and
information about the trends in medicine and society that affect the health and
well-being of you and your family. Since the first issue in January 1985, Health
has covered a wide range of stories: from the fitness-jogging movement to
laparoscopic surgery, from thyroid disease in the White House to hospice care in
the community, from "hot" vitamins to heart-lung transplants.

   The following list of winners and losers is designed to give you a sense of
how much and how little health has changed in the past 10 years.

   Winners include those treatments, tests, public health initiatives and health
care trends that became firmly established in the past 10 years.

   Sometimes the winner is a dramatic new advance that affects a small number of
patients but has enormous implications for society. Gene therapy experiments,
for example, have been tried only on a few hundred patients. But the technology
of manipulating and transferring new genes to remedy genetic flaws rests on the
bold new science of identifying all the genes in the human body. If the genetics
revolution continues, every baby in future decades might well be given a genetic
profile along with its blood type -- an inventory of risks and potential that
raises profound ethical and political issues.

   Sometimes the health winner is a public strategy such as the anti-smoking
campaign that affects large numbers of people because it reduces the risk of
illnesses. Sometimes it is a trend such as the right-to-die movement that has
significantly altered end-of-life care. Sometimes it is a new way of going to
the doctor and getting care, such as the rise of managed care plans, including
health maintenance organizations.

   Sometimes the winner solves one medical problem only to create troubling new
ones. Dramatic advances in saving babies weighing less than two pounds have led
to concerns about the quality of life of those children as they grow up.

   Losers on our list include those treatments, procedures, research initiatives
and public health campaigns that failed to materialize or lost ground in the
past decade.

   Sometimes a loser is a medical strategy that generated a great deal of
excitement but did not prove out. The use of vitamin supplements to prevent lung
cancer, for example, has so far failed to live up to researchers' hopes. And
scientists still haven't figured out a cure for the common cold.

   Sometimes losers are the failure to contain new epidemics, such as the
spreading of AIDS, the resurgence of TB or the rise in gunshot violence.

   Sometimes the loser is a personal problem for many Americans, such as the
increase in obesity in the past 10 years, despite more than $ 30 billion that
dieters spend every year to shed unwanted pounds.

   Sometimes the loser is good news and shows how a better technology takes the
place of an old one. The radical mastectomy, for example, which used to be the
standard surgical treatment for breast cancer, has largely been overtaken by
more breast-conserving procedures such as the lumpectomy.

   Behind the winners and losers on our list is a background of vital statistics
about the health of the nation: how well and how long Americans live and how
they die.

   The caution here is that 10 years is a very short time in medical history.
Treatments and trends go in and out of fashion. "It's important to have patience
...  [and] skepticism," says historian Wilcox. Just as in earlier, bloodletting
times, today's health care community is "undertaking forms of therapy where no
objective evidence exists that the patient does any better," he says.

   And besides, those blood-sucking leeches are making a comeback. Their saliva
contains important blood-thinning substances and the little creatures are now
being used to help heal wounds. Who knows -- 10 years from now leeches may once
again be restored to their former medical glory and get a place on the list of
winners in Health.


   New Drugs For Treating Mental Illness

   New classes of medications for treating two of the most common and disabling
mental illnesses -- depression and schizophrenia -- are the notable success
stories in psychiatry, a specialty that continued to embrace drug treatment over
traditional talk therapy.

   The best known new drug for depression is Prozac, which has become an icon of
popular culture. Prozac has spawned a spate of best-selling books that extol its
virtues and question its personality-altering powers. An estimated 10 million
Americans now take the drug, and some veterinarians are even giving it to
troubled dogs.

   Prozac ($ 1 billion worth was sold in 1992) is the first of a new class of
antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI). Unlike
older antidepressants, these drugs block the action of serotonin, a brain
chemical, at nerve endings and elevate mood. Other new SSRIs include Paxil,
Effexor and Zoloft.

   This new class of antidepressants lacks many of the troublesome complications
of older depression drugs, chiefly weight gain, dry mouth and sluggishness.
However, these drugs have other side effects, including loss of sexual desire,
nervousness and insomnia, and many people have to stop taking them after several
months. Moreover, the potential overprescription of the drug has led to a
nationwide debate.

   The impact of two new antipsychotic drugs to treat schizophrenia has been
equally remarkable.

   The first, clozapine was introduced in 1990. It has given a second chance to
thousands of schizophrenics who had languished for years on the back wards of
mental hospitals for lack of any effective drug. Some have been able to go back
to school, to hold jobs and to live independently. And, unlike older
antipsychotic drugs such as Haldol, clozapine affects both the delusions and
hallucinations of schizophrenia as well as the extreme passivity. But clozapine
has its downside too: It can cause a potentially fatal blood disorder, so
patients taking the drug must be monitored carefully.

   Risperidone, approved in 1993, is the newest schizophrenia drug. It appears
to lack the side effects of clozapine, but it may not be as effective.


   The Heavy Truth About Americans' Weight

   Despite another decade of fighting the battle of the bulge, Americans are
fatter than ever. One in three Americans is overweight, according to the latest
government statistics, a jump of eight percentage points since a survey done 12
years ago. Or put another way, Americans gained an average of about eight pounds
during the past decade. Health officials estimate that 58 million Americans face
an increased risk of heart disease, diabetes, and other chronic ailments because
they weigh at least 20 percent more than the ideal body weight for their age.

   These expanding waistlines occur at a time of national obsession with dieting
and exercise. In 1994 Americans spent an estimated $ 33 billion to lose weight,
according to a recent Institute of Medicine report. And 90 percent of U.S.
adults routinely consume foods labeled "diet," "light," "reduced calorie" or
"low fat," according to the Calorie Control Council, a trade association of diet
food makers based in Atlanta.

   Despite these efforts, most dieters watch the scale rise and fall, only to
rise again in a pattern dubbed yo-yo dieting by weight loss experts. Yet,
permanent losses of just five to 10 pounds can in some cases significantly
reduce the risk of such problems as high blood pressure and diabetes.

   While the recent discovery of a fat gene offers a potential new avenue for
weight control, any genetic treatment is probably decades away. Meanwhile, some
doctors are increasingly turning to drugs to help people lose weight. And the
newest recruit in the government's strategy to reduce fat is former U.S. surgeon
general C. Everett Koop, drafted by the Clinton White House to help "Shape Up,
America!"


   More and More Organ Transplants

   Organ transplants boomed in the past decade, held back from further growth
only by a crucial limiting factor: the lack of organ donors.

   In 1983, there were 172 heart transplants done in the United States. In 1993,
there were 2,299. In the past five years alone, the number of liver transplants
more than doubled to 3,781, pancreas transplants tripled to 1,239 and lung
transplants rose 20-fold to 790, according to United Network for Organ Sharing,
the computerized national transplant-matching registry.

   Kidneys, the oldest and most common organ transplant, were transplanted
10,931 times, an increase of 21 percent over 1988. More exotic transplants --
such as small intestine -- are being pursued at specialized centers, and
combination transplants -- such as heart-lung and kidney-pancreas -- have become
more common.

   Although far from routine, organ transplants have evolved from a radical,
experimental treatment to state-of-the-art medicine for patients with many
life-threatening conditions. With better tissue matching and immunosuppressive
drugs, doctors have made progress against the two leading causes of death in
transplant recipients: infection and rejection -- the immune system's tendency
to attack a transplanted organ as "foreign."

   The flip side of the growing transplant numbers is the lengthening waiting
lists. There are always more people in need of a transplant than there are
donors, which raises ethical dilemmas about who should get the first organ
available during a perennial shortage.

   At the end of 1993, about 25,000 Americans were waiting for a kidney
transplant, nearly 3,000 for a liver and another 3,000 for a donor heart. In
1993 alone, nearly 3,000 Americans died while on a waiting list for a major
organ transplant. Those totals do not count thousands more patients who could
benefit from a transplant but never make it onto the official waiting lists.


   Nothing Works Against the Common Cold

   The common cold is the cockroach of medicine, one of the hardiest and most
annoying maladies that defy scientific efforts to vanquish them.

   Despite recent advances in other branches of medicine, doctors are still
powerless to cure or even to treat colds, the leading medical cause of absence
from work or school. Colds are caused by more than 200 varieties of rhinoviruses
that mutate rapidly. Adults contract an average of about three colds annually;
children, who have less immunity to infection, develop two to three times that
number.

   Although researchers are following several intriguing clues about what these
viruses do to the upper respiratory tract -- knowledge that could lead to ways
to disarm them -- the old adage about colds still holds true: Treat a cold and
it will last for seven days. Don't treat it, and it will last a week.

   There are a few things scientists do know about colds: They are viruses
primarily transmitted by touch, such as hand-to-hand contact or by fingering
objects a cold sufferer has recently handled. People don't catch colds by
becoming soaked or chilled, failing to wear a hat in winter, being overtired or
in the wake of abrupt weather changes.

   The same cold viruses affect people differently. Some people are infectious
but have no symptoms, while other cold sufferers may feel pretty sick and may be
predisposed to developing a secondary complication such as bronchitis, a sinus
infection or pneumonia that requires medical attention.

   Scientists have also discovered that colds affect more than the nose. A study
published last year in the New England Journal of Medicine reported that colds
affect the sinuses as much as the nasal passages. Any cure or treatment,
therefore, must relieve congestion in the labyrinthine sinus cavities, a much
trickier proposition than just eliminating it from the nasal passages.


   Improved Technology Helps Tiny Babies

   For decades it was a problem that plagued neonatologists: how to save tiny,
premature newborns from hyaline membrane syndrome, a leading killer of preemies
caused by a lack of surfactant, a chemical essential to lung function.

   In the past five years, said Maureen Edwards, director of the intensive care
nursery at George Washington University Medical Center, that problem has been
solved. Doctors now routinely administer expensive artificial surfactants to
extremely low birthweight infants born as early as the 26th week of pregnancy
(about 4 months premature) and weighing little more than 1.5 pounds. The use of
surfactants has also shortened the time that larger preemies must spend on
ventilators, reducing the chances of permanent lung damage from long-term
dependence on the machines.

   Surfactants are one of several recent improvements that have saved fragile
infants who would have died a decade ago. Other advances include better surgical
techniques and ways of reducing intracranial hemorrhage (bleeding in the brain)
that can be fatal. Advances in obstetrical diagnosis, including the use of
ultrasound, have resulted in increased survival of extremely tiny preemies.

   The number of such babies is increasing, statistics show. In 1991 (the latest
figures available), about 26,000 babies were born at less than 1,000 grams
(about 2.2 pounds).

   The ability to keep these babies alive raises hard questions for doctors,
parents and medical ethicists: Should a one-pound baby born in the second
trimester of pregnancy be kept alive? A study published last year in the New
England Journal of Medicine found that more than half of very tiny preemies born
in the mid-1980s weighing less than two pounds, the first group doctors were
able to save, entered school with severe and permanent mental and physical
handicaps, including blindness and mental retardation. Another large group
seemed to be faring rather well.


   Better Care for Cancer Patients, but Cures Prove Elusive

   Despite an explosion of knowledge about malignant cells, medicine remains
more adept at diagnosing the scourge of cancer than at curing it.

   That's what makes the 23-year-old War on Cancer, in the judgment of John C.
Bailar III, a professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at McGill University,
"a qualified failure."

   Cancer is still the second-leading killer of Americans, after heart disease,
and responsible for one in every five deaths. An estimated 538,000 Americans
died of cancer last year.

   Trends in cancer incidence and mortality are hard to track, because so many
factors are involved, including the aging of the population, environmental
hazards, diet and changing habits like smoking, as well as advances in diagnosis
and treatment.

   Big gains against relatively rare types -- such as testicular and cervical
cancer, some leukemias and Hodgkin's disease -- may be statistically blotted out
by the increasing toll from one major killer, lung cancer, which has risen
sharply in women.

   Four types of cancer -- lung, breast, bowel and prostate -- account for more
than half of the cancer deaths in the United States. Among those, doctors have
made the most progress against bowel (or colo-rectal) cancer, reducing the death
rate by better treatment and earlier detection. Breast cancer deaths have
declined in women under 50 but risen in women over 50.

   Even in cancers where the death rate remains high, experts agree that quality
of life has improved for patients, because of better pain control, nutrition,
physical therapy and social work.

   Hospice care has expanded greatly for terminally ill patients.


   Smoking Is Less Chic; But Officials Worry About Teenagers

   Smokers are a lonely lot. Once the symbol of sophistication and chic, today
they are often social pariahs, banned from lighting up in offices, restaurants,
schools, churches, public buildings and airplanes.

   "The most profound change with smoking in the last 10 years has been social,"
said Cynthia Rand of Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions.

   Even so, more than 46 million Americans are smokers, according to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention's Office of Smoking and Health.

   The percent of the population using cigarettes declined from 32 percent in
1984 to 25 percent in 1993, the most recent year for which figures are
available, CDC reports. The biggest strides have been made in adults, but public
health officials are concerned about the failure to curb smoking among
teenagers. For example, the percentage of high school seniors who were daily
smokers was 18.7 percent in 1984 and 19 percent in 1993.

   Teenage girls used to account for many of the young smokers. But their
cigarette smoking declined 11 percent during the past decade, while male teen
smoking rose 21 percent. There are also important racial differences: Smoking in
black teens dropped 51 percent in the past decade, but rose 14 percent in
whites.

   Surveys show that even the most ardent smokers wish they had never started. A
new study of 20,000 smokers by the Office of Smoking and Health found 70 percent
would like to quit completely.

   Another recent study found that quitting is easiest in three steps: Set a
date to quit; join a group for support; get a prescription for a nicotine patch
or gum to help ease withdrawal.

   Forty percent of the 6,000 who used this approach were still not smoking one
year later, according to the study, which was sponsored by the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute and reported in the Journal of the American Medical
Association in November.


   Clot-Busting Drugs Can Stop Heart Attacks, And They've Reduced Deaths by 25
Percent

   Ten years ago, "clot-buster" was barely part of the medical lexicon, but
today it is one of medicine's favorite terms. The reason: Research in the past
few years has shown that prompt use of clot-busting drugs in people having a
heart attack can save thousands of lives annually.

   Now doctors routinely halt heart attacks using clot-dissolving drugs such as
streptokinase and tissue plasminogen activator, commonly called t-PA. These
treatments, called thrombolytic therapy, have reduced heart attack deaths by 25
percent in the past decade, said Patrice Desvigne-Nickens, director of the Heart
Research Program at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   A heart attack is generally a two-stage process. First, arteries that bring
blood and oxygen to the heart grow narrower over a period of years by
accumulating layers of fat and cholesterol. Then, without warning, a small blood
clot gets trapped in one of these narrowed vessels, cutting off the flow of
oxygen to the heart muscle. Clot-busters dissolve that plug, and if given
quickly enough can prevent the death of heart muscle cells.

   "We've gone from thinking of a heart attack as the last sign of a chronic
process which was not reversible to understanding that we have this clot and
what it is doing can actually be interrupted," Nickens said.

   The key is to treat patients promptly, preferably within minutes of the
attack. Use of the clot-busting drugs is often coupled with aspirin and heparin,
two other drugs that help prevent blood clotting.

   Physicians have engaged in a huge scientific debate during the past decade
about which drug to use -- the less costly streptokinase or the genetically
engineered t-PA. T-PA costs about $ 2,400 a dose, six times more than the $ 400
for a dose of streptokinase.

   While at least two major human studies found little difference in the drugs'
effectiveness, particularly when they were combined with aspirin and heparin, a
$ 65 million international trial of 41,000 patients concluded in 1993 that using
t-PA saved about 10 more lives per 1,000 people treated than did using
streptokinase.

   This 14 percent reduction in risk could translate to saving about 2,000 lives
per year.

   Since 1993, about 70 percent of people who get clot busters receive t-PA.

   This trend was reinforced last June when a Food and Drug Administration
advisory panel endorsed giving a strong initial dose of t-PA to heart attack
patients.


   Gun Ownership Rises Steadily, And Murder Rate for Young Men Doubles

   The bullet has become a kind of metal pathogen that takes an increasing toll
in young American lives.

   About 24,000 Americans a year die by handguns in homicides, suicides or
accidents. Two out of three American murders are committed with a firearm.

   While the murder rate since 1985 has declined slightly in Americans 25 and
older, it has rocketed in Americans under 25.

   Between 1983 and 1993, the murder rate in young men 18 to 24 doubled. In boys
14 to 17, it more than doubled. More than half of the nation's murders are
committed by males under 25. Homicide is the leading cause of death among young
black males aged 15 to 24.

   Experts note that the leap in the homicide rate among teenagers and young men
started around 1985, when they began to be recruited heavily into the lucrative
and violent crack-cocaine trade, where gun battles are common to defend turf.

   Suicide slightly outranks homicide as a cause of death, and both men and
women are most likely to use guns to kill themselves. Suicide rates are highest
among men 75 and older and among women aged 45 to 54. In both men and women, the
rate has risen fastest over the past decade in those 85 and older.

   After a decade of debate, Congress passed the Brady bill in the fall of 1993,
mandating a five-day waiting period for handgun sales. As part of last year's
crime bill, it also banned assault weapons. But gun ownership rose steadily
during the decade, and Americans now own more than 200 million firearms.


   Little Success Against Addiction to Alcohol and Other Drugs

   By definition, addiction is difficult to break. And the latest government
statistics confirm that the nation's efforts to reduce drug abuse and alcoholism
have not been successful.

   Federal statistics released in December showed no significant decline in the
use of any illicit drug among high school students, and increases in many
categories. The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, which monitors drug and
alcohol abuse among adults, documents a significant increase in lifetime use of
illicit drugs during the past decade. And the government's Drug Abuse Warning
Network shows a recent increase in the number of drug-related emergency room
visits.

   These trends can be attributed in part to a tendency to attack addiction
without simultaneously attacking the conditions that spawn it, said David J.
Mactas, director of the federal Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. "Addiction
does not live by itself but in a constellation of social problems like poverty,
illiteracy, unemployment. We need to look at the problem in context and
coordinate things."

   Moreover, Mactas said, there is still no "magic bullet" medicine that can
break the biochemistry of dependence. Funding for the moderately effective
treatments that do exist declined during the first half of the past decade and
has remained essentially flat since then. While an estimated 18 million drinkers
and 5 million drug abusers need treatment, he said, the nation has the capacity
to treat only about 800,000.

   One treatment that gets high grades from experts and has gained in respect in
the past 10 years is the 12-step program used in Alcoholics Anonymous, said
Thomas Babor, scientific director at the University of Connecticut's alcohol
research center in Farmington.

   And a new drug for alcoholism, naltrexone, may soon get approval from the
Food and Drug Administration.

   But at least as important as any single program or drug, Mactas said, is to
recognize that addiction is a medical problem, and to offer addicts the social
support they need to overcome their addiction.

   "It's an illness, a chronic relapsing condition," said Mactas, "and it must
not be trivialized."


   Right-to-Die Efforts Achieve Greater Support

   The right-to-die movement gained momentum and changed the terms in which
Americans talk about the end of their lives.

   That debate now includes the question of whether -- or under what conditions
-- physicians may ethically help a patient hasten his or her own death.

   Ten years ago, Jack Kevorkian was a relatively unknown pathologist in
Michigan. Today, he draws fame and infamy for having helped more than 20 people
take their own lives by breathing carbon monoxide.

   Another unknown, Nancy Cruzan, became the focus of the first right-to-die
case decided by the U.S. Supreme Court as she lay comatose in Missouri. Cruzan
died in 1990 after her parents won the right to have her feeding tube withdrawn.

   In Cruzan, the Supreme Court narrowly ruled that adults have a constitutional
right to refuse unwanted life-prolonging treatment.

   The District and all 50 states have laws authorizing living wills or other
advance directives by which people specify what sorts of medical treatment they
want -- or do not want -- if they become incapacitated or terminally ill. A
federal law that took effect in December 1991 requires most hospitals and
nursing homes to inform patients about their right to refuse medical treatment.

   In the first federal court ruling on assisted suicide, a judge in Seattle
last May struck down a state ban against physicians helping dying patients end
their lives.

   Last November, voters in Oregon approved an initiative that would allow
doctors to prescribe lethal drugs to terminally ill patients who ask for help in
committing suicide. Similar measures had been rejected in Washington state and
California. The new Oregon law was to have taken effect Dec. 8, but is under
challenge in federal court.


   The Vast Promise of Gene Therapy

   Just 10 years ago, a relatively unknown scientist at the National Institutes
of Health wrote a report for the journal Science outlining a plausible way to
replace defective genes in people with new, fully functioning genes. Gene
therapy could in theory correct a wide spectrum of hereditary diseases, wrote W.
French Anderson.

   Ten years later, Anderson's predictions have proved exactly on track. More
than 200 patients have now been given new genes in efforts to correct various
genetic flaws. Anderson performed the first such experiment in September 1990 on
a 4-year-old girl with a deadly immune system deficiency known as adenosine
deaminase (ADA) deficiency. Other diseases that have since been treated with
gene therapy include cystic fibrosis, AIDS, inherited high cholesterol and
cancers of the brain, skin and lymphatic system.

   At the same time, gene therapy has not proved particularly useful yet. For
example, the young girl who was first to receive new genes is doing well, but it
remains unclear whether her improvement is due to her new genes or to a new drug
she has also been taking. Other patients have shown little or no improvement,
and benefits have mostly been transient.  Indeed, scientists said, long-lasting
gene therapy is proving to be a more difficult challenge than they had
originally anticipated. Especially problematic: getting the genes to their
proper destinations in the body and keeping them working once they get there.

   Still, experimentation with genetic treatments has only just begun. And
already researchers are discussing what was once a completely taboo topic:
changing genes not only to cure diseases but also to enhance physical beauty or
even intelligence -- aspirations sure to stir bioethical debate for years to
come.


   Vitamin Supplements Flunk the Tests

   Nutritionists have repeatedly observed that people who eat lots of fruits and
vegetables live longer and healthier lives than those who don't. And presuming
that vitamins are the key to health in these foods, many have suggested that
vitamin supplements may match or even outperform oranges, apples and broccoli,
especially when it comes to cancer prevention.

   But the past decade has seen no resolution in the longstanding debate over
the value of vitamin supplements. In fact, the two biggest studies to look at
the question in humans both came up negative. Indeed, men in one study who took
beta carotene, which the body converts into vitamin A, had higher rates of lung
cancer than those who did not take vitamin supplements.

   On the positive side, studies have suggested that vitamin E may help stave
off heart disease, vitamin C may lower the odds of getting cataracts, and
supplements of folic acid (a near relative of vitamin B) can help prevent birth
defects. But there is still no definitive proof that these benefits require
supplementation above the levels obtained with a wholesome diet.

   The story isn't over, though; the largest study yet to look at the
relationship between beta carotene and health will close at the end of 1995.
Meanwhile, experts say, eat your fruits and vegetables.


   Total Mastectomy Falls From Favor

   Sometimes losing is good. So a small cheer, please, to mark the demise of the
total mastectomy. The disfiguring and debilitating surgical procedure has
clearly fallen from favor.

   For many years the treatment for breast cancer had remained essentially the
same: removal of the entire breast. Then, in 1985, the first results from a
large-scale study suggested that women might do just as well by simply removing
the malignant lump and sparing the breast. "The conclusion was that lumpectomy
and radiation after surgery resulted in an outcome every bit as good as taking
the breast off," said Bernard Fisher, the University of Pittsburgh oncologist
who led the trial.

   That watershed finding, confirmed by follow-up studies, has saved thousands
of women the medical and psychological trauma of losing their breasts. At the
same time, the growing use of mammography to detect breast tumors while they are
still very small has allowed for even less surgical trauma.

   Now the stage is set for the next improvement, Fisher said. Preliminary
studies indicate that even in women with breast tumors too large for lumpectomy
-- those who would normally have no choice but to get a mastectomy -- it is
usually possible to shrink the lump with a course of chemotherapy, then follow
with a lumpectomy and radiation. If follow-up studies confirm that these women
do as well in the long term as they've done so far, Fisher said, then total
mastectomies may become practically extinct.


   Tuberculosis, Once Thought on Its Knees, Punches Back

   Tuberculosis launched a comeback in the past decade, reversing a trend that
dated back to the 1950s.

   Just when public health officials had begun to hope realistically of wiping
out the deadly lung disease early in the next century, the number of new cases
of TB bottomed out in 1985 and started to climb again.

   Particularly frightening is the growth of strains of TB that are resistant to
standard anti-TB "wonder drugs" such as isoniazid, rifampin and pyrazinamide.
The fatality rate in patients with TB that is resistant to more than one of
those drugs is above 50 percent.

   Among the factors in TB's resurgence: the epidemic of AIDS, which ruins the
immune system's ability to fight off infections; the influx of immigrants from
countries where TB is rampant; and the growing numbers of homeless and
chronically ill people living in crowded conditions without access to good
health care.

   Even with its comeback, TB kills fewer than 2,000 Americans a year.
Worldwide, it kills about 3 million a year, more than any other infectious
disease.

   Most people exposed to TB will not get infected, most of those infected won't
get sick, and most active cases of TB can be cured when treated with
antibiotics.

   But to ensure a full recovery, patients must take a series of drugs every day
for six months or more. If they fail to do so, bacteria resistant to the drugs
can develop.


   Vaccine for AIDS Fails to Appear

   After the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS, was
identified in 1983, many scientists were optimistic that they'd be able to make
a vaccine with relative ease. But 10 years of grueling labor in dozens of the
world's best laboratories has so far failed to bring that quest to an end.

   The biggest problem was that scientists spent years developing vaccines to
work against strains of HIV that had been raised in laboratory culture dishes,
said Dani P. Bolognesi, director of Duke University's Center for AIDS Research.
"It seemed like a reasonable strategy," he said, since it had worked before for
other diseases. Indeed, several AIDS vaccines looked good in animal studies. But
when tested against HIV strains taken from real patients, they failed to
neutralize the viruses.

   That finding stopped researchers in their tracks, Bolognesi said, and a
massive reassessment is underway. It may be that HIV strains in people differ
from laboratory-reared strains in a relatively straightforward way that can be
addressed in the next generation of vaccines. Or it may be that strains differ
so much from one group of people to another that vaccines will have to be
customized for each population -- a daunting task.

   Also problematic: Vaccine makers had focused almost exclusively at first on
boosting the body's production of antibodies against HIV, but now they believe
that other aspects of the immune system must also be called up to mount an
effective battle against the virus.

   Meanwhile, there is some evidence that certain vaccine-induced antibodies may
do more harm than good, and scientists still don't know how to make a vaccine
that makes only good antibodies and not also bad ones.

   Some countries with particularly widespread AIDS epidemics are going ahead
with clinical trials of experimental vaccines that are far from perfect but at
least appear safe, in hopes of saving a few lives and learning more about what
works and what doesn't.

   "It's very confusing right now," Bolognesi said. Neither he nor anyone else
is willing to predict when an effective vaccine may finally show up.


   Blood Test for AIDS Prevents Many Infections

   The development of a blood test to detect infection with the AIDS virus was
"an incredible public health breakthrough," said Anthony Fauci, chief of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

   In 1985 the Food and Drug Administration approved the so-called ELISA test,
which detects antibodies to the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS,
in a person's blood. In the years prior to that, thousands of people had become
infected with HIV after receiving transfusions from infected donors, many of
whom had no idea they harbored the deadly virus. Particularly hard hit were
hemophiliacs, who require regular transfusions of blood products to replace the
clotting factor that they lack. As many as half of the nation's 20,000
hemophiliacs may have become infected with HIV between 1980 and 1985; more than
2,700 have already been diagnosed with AIDS.

   In contrast, only about 20 cases of transfusion-related HIV infection have
been documented in the United States since 1985, according to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. And the risk of HIV infection from a blood
transfusion is now estimated to be one in 225,000 for people receiving a single
unit of blood. (That minuscule risk remains because the blood test cannot detect
antibodies in an HIV-infected donor during the first few weeks of infection.)

   In other countries, the test has made even more of a difference. In some
African cities, for example, fully 10 percent of the population is HIV-positive.
"I shudder to think what the infection prevalence would be in these countries
without the test," Fauci said. "It would be a total disaster."


   Health Care Reform Legislation Is Down but Probably Not Out

   No one who knows anything about health care believes that the recent demise
of federal reform legislation means that the issue will go away. Many expect
that the next Congress and the states will be grappling with reform issues of
access, cost, and quality for years to come.

   "You can run, but you can't hide," Drew E. Altman, president of the Henry J.
Kaiser Family Foundation, observed recently. "We failed in an historic attempt
to deal with health care reform in a sweeping way. Now we'll deal with it in an
incremental way."

   Less than two years ago the momentum for reform seemed like an unstoppable
freight train. Polls listed it as a major public concern, one that helped elect
President Clinton. That train derailed last fall, after Congress failed to enact
any of more than a dozen major plans, including one proposed by the Clinton
administration.

   While the failure of reform in 1994 will long be dissected by analysts, many
attribute it to confusion about what reform would mean and a lack of urgency by
Americans buoyed by an improving economy and suspicious of government
involvement.

   Questions about access, however, remain critical. An estimated 38.5 million
Americans are uninsured and as many as 50 million are believed to be
underinsured, lacking sufficient coverage in the event of a serious, potentially
bankrupting illness.

   These lingering problems are likely to be the subject of tinkering by state
and federal officials in the next few years.

   In addition, rising costs faced by employers who provide insurance for their
workers, and concerns of consumers about choosing their own doctors will loom
larger and may help create another groundswell for national health care reform
legislation.


   Managed Care, Scarcely Heard Of A Decade Ago, Becomes the Norm

   Ten years ago, most Americans had never heard the two little words that now
dominate the theory and practice of medicine: managed care.

   These days there is no escaping the term. It encompasses a plethora of
arrangements and practices from health maintenance organizations (HMOs) to
pre-approval for treatment to the burgeoning networks of doctors and hospitals
sometimes known as preferred provider organizations.

   As recently as a decade ago, an insured person got sick and then picked a
doctor who provided treatment that was almost automatically reimbursed by an
insurance company. For most Americans those days are gone.

   Now, nearly everyone who is not rich enough to pay for treatment out of
pocket is receiving managed care. These recipients typically find that their
treatments are closely monitored, their choices of doctors and hospitals are
circumscribed and they are responsible for paying more for their health care.

   One clear-cut measure of the managed care revolution is the growth in the
number of people who belong to HMOs, which provide care for a predetermined fee
rather than according to services rendered. About 50 million Americans (1 in 5)
now belong to an HMO, a figure that is expected to increase in the next five
years. In 1985, 19 million Americans were HMO members.

   At the heart of the managed care revolution is an effort to control medical
costs, which have steadily escalated during the past decade. Economic pressures
have also unleashed an unprecedented wave of mergers by hospitals that are
fiercely competing for doctors and patients.

   Last year the world's largest for-profit hospital chain was created when
Columbia Health Corp., in quick succession, bought two of its formal rivals: HCA
and Healthtrust. The mergers mean that Columbia will control 311 hospitals, 50
percent of the nation's investor-owned facilities.


   Magnetic Resonance Improves Images For Diagnosis

   The diagnostic scanning device called a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
machine was still a novelty 10 years ago, with some 50 devices scattered across
the country. Today, several thousand MRI machines are in use in the United
States, providing doctors with startlingly sharp pictures of the body's
interior. Unlike X-rays, which show areas of higher density in the body, MRI
machines detect tiny differences in electrical charges within the body while a
person is exposed to a powerful magnetic field. The technique can reveal damage
to muscles, nerves, blood vessels or other soft tissues that would go undetected
by other means.

   "There has been a constant growth and improvement in [medical] image
quality," said Thomas Brady, director of the nuclear magnetic resonance center
at Massachusetts General Hospital. "In MRI especially there has been a
revolution, the pinnacle of which is 'functional MRI.' " With functional MRI,
doctors get not only high-resolution snapshots of the body but also moving
pictures of the organs at work, in real time and in breathtaking detail. For
example, it can detect the strangled blood flow in a small part of the brain
immediately after a stroke, when a conventional MRI or CT scan would appear
normal. That's important, Brady said, because treatment is most effective in
those first few hours.

   Improvements in MRI promise even more detailed information. One experimental
system has enhanced MRI resolution 10,000-fold, revealing the feathery linings
of lungs that normally are not visible with any technique. But such advances are
not cheap. Standard MRI machines cost $ 1 million to $ 2 million and newer
versions are expected to cost even more. The devices are symbolic of a national
dilemma, as Americans struggle to get the highest standard of care without
simultaneously going broke.

CORRECTION-DATE: FEBRUARY 7, 1995

CORRECTION:
Clarification; Effexor belongs to an entirely new class of antidepressants known
as serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. It is not a selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor as reported in "Winners and Losers -- A Look at the
Past Ten Years" [Cover, Jan. 3].

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, LIFE, MARY BONO; PHOTO; PHOTO, STEVEN W. JONES/FPG
INTERNATIONAL; PHOTO, MICHAEL NELSON/FPG INTERNATIONAL; PHOTO, AP; PHOTO, GERALD
MARTINEAU; PHOTO, ANNALISA KRAFT; PHOTO, MICHEAL WILLIAMSON; ILLUSTRATION;
CAPTION: Jack Kevorkian; CAPTION: Ashanthi DeSilva, first gene therapy
recipient.; CAPTION: A TB patient shows the thirteen pills he must take three
times a week.; CAPTION: Hillary Rodham Clinton meets health care reform
advocates at a rally at the carpenter's union building on Constitution Avenue in
August.; CAPTION: An MRI of the head.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1995


                             494 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     January 2, 1995, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 2414 words

HEADLINE: Year of the Downhill Racers;
In 'Tough, Tough' 1994, Local Stocks Produced Few Success Stories

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   In 1994, the good times for Washington area stocks were short-lived. They
lasted only until Feb. 4, the day that the Federal Reserve began to raise
interest rates. After that, and for the next 11 months, it was all downhill.

   By the time the turbulent year was over, almost two-thirds of Washington area
stocks had lost money. The losses cut across a wide band and hurt financial,
retail, biotech, telecommunications and transportation stocks.

   It also was the kind of year in which the relatively few winners fell into
two categories: companies with products or services that were in high demand;
and companies that, having faltered financially, were in a turnaround mode.

   As often happens in periods of market turmoil, the big blue-chip stocks
listed in the Dow Jones industrial average and the Standard & Poor's 500 stock
index fared somewhat better than the stocks of the hundreds of smaller companies
in a business community that extends from Baltimore to Richmond.

   "It was a bear market and if you look at the Dow and the S&P, it doesn't
reflect what happened in the broad market," said Prabha S. Carpenter, portfolio
manager of the Growth Fund of Washington, a $ 33 million fund that invests in
three dozen local stocks. Carpenter's fund was down 9.3 percent for the year.

   Prominent area companies on the loser's list included long-distance giant MCI
Communications Corp., down 34.9 percent; home builder Ryland Group Inc., off 25
percent; and Potomac Electric Power Co., down 31.3 percent.

   "If you made money in 1994, you did well. It was a tough, tough year," said
Jeffrey D. Saut, research director of Ferris, Baker Watts Inc. of Baltimore and
Washington.

   Saut said that since the market didn't go up in 1994, investors had to be
good stock pickers to achieve any gains at all. "Stock selection was the key and
will be the key going forward," he said.

   Profitable stock picks would have included America Online Inc., the popular
computer-based information service. It rose 91.5 percent on top of its 100
percent gain in 1993. Another good pick would have been Mid Atlantic Medical
Services Inc., a rapidly growing health care provider, which climbed 78.6
percent after an 87.5 percent gain in 1993.

   Turnaround stories included several computer information and networking
companies. Among them were Infodata Systems Inc., up 259 percent; Microdyne
Corp., up 123.8 percent; and Netrix Corp., which gained 80.3 percent. Their
executives tell similar stories. After hitting financial potholes, the companies
did what they had to do -- first to survive -- and then to return to, or
improve, their profitability.

   Charles W. Stein, president of Netrix Corp., a telecommunications company,
talked about the financial troubles at his firm when its international sales
softened early in 1993. "What you do is to pick yourself up and figure out what
you need to do to keep it from happening again," Stein said.

   Netrix reorganized. "We changed from a technology-driven company to a company
that was market driven," Stein said. Then, in an acquisition, Netrix acquired a
25-person sales force, which has allowed the firm to shift its sales from
heavily foreign to a 50-50 domestic-foreign mix, Stein said.

   The dominant theme among companies in this region in 1994, said Kenneth N.
Lucas, research director at Johnston, Lemon & Co., in Washington, was the
strenuous drive by companies to cut their costs and to beef up sales.

   "Wholesale or retail, they were all scrambling to get sales wherever they
could," Lucas said.

   Fortunately, Lucas said, many companies avoided the initial sting of rising
interest rates because they refinanced their debt several years ago when
interest rates were low.

   Rising rates, however, caused a crash in the bond market, which spread to the
stock market, where investors worried that a slowing economy could hurt
corporate profits. Higher rates also made bonds more attractive than many
stocks.

   As a result, all the sound and fury surrounding the Dow ended in a year-long
gain of 80.35 points as the Dow closed the year at 3834.44. Somewhat forgotten
was that the Dow reached its all-time high of 3978.36 on Jan. 31 -- before
rising rates cracked the markets.

   The divergence between the Dow-S&P stocks and those in the Washington region
could be seen from the final 1994 numbers. The Dow gained 2.1 percent, the New
York Stock Exchange composite lost 3.1 percent and the S&P 500 was down 1.5
percent. The Nasdaq composite lost 3.2 percent.

   However, the Johnston, Lemon index of 30 Washington area stocks dropped 11.7
percent. Among the 196 stocks in the Washington Business area stock table, 73
stocks gained, 119 lost money and four remained unchanged.

   Among the hardest hit were utilities, which are sensitive to interest rate
movements. Dominion Resources Inc. was off 20.7 percent and Washington Gas Light
Co. was down 18.8 percent. Pepco, as mentioned, dropped 31.3 percent.

   Washington area bank stocks, long a favorite playground for local stock
pickers, were generally unrewarding in 1994. Rising interest rates cast a pall
over most bank and thrift stocks -- although "merger fever" has kept investors
searching for banks and thrifts that are the most likely merger candidates.

   Here are the regional stocks, selling for $ 2 or more, that did the best and
the worst in 1994. The name of each company, its stock symbol and location are
followed by its stock prices on Dec. 31, 1993, and Dec. 30, 1994, and the
percentage gain or loss.


   The Top Gainers


   * Infodata Systems Inc. (INFD) of Fairfax; $ 1.88, $ 6.75, up 259 percent.
Infodata got rid of its costly EarthLaw environmental information service and
refocused its business on electronic document management systems. Profits are
returning and company officials are hoping for a 30 percent growth rate in the
future.

   * Microdyne Corp. (MCDY) of Alexandria; $ 4.75, $ 10.63, up 123.8 percent.
Learning from past mistakes, which cost the firm $ 8 million, Microdyne
officials have trimmed down the number of products and focused business
decisions more clearly on customer needs.

   * Ameribanc Investors Group (AINVS) of Annandale; $ 1.44, $ 2.81, up 95.1
percent. After a long search for an buyer, Ameribanc agreed to be sold to First
Union Corp. for $ 3 a share. The deal is expected to close in the first half of
the year.

   * America Online Inc. (AMER) of Vienna; $ 29.25, $ 56, up 91.5 percent.
Business is booming at this national on-line computer service. The company says
it has signed up 1.5 million subscribers, including 500,000 in the last four
months.

   * Globalink Inc. (GNK) of Fairfax; $ 8, $ 14.88, up 86 percent. Shareholders
at Globalink, which sells foreign language translation software, have approved
the acquisition of MicroTac Software, making the merged firm the largest
provider of translation software.

   * Netrix Corp. (NTRX) of Herndon; $ 5.13, $ 9.25, up 80.3 percent. On the
loser's list last year, Netrix's turnaround brings it back to the winner's
circle. Investors, seeing the changes at the company and earnings improvements
have been bidding up the stock.

   * Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc. (MME) of Rockville; $ 12.81, $ 22.88, up
78.6 percent. Enrollment in the company's health care plans has moved up to 1.17
million people and the company expects membership to grow by another 25 percent
to 30 percent next year. Sales and profits also have been rising.

   * Smithfield Foods Inc. (SFDS) of Smithfield, Va.; $ 18.50, $ 32, up 73
percent. Smithfield is the leading processor and marketer of pork products in
the mid-Atlantic region. Smithfield's profits jumped eightfold in the second
quarter because of falling hog prices.

   * CACI International Inc. (CACI) of Arlington; $ 5.88, $ 10.13, up 72.3
percent. CACI designs computer systems that help federal agencies operate more
efficiently. A turnaround story, CACI is reporting higher sales and profits and
predicts it will grow more than 15 percent in the 1995 fiscal year.

   * PHP Healthcare Corp. (PPH) of Reston; $ 6.75, $ 11.50, up 70.4 percent. Two
years ago PHP Healthcare was facing increased competition and declining profit
margins in its government services business. So it began to reposition itself as
a managed care company. In January, PHP will start delivering integrated health
care services for Blue Cross-Blue Shield of New Jersey.

   * Integral Systems Inc. (ISYS) of Lanham, Md.; $ 15, $ 24.50, up 63.3
percent. The company, which is involved in satellite communications, has won
several significant contracts recently. With a small amount of stock available
for trading, the shares have moved up sharply.

   * Industrial Training Corp. (ITCC) of Herndon; $ 4.75, $ 7.50, up 57.9
percent. ITC develops multimedia training programs. Since its acquisition last
year of Comsell Training Inc., ITC has been reporting record sales and greatly
increased profits.

   * Waverly Inc. (WAVR) of Baltimore; $ 16.75, $ 26.25, up 56.7 percent. Shares
of Waverly, a medical publisher, soared early last month. The Los Angeles-based
Times Mirror Co. recently increased its stake in Waverly to more than 5 percent
and Newsweb Corp., a Chicago-based printing firm, recently said it increased its
holdings to 7.7 percent. A majority of Waverly shares is controlled by
management.

   * GRC International Inc. (GRH) of Vienna; $ 7.38, $ 11.38, up 54.2 percent.
GRC International is in the telecommunications and information systems business,
primarily for the government. But it is trying to shift its focus from defense
to commercial markets. It recently named Gen. Edward C. Meyer, former Army chief
of staff, to be chairman.

   * Micros Systems Inc. (MCRS) of Beltsville; $ 25.25, $ 37.75, up 49.5
percent. Westinghouse Electric Corp., which owns 62 percent of Micros Systems,
recently said it might sell its shares in the maker of electronic cash
registers. The announcement shaved several dollars off the price of the stock of
this highly profitable company.



   The Leading Losers


   * FastComm Communications Corp. (FSCX) of Sterling; $ 12.38, $ 3.50, down
71.7 percent. FastComm Communications, which changed accountants several months
ago, recently said that the Securities and Exchange Commission is conducting an
inquiry into the company. During the firm's second quarter, sales fell and
losses grew.

   * MedImmune Inc. (MEDI) of Gaithersburg; $ 11, $ 3.50, down 68.8 percent. The
company ran into trouble with a drug intended to battle a respiratory virus that
kills infants. But now MedImmune is seeking other ways to make progress against
the disease that hospitalizes 90,000 children a year.

   * USAir Group Inc. (U) of Arlington; $ 12.88, $ 4.25, down 67 percent.
Everybody knows the troubles they've seen: financial losses, air crashes and the
disenchantment of Warren E. Buffett, who invested $ 358 million in USAir. The
airline is trying to shave $ 2.5 billion in costs over five years.

   * Washington Homes Inc. (WHI) of Landover; $ 9.88, $ 3.38, down 65.8 percent.
Higher interest rates are not good for the health of home builders. In the
firm's first quarter, revenue was up but profits were down as the company made
greater concessions to customers. The company has suspended its quarterly
dividend of 5 cents a share.

   * S&K Famous Brands Inc. (SKFB) of Glen Allen, Va.; $ 20, $ 7.13, down 64.4
percent. A menswear retailer, S&K has 174 stores in 27 states. Sales are up this
year over last but they've been spotty. Demand for outerwear and sportswear is
lagging but suits and sports coats are doing well.

   * Resource Mortgage Capital Inc. (RMR) of Columbia; $ 28.63, $ 10.63, down
62.9 percent. Things were booming when interest rates were low. But now that
rates are rising, the company is expecting lower profits and has cut its
dividend.

   * Penril DataComm Networks Inc. (PNRL) of Gaithersburg; $ 6.19, $ 2.50, down
59.6 percent. Sales and profits were down in the first quarter, but the firm has
made several acquisitions and is optimistic that its networking products will
find a place in the new dial-up world.

   * Capitol Multimedia Inc. (CDIM) of Bethesda; $ 9.75, $ 4, down 59 percent. A
publisher of CD-based interactive entertainment software, Capitol Multimedia is
launching a growing number of titles and working with Bell Atlantic to offer
interactive yellow page services to hotel guests.

   * Genetic Therapy Inc. (GTII) of Gaithersburg; $ 16.25, $ 7, down 56.9
percent. The company is conducting gene therapy trials for people suffering from
cystic fibrosis and brain cancer. The company figures it will be a couple of
years before it gets a product out the door but it has about $ 70 million in
cash.

   * Oncor Inc. (ONCR) of Gaithersburg; $ 10.38, $ 4.50, down 56.6 percent.
Oncor's stock has been beaten down, as have many other biotech stocks. But
Chairman Stephen Turner said that Oncor raised $ 25 million early last year, has
two applications pending at the Food and Drug Administration and is seeing a
increase of sales of devices to detect cancer and manage its treatment.

   * Hanger Orthopedic Group Inc. (HGR) of Bethesda; $ 6.25, $ 3, down 52
percent. Executives at Hanger Orthopedic recently said they know of no reason
why their stock has fallen so much. They say they have confidence in their
business plan, which calls for them to acquire many small firms in the orthotic
and prosthetic industry.

   * Computer Data Systems Inc. (CPTD) of Rockville; $ 18.25, $ 9.38, down 48.6
percent. Shares of this premier professional services company have been hurt by
a tougher climate for government contracts and a downturn in company profits.

   * Rowe Furniture Corp. (ROW) of Arlington; $ 9.45, $ 5, down 47.1 percent.
Furniture stocks have been lagging, in part because higher interest rates can
discourage customers from buying on credit. Rowe recently split its stock 2 for
1 and boosted its dividend by 20 percent.

   * NVR Inc. (NVR) of McLean; $ 9.75, $ 5.50, down 43.6 percent. Higher
interest rates have had an adverse impact on home building at NVR, as they have
at other companies in this industry. NVR continues to buy back its own shares
and bought more than 2 million shares in the first nine months of last year.

   * Univax Biologics Inc. (UNVX) of Rockville; $ 7.25, $ 4.25, down 41.4
percent. Univax, which uses immunization technology to fight infectious
diseases, has several products in various stages of development. The company was
able to raise about $ 21.6 million from a public offering last fall to help
finance its work.



GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, 1994 SELECTED AREA STOCK INDEX (CHART IS UNAVAILABLE.),
BLAIR THORNLEY FOR TWP; CHART

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1995


                             495 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 31, 1994, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A4

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy is tried against cystic fibrosis;
Viruses or bubbles of fat used to move genes to cells

BYLINE: Byron Spice, Science Editor, Post-Gazette

BODY:


   British researchers have shown that people with cystic fibrosis can benefit,
at least temporarily, from therapeutic genes delivered to diseased cells by
millions of tiny fat bubbles.

   The fat bubbles, called liposomes, were developed and supplied by University
of Pittsburgh pharmacologist Leaf Huang.

   The London study was meant only to demonstrate the safety and potential
effectiveness of this approach to gene therapy and was not intended to cure
patients, Huang said. But the findings, to be published in the tomorrow's
inaugural issue of the journal Nature Medicine, lay the groundwork for a more
ambitious trial in patients.

   ''This is only meant to be the first step,'' Huang said, showing that the
normal gene can be added to the desired cells, that the gene can be made to
function in those cells and that the functioning genes can improve the patient's
condition. ''Scientifically, I think it is very significant.''

   But there remain a number of technical obstacles before cystic fibrosis,
which is caused by inheritance of an abnormal gene, can be treated by gene
therapy. The devastating disease causes secretion of thick mucus that obstructs
the lungs and increases vulnerability to respiratory infections.

   As an alternative to liposomes, other researchers are trying to transfer
beneficial genes to cystic fibrosis patients via modified cold viruses. Both the
viral and liposome methods have shortcomings, Dr. Ronald G. Crystal noted in a
Nature Medicine commentary.

   Viruses are very good at worming their way into a cell and integrating
themselves -- and any gene attached to them -- into the genetic code of that
cell, said Crystal, a lung specialist at Cornell Medical Center in New York City
and a proponent of the ''viral vector'' approach.

   But experiments thus far show that the viruses, though modified to reduce the
risk of causing disease, can cause inflammation and can cause the cells they
inhabit to be targeted for attack by the patient's immune system.

   Liposomes are also very good at delivering genes to the cells; their fatty
shells fuse with the cell walls. Unlike viruses, they do not set off alarms in
the body's immune system. The problem, Crystal said, is that once the genes are
delivered inside the cells, they often have trouble integrating themselves into
the genetic code. As a result, large numbers of liposomes would have to be
administered to a patient to have an effect.

   That is, in fact, one of the lessons from the London study, Huang said.
Fifteen adults with cystic fibrosis were involved in the experiments, led by
Natasha Caplen of St. Mary's Hospital Medical School. Millions of microscopic
liposomes containing the beneficial gene were sprayed into the noses of nine
subjects; the remaining six received sprays of liposomes only.

   The nose is not a major area of cystic fibrosis activity, Huang said, but it
is easily studied and is resistant to toxic effects.

   The patients who received the gene therapy experienced no harmful side
effects. The treatment corrected the cystic fibrosis defect by about 20 percent
for several days.

   Such a small improvement suggests that treatment of the lungs and conducting
airways -- the areas most devastated by the disease -- will require ''very large
doses,'' Huang said. Producing such large doses is a technical hurdle, he
admitted, ''but we are solving that problem now.''

   He said he and his colleagues were also exploring ways of helping the normal
genes integrate themselves in the genetic code of the target cells without the
aid of a virus.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1995


                             496 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                   December 31, 1994, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 169 words

HEADLINE: Fat bubbles used for gene therapy

SOURCE: An Associated Press Report

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   Scientists used microscopic bubbles of fat to implant genes in the noses of
cystic fibrosis patients, an advance that raises hopes of treating the disease
through gene therapy.

   Researchers had previously used viruses to deliver genes, but some scientists
say bubbles may prove to work better.

   In cystic fibrosis, the lungs are clogged by a sticky mucus that leads to
fatal infections. The disease is caused by a faulty gene. Gene therapy is aimed
at delivering a working copy of this gene to the lungs, but scientists use nasal
tissue for initial experiments because it is more accessible.

   In the new work, copies of the gene were attached to the bubbles and sprayed
repeatedly into the noses of nine patients. The gene was successfully implanted
in at least seven patients and found to be active in five.

   Researchers found that the procedure partially corrected an abnormality in an
electrical charge that is seen in tissue from cystic fibrosis patients, but the
effect disappeared within a week.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1995


                             497 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     DECEMBER 30, 1994 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 537 words

HEADLINE: TORG IS TAKING HIS SPORTS-MEDICINE PRACTICE TO HAHNEMANN THE EAGLES'
TEAM PHYSICIAN IS LEAVING THE HOSPITAL OF THE U. OF PA. HE TOOK A PARTING SHOT
AT THE MEDICAL SCHOOL DEAN.

BYLINE: Tim Panaccio, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Joseph Torg, the godfather of sports medicine in Philadelphia, as well as the
Eagles' team physician, is taking his multimillion-dollar practice to Hahnemann
University Hospital beginning Sunday.

   The move revealed a bitter split over the direction of medical care at the
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, where Torg has practiced for nearly
17 years.

   Torg, 60, founded the sports-medicine program at Temple in 1970, then moved
to HUP after seven years.

   "My vision is to put together a regional, comprehensive sports medicine
program utilizing all of Hahnemann's facilities," he said.

   Awaiting Torg at Hahnemann is an 8,000-square-foot facility that will bear
his name: Joseph Torg Center for Sports Medicine and Athletic Trauma. Hahnemann
also will establish four area satellite offices for sports medicine.

   "Orthopedics is being emphasized as a major program throughout our health
system, and Joe Torg gives us a world-class presence in sports medicine," said
Dr. Arnold Berman, chairman of Hahnemann's orthopedic department, who recruited
Torg. "We've never done a lot in this area or had the pizazz he brings."

   With this move, Hahnemann will become the fourth hospital in which Torg has
established a sports-medicine division under the larger umbrella of orthopedics.
He did it first with Temple, then HUP, and, in 1993, at the Medical College of
Pennsylvania.

   The Medical College of Pennsylvania and Hahnemann are both part of Allegheny
Health, Education and Research Foundation.

   Torg estimated his sports-medicine practice at Penn generated $2 million in
annual revenues, a figure he expects to double at Hahnemann.

   For the last 2 1/2 years, HUP has been downsizing its orthopedic division.
Torg said 11 of 21 orthopedic surgeons, including three in sports medicine, have
left the hospital.

   HUP's orthopedic department hasn't had a permanent chairman since Carl
Brighton resigned more than two years ago.

   Torg said the orthopedic and sports-medicine units at HUP had suffered under
Dr. William Kelley, the dean of the School of Medicine at Penn. He characterized
HUP's current leadership as "a disaster."

   "Kelley doesn't understand you can't treat broken bones and ligament tears
with gene therapy and molecular biology," Torg said.

   Kelley, who was read those remarks, said that HUP was committed to raising
the level of orthopedics and sports medicine to "one of the best in the country"
within the next five years and that in January Torg would be replaced with two
physicians.

   For the moment, however, Kelley said, HUP is trying to expand other
subsurgical specialties, such as ophthalmology, rehabilitative medicine,
otorhinolaryngology, urology and neurosurgery.

   Torg said he averages about 90 reconstructive knee surgeries and 200
arthroscopic procedures a year. He said the knee surgeries typically cost
$20,000 and arthroscopic surgery costs about $8,000. That translates into about
$3.4 million in annual lost business for HUP.

   Commenting on the substantial revenues Torg generates for HUP, Kelley said,
"I suspect that may be why Hahnemann made an effort to move him over there."

   How the move affects Torg's job with the Eagles is unclear.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;

PHOTO (1)
1. Dr. Joseph Torg will bring "pizazz" to Hahnemann.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             498 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                   December 27, 1994, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 10

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may help lower blood pressure

BYLINE: A Tribune Staff Report

BODY:


   With a single injection of synthetic material to the brain of rats,
researchers at the University of Florida have reduced the rodents' blood
pressure for up to a week. The study in genetically hypersensitive animals
indicates that gene therapy could be an effective way to control high blood
pressure - a leading cause of heart attack and stroke.

   "We have shown we can block the normal sequence of genetic events that lead
to hypertension originating in the brain," says Ian Phillips, director of the
Hypertension Center at UF's College of Medicine.

   Steve Morgan applies 200 drops a day to his eyes, which otherwise would
"shrivel up like an orange in the desert." The building contractor from Park
City, Utah, suffers from a medical condition that prevents his tear ducts from
producing fluids. Tears clean, moisten and bring nutrients to the cornea, which
doesn't have its own supply of blood vessels.

   A new invention by scientists at Tufts University in Boston now makes
Morgan's life easier: A special pair of eye glasses that automatically ejects
tiny drops directly into the wearer's eyes. Fitted with tiny nozzles along the
frame, the glasses are connected to a small fluid box that fits into a shirt or
pants pocket. A programmed, motorized pump delivers the drops at specific
intervals or at the push of a button.

   Radon is a natural radioactive gas formed by the decay of uranium in the
soil, although you can't smell, taste or see it. But it creeps up through porous
soil and cracks in ground structures, and accumulation in the home, arguably,
can be harmful. A new gadget called the Radon Alert monitors gas levels when
continuously plugged into a 120-volt outlet. After 48 hours, it displays an
evaluation in picocuries, a unit of measurement used for radioactivity. With any
reading above 4 picocuries, a red light comes on. The unit sells for $ 150 and
can be purchased through Real Goods Trading Corp., in Ukiah, Calif. For details
call (800) 762-7325).

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(C); SIGNATURE(C),
 (C) This radon detector will monitor a home for the radioactive gas and will
give a warning if levels become too high. Photo from Real Goods Trading Corp.

NOTES: NOTE; FAST FORWARD SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1994


                             499 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 26, 1994, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 885 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy is tried on vascular disease;
Artery expected to do its own bypass

BYLINE: GINA KOLATA; New York Times

DATELINE: BRIGHTON, Mass.

BODY:

   BRIGHTON, Mass. - The tiny cardiac catheterization room at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital was never meant to hold two dozen doctors,
nurses and visitors, all wearing heavy lead aprons to protect them
from a constant barrage of X-rays.

   But this was a day most of the crowd in the room had
anticipated for years.  It was a day earlier this month when Dr.
Jeffrey Isner and one of his associates, Dr. Robert Schainfeld,
were attempting the first gene therapy for vascular disease.

   If the experiment succeeded, it would herald a revolution in
the treatment of vascular disease that might replace bypass surgery.

   The idea was to add genes to arteries that would direct the
formation of new blood vessels to grow around a blocked area.  If it
worked, it would be a sort of auto-bypass.

   The room was electric with excitement as the procedure,
scheduled to take two hours, got under way.  Dr. Kenneth Walsh, a
molecular biologist who supervised the preparation of the DNA for
the experiment, said he saw the moment as a turning point.

   ""Every now and then you reach a milestone where things
tomorrow are not going to be the same as today. '' he explained.

   The patient, lying on the operating table was Michael Ruo,
54, a man from Foxborough, Mass., who felt that gene therapy was
his last best hope.  He had an artery in his leg that was so
severely blocked that his leg would have to be amputated if the
highly experimental treatment did not succeed.

   The journey toward this day began several years ago when
researchers discovered that a substance, dubbed vascular
endothelial growth factor, or vegF, can encourage new blood vessels
to sprout out an artery.

   VegF was first discovered by cancer researchers who noticed
that tumors use it to grow new blood vessels to supply themselves
with nourishing blood.  Then investigators found that fetuses also
use vegF to grow blood vessels.  It seemed to be the body's signal
to grow vessels.

   The discovery of vegF, and the isolation of the human vegF
gene, gave Isner an idea.  Cardiologist had long known that some
people naturally form collateral blood vessels that can bypass
blocked arteries, but most people do not make them or do not make
enough of them to successfully divert blood.

   Perhaps, Isner reasoned, if he supplied vegF genes to the
smooth muscle cells lining an artery wall next to a blockage, the
genes might force new blood vessels to grow.

   It was an ideal setting for gene therapy.  One of the most
difficult aspects of gene therapy is finding a good way to get the
genes into cells.  But muscle cells are among the few in the body
that actually take up so called naked DNA, genes that are not
packaged in viruses or wrapped in membranes.

   Once the genes get into the cells, they remain active for a
few weeks, directing cells to make proteins.  So vegF genes might
remain active just long enough for new blood vessels to sprout.  And
because naked DNA is quickly degraded in the bloodstream, genes
that did not migrate into the smooth muscle cells would be
destroyed.

   Isner and his colleagues began by experimenting on rabbits.

   They would tie off an artery in a leg and then add vegF genes to
the smooth muscle cells lining the artery.

   Within three to 10 days, new blood vessels started to bud out
from the artery.  Within three weeks, they grew around the blockage
and hooked up again downstream, diverting the blood around the
obstruction.

   Buoyed by this success, the investigator applied to the
National Institutes of Health and the Food and Drug Administration
for approval to try the gene therapy on patients.

   They wanted to start with patients who had blocked arteries
in their legs and who, for various medical reasons, were not
candidates for bypass surgery for balloon angioplasty.  These
patients, unlike people with blocked coronary arteries, cannot be
treated with drugs.  No drugs are effective for their condition.

   Instead, they faced amputations of their legs, a procedure
that is very risky.  Isner said that 20 percent of them die in the
hospital and 40 percent are dead within a year of the surgery.  So,
Isner said, they were the patients who had the most to gain and
least to lose from gene therapy.

   Isner estimated that 30,000 to 40,000 patients in the United
States each year have such severe blockages in their leg arteries
that they have constant and unrelenting pain in their legs or have
ulcers on their legs that cannot heal.

   Eventually, Isner said, if the treatment for blockages in the
leg succeeded, the investigators would like to move on to the heart
and try to use gene therapy to enable patients to essentially grow
their own bypasses.

   On Nov. 15, Isner's method got its final approval to try the
gene therapy on 12 patients, and they immediately began looking for
the first qualified volunteer.  Ruo was more than ready, and results
of his surgery are eagerly awaited.



   Helping the body do its own bypass

   In an experimental treatment for blockage in a major leg artery,
the gene for a protein that stimulates growth of new blood vessels
was inserted.  Doctors hope that after several weeks, new growth will
bypass the blockage.

   How the stages look.

   Catheter inserts genes.

   Expected new growth.


GRAPHIC: Graph: Helping the body do its own bypass (text); New York Times,
Source: Jeffrey Horowitz/St.Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1995


                             500 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 26, 1994, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 885 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy is tried on vascular disease;
Artery expected to do its own bypass

BYLINE: GINA KOLATA; New York Times

DATELINE: BRIGHTON, Mass.

BODY:

   BRIGHTON, Mass. - The tiny cardiac catheterization room at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital was never meant to hold two dozen doctors,
nurses and visitors, all wearing heavy lead aprons to protect them
from a constant barrage of X-rays.

   But this was a day most of the crowd in the room had
anticipated for years.  It was a day earlier this month when Dr.
Jeffrey Isner and one of his associates, Dr. Robert Schainfeld,
were attempting the first gene therapy for vascular disease.

   If the experiment succeeded, it would herald a revolution in
the treatment of vascular disease that might replace bypass surgery.

   The idea was to add genes to arteries that would direct the
formation of new blood vessels to grow around a blocked area.  If it
worked, it would be a sort of auto-bypass.

   The room was electric with excitement as the procedure,
scheduled to take two hours, got under way.  Dr. Kenneth Walsh, a
molecular biologist who supervised the preparation of the DNA for
the experiment, said he saw the moment as a turning point.

   ""Every now and then you reach a milestone where things
tomorrow are not going to be the same as today. '' he explained.

   The patient, lying on the operating table was Michael Ruo,
54, a man from Foxborough, Mass., who felt that gene therapy was
his last best hope.  He had an artery in his leg that was so
severely blocked that his leg would have to be amputated if the
highly experimental treatment did not succeed.

   The journey toward this day began several years ago when
researchers discovered that a substance, dubbed vascular
endothelial growth factor, or vegF, can encourage new blood vessels
to sprout out an artery.

   VegF was first discovered by cancer researchers who noticed
that tumors use it to grow new blood vessels to supply themselves
with nourishing blood.  Then investigators found that fetuses also
use vegF to grow blood vessels.  It seemed to be the body's signal
to grow vessels.

   The discovery of vegF, and the isolation of the human vegF
gene, gave Isner an idea.  Cardiologist had long known that some
people naturally form collateral blood vessels that can bypass
blocked arteries, but most people do not make them or do not make
enough of them to successfully divert blood.

   Perhaps, Isner reasoned, if he supplied vegF genes to the
smooth muscle cells lining an artery wall next to a blockage, the
genes might force new blood vessels to grow.

   It was an ideal setting for gene therapy.  One of the most
difficult aspects of gene therapy is finding a good way to get the
genes into cells.  But muscle cells are among the few in the body
that actually take up so called naked DNA, genes that are not
packaged in viruses or wrapped in membranes.

   Once the genes get into the cells, they remain active for a
few weeks, directing cells to make proteins.  So vegF genes might
remain active just long enough for new blood vessels to sprout.  And
because naked DNA is quickly degraded in the bloodstream, genes
that did not migrate into the smooth muscle cells would be
destroyed.

   Isner and his colleagues began by experimenting on rabbits.

   They would tie off an artery in a leg and then add vegF genes to
the smooth muscle cells lining the artery.

   Within three to 10 days, new blood vessels started to bud out
from the artery.  Within three weeks, they grew around the blockage
and hooked up again downstream, diverting the blood around the
obstruction.

   Buoyed by this success, the investigator applied to the
National Institutes of Health and the Food and Drug Administration
for approval to try the gene therapy on patients.

   They wanted to start with patients who had blocked arteries
in their legs and who, for various medical reasons, were not
candidates for bypass surgery for balloon angioplasty.  These
patients, unlike people with blocked coronary arteries, cannot be
treated with drugs.  No drugs are effective for their condition.

   Instead, they faced amputations of their legs, a procedure
that is very risky.  Isner said that 20 percent of them die in the
hospital and 40 percent are dead within a year of the surgery.  So,
Isner said, they were the patients who had the most to gain and
least to lose from gene therapy.

   Isner estimated that 30,000 to 40,000 patients in the United
States each year have such severe blockages in their leg arteries
that they have constant and unrelenting pain in their legs or have
ulcers on their legs that cannot heal.

   Eventually, Isner said, if the treatment for blockages in the
leg succeeded, the investigators would like to move on to the heart
and try to use gene therapy to enable patients to essentially grow
their own bypasses.

   On Nov. 15, Isner's method got its final approval to try the
gene therapy on 12 patients, and they immediately began looking for
the first qualified volunteer.  Ruo was more than ready, and results
of his surgery are eagerly awaited.



   Helping the body do its own bypass

   In an experimental treatment for blockage in a major leg artery,
the gene for a protein that stimulates growth of new blood vessels
was inserted.  Doctors hope that after several weeks, new growth will
bypass the blockage.

   How the stages look.

   Catheter inserts genes.

   Expected new growth.


GRAPHIC: Graph: Helping the body do its own bypass (text); New York Times,
Source: Jeffrey Horowitz/St.Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995


                             501 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 25, 1994 Sunday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. G-1

LENGTH: 1647 words

HEADLINE: PROMISE, AT A PRICE

BYLINE: DAVID GOLLAHER, GOLLAHER is director of the California Health Care
Institute, a public policy research group that represents academic biomedical
research, biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and medical device organizations. He
has served on the faculties of SDSU and UCSD and previously was a vice president
with Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation.

BODY:

   In the world of biomedical science, 1994 has been the most chaotic year on
record.

   To be sure, there was much to celebrate.

   Basic scientific discovery, above all in cell biology and molecular genetics,
accelerated at warp speed.

   And a number of remarkable new biopharmaceutical products were approved by
the Food and Drug Administration, giving physicians novel tools to treat some of
our most dreaded diseases. Important as these advances are, though, 1994 also
must go down as the year medical science collided head on with what Thomas
Carlyle called the "Dismal Science" of political economy. But first, the good
news: [] Groups of biotechnology researchers isolated and cloned thrombopoietin,
a powerful hormone that causes bone marrow to produce platelets -- the cells
essential to blood clotting.

   How platelets are produced had been for three decades one of medicine's great
unsolved mysteries.

   The discovery of thrombopoietin opens the door to making a genetically
engineered version of the hormone that could be used with cancer patients whose
blood is deficient in platelets, especially those undergoing chemotherapy and
bone-marrow transplantation. [] Amgen, the country's largest biotech company,
introduced Neupogen, a drug that stimulates bone marrow to produce critically
important white blood cells known as neutrophils.

   In cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, these bacteria-fighting cells
become depleted, greatly increasing the risk of infection.

   Neupogen shortens patients' time in the hospital and vastly improves their
quality of life. [] Chiron Corp. received approval for Betaseron, giving fresh
hope to 350,000 Americans afflicted with multiple sclerosis, a degenerative
disorder of the central nervous system.

   For many patients, this biotech innovation reduces the frequency of flare-ups
and slows the course of the disease. [] Genentech introduced Pulmozyme, a
breakthrough for patients with the most common fatal genetic disease in America:
cystic fibrosis.

   It usually appears in early childhood, clogging the lungs of affected
patients with mucus which impairs lung function and leads to devastating
infections. Pulmozyme, a recombinant DNA drug, works to normalize the secretions
in patients' lungs.

   Patients experience fewer infections and breath easier. Notwithstanding these
important advances, 1994 was also the year medical science collided with cost
containment. Before this year, it was still possible to hold onto the idea that
science and medicine could remain immune from the economic and political forces
that pressured other industries.

   But even as federal health care reform collapsed, it became evident that
government policy would, in many respects, shape the future of academic
research, biotechnology, pharmaceutical development and medical devices --
indeed, the entire health technology economy.

   There's no escaping the truth that government accounts for some 40 percent of
America's trillion-dollar health economy, and that putting a lid on government
spending has become the obsession of Republicans and Democrats alike. The most
imminent danger to biomedical research, though, comes not from the visible hand
of government.

   It comes from the invisible hand of the marketplace.

   While Congress wrangled unsuccessfully over health reform, the private market
has dynamically reorganized the relationship between science, technology, and
medical care.

   What is emerging is a vast unpredictable new health care market, driven by
managed care, price competition, and cost-cutting. This is a market in which
biomedical innovation is evaluated less in terms of quality than costs. o o o []
[] [] A good example of how scientific progress flows into the murky waters of
politics is molecular genetics.

   Genes, their role in disease and human behavior, have been the year's hottest
bioscience topic.

   Jules Hirsch, a physician at Rockefeller University, observed recently that
"what's happening with molecular genetics today is like what happened with
chemistry back when the periodic table came into being."

   Researchers are redrawing the map of human physiology, now at the molecular
level.

   Using an automated cloning technique for multiplying strands of DNA called
polymerase chain reaction, they have managed to identify genes like the
notorious BRAC1. This gene brings unfortunate women who carry it an 85 percent
probability of getting breast cancer.

   Scientists also have found genetic markers linked to cystic fibrosis, colon
cancer, obesity, and even to patterns of behavior like homosexuality and
aggression. Decoding genes, the tiny bits of DNA that are the essential units of
heredity, is the crucial first step toward creating genetic therapies.

   Here the idea is not to treat symptoms, or even the malady that causes them,
but to correct the basic defects in DNA that predispose people to disease in the
first place.

   Gene-therapy trials now under way aim to transplant copies of various healthy
genes into patients.

   The most challenging problem is to deliver the healthy genes to the cells
that need them.

   As new genes are found, the struggle will be to find what scientists call
vectors -- delivery vehicles to carry the right genes to the right cells. In the
meantime, the main practical use of genetic science will be screening.

   It is far easier to find flaws than to fix them.

   And this leads directly to a host of political, economic, and ethical
questions that no one has begun to unriddle. For starters, genetic testing is
expensive.

   Most insurance policies, public or private, provide no coverage.

   Patients must pay cash, so the poor are automatically excluded.

   Yet there is something disturbing about permitting economics to limit genetic
screening to the affluent, creating what Robert Wright calls "a genetic
underclass, letting a broad range of hereditary diseases settle at the bottom of
the social hierarchy."

   The government, unable to come to grips with something as basic as universal
coverage, will have enormous difficulty deciding how to regulate our approach to
DNA. o o o [] [] [] While government policy, particularly health care reform,
occupied center stage for most of 1994, managed care was quietly transforming
American medicine.

   Sometime during the year, the country crossed a great divide: a majority of
all privately insured Americans found themselves enrolled in managed care plans
-- plans that restrict their choices of doctors, hospitals, and medical
treatments. Nationally, more than 50 million people have enrolled in Health
Maintenance Organizations (HMOs); in Southern California 75 percent of the
private health insurance market is controlled by HMOs. The rapid shift to HMO
medicine, with emphasis on limiting tests, on curbing patients' referrals to
specialists, on reducing rates of surgery and hospitalization, has touched off a
series of seismic shifts and aftershocks in the biomedical research and
development sector, with more to come. Academic medical centers like UCSD and
Stanford, traditionally regional centers for state-of-the-art technology, find
it difficult to cope with managed care economics.

   They tend to have more hospital beds, more specialists, and fewer primary
care doctors than they need.

   Moreover, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), which administers
Medicare and Medicaid, has sharply cut payments for inpatient and outpatient
services. And an austere budget at the National Institutes of Health means that
universities cannot hope to subsidize clinical deficits with research grants.
Today's purchaser of new technologies tends to be a managed care corporation
like the Kaiser Foundation, not an individual doctor or hospital.

   Hence marginal decisions are based mainly on price.

   Increasingly, high-priced technologies undergo rigorous cost-benefit review
before health plans decide to cover them.

   Winners -- for instance, Chiron's Betaseron, a breakthrough drug for treating
multiple sclerosis -- are products with a measurable therapeutic advantage over
existing clinical alternatives. The structure of the pharmaceutical and biotech
industries has changed dramatically.

   In some of the largest mergers and acquisitions Wall Street has seen, major
international drug companies have transformed themselves. Hoffman-La Roche, for
example, already a majority shareholder in Genentech, moved to acquire Syntex,
while Ciba, seeking to expand its research base, bought a 49 percent stake in
Chiron.

   At the other extreme, Smithkline and Eli Lilly followed the example of Merck,
making major purchases of drug distribution firms in order to open new channels
into managed care. o o o [] [] [] Since 1950, when health care accounted for 5
percent of our Gross Domestic Product and the annual NIH budget was $46 million,
American medical science grew according to the incentives built into a
fee-for-service system. Doctors and hospitals made more money by doing more.

   Scientists were encouraged to produce improvements in quality, confident that
cost would not matter. It is hard to exaggerate how radically the HMO system, in
which health plans are paid a flat all-inclusive monthly fee to care for
patients, changes the political economy of medicine.

   Prepaid HMO medicine means that doctors must regard every test, every
procedure, every technology they use, not as a source of income, but as a cost.

   Inevitably, this new world view will influence their choice of which tools to
use, and on whom. Science is about knowledge; technology is about power.

   The great challenge for medical science in the coming era will be to ensure
that cost containment, with its emphasis on short-term results, does not
strangle the expensive, unpredictable, fundamental pursuit of knowledge that is
essential to medical progress.

   Even as science must learn to adapt to the brave new world of HMOs, managed
care must find ways to support the great medical bioscience enterprise that is
the crown jewel of American medicine.

GRAPHIC: 1 DIAGRAM; CAPTIONS: LUNGS | HEART | ARM; PHOTOBY: DAVID MOLLERING

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             502 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   December 24, 1994, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 1021 words

HEADLINE: NIH Cancer Chief Vents Frustration;
Departing Broder Defends Government as Vital to Science

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Samuel Broder, who announced Wednesday that he will resign as director of the
National Cancer Institute, said yesterday that a major factor in his decision to
leave public service was his frustration with the currently fashionable view of
government as an impediment to progress.

   "When I first came here 22 years ago, government service was still something
that people generally admired -- it was a very positive career choice," Broder
said. "And I think it might be good to take a few steps back and remember that
although we do have to make government more efficient and face fiscal realities
... there are certain core functions of the government that are extremely
important, including scientific research for the alleviation of suffering."

   Broder's is the latest in a recent series of defections from the NCI, the
largest of the research institutes making up the National Institutes of Health.
The institute's deputy director, Daniel C. Ihde, retired early this year and has
yet to be replaced. The NCI division that investigates causes of cancer has been
without a leader since its chief, Richard Adamson, retired this fall. Bruce A.
Chabner, the director of NCI's division of cancer treatment, recently announced
he would leave to head the cancer program at Massachusetts General Hospital in
Boston. Robert C. Gallo, chief of NCI's laboratory of tumor cell biology and one
of the country's leading AIDS researchers, has said he intends to leave.

   Several NIH scientists said the stream of departures is the most visible
evidence of a disquieting trend at the Bethesda campus.

   "No longer is NIH an intellectual, Jeffersonian institution," said one NIH
official, speaking on condition of anonymity. "Everything you say around here
now has to be considered for its political ramifications. Congress is involved
more than ever. Every day is a political day, not a scientific day."

   Broder had plenty of personal reasons for accepting a lucrative new position
at a Miami drug company. For six years as director of the NCI, he has been a man
in the middle, fighting to keep the institute's research program intact in an
era of tightening budgets and responding to activists' demands for medical
progress on cancer and AIDS.

   Last December he endured fierce criticism for saying that mammography, a
diagnostic test for breast cancer, is of no proven use in women under 50 -- a
view that put him at odds with many oncologists and radiologists, as well as the
American Cancer Society. In the spring he faced the wrath of Rep. John D.
Dingell (D-Mich), who was investigating a nationwide NCI-sponsored breast cancer
trial that had become compromised by fraudulent data.

   Then, in recent weeks, rumors spread that NIH director Harold Varmus was
planning to transfer money from the cancer institute to other NIH institutes --
evidence, according to some observers, of an escalating personal enmity between
Varmus and Broder.

   But interviews with Broder and several colleagues suggest that his
resignation, effective in April, is symptomatic of a larger problem of morale at
NIH. Colleagues characterized it as the decision of an old-fashioned public
servant who saw an opportunity to pursue treatments for cancer and AIDS
unfettered by federal politics.

   On Wednesday, Broder left a message for Varmus, who was out of the office,
and informed associates that he would move to Florida to become chief scientific
officer at IVAX Corp. -- a pharmaceutical company founded seven years ago by a
multimillionaire former colleague and friend.

   "This company can make decisions in five minutes that would take the
government probably three to four years to make," Broder said. And, he added,
the company had made him an offer he "couldn't refuse."

   Chabner, who will leave NCI's cancer treatment division in the spring, said
that while the idea of shifting medical research to the private sector may
appeal to advocates of government downsizing, the strategy has problems. "It's
hard to do cutting-edge experimental therapies like gene therapy in private
hospitals," he said, since the procedures are very expensive and have no hope of
being profitable in the early years of development.

   Anthony S. Fauci, chief of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and a longtime friend of Broder's, said he suspected Broder will savor
being out of the public eye. Since becoming NCI director in 1988, Broder has
been a key figure in the battle against two intractable medical problems, cancer
and AIDS -- a position that Fauci said was especially trying for Broder because
he genuinely cared about the people with AIDS, the women with breast cancer and
the other desperate patients who besieged him with pleas for help.

   "Sam was very sensitive to his constituents," Fauci said. "All institute
directors have the hassles we deal with every day. But Sam, through no fault of
his own, had more than his share of hassles. He was under an extraordinary
amount of pressure from so many directions, from Congress on one side and
activists on the other."

   Life should be easier in Miami. IVAX revenues amounted to almost $ 1 billion
last year -- about half the entire NCI budget -- and Broder will have at his
disposal a global network of drug production facilities and research
laboratories intent on developing new drugs for cancer, AIDS and other diseases.
The company's chief is Phillip Frost, who worked with Broder as a member of an
NCI advisory board.

   Broder will apparently receive a substantial increase over his current
government salary of about $ 120,000. The Cancer Letter, a Washington-based
newsletter, reported yesterday that IVAX's top executives earned between $
225,000 and $ 340,000 last year in addition to receiving millions of dollars in
stock options.

   "Government scientists used to be the golden boys, but those days are over,"
Gallo said. "Government is a bad guy today. And no wonder. Do you know how I
have to spend my time now? I have to go to a course on sexual harassment. I have
to go to a managers' course. I have to go to courses to learn how to go to
courses. Boy, have things changed."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, SAMUEL BRODER, PICTURED IN HIS LAB IN 1988, SAYS THAT WHEN HE
BEGAN "22 YEARS AGO, GOVERNMENT SERVICE WAS ... A VERY POSITIVE CAREER CHOICE.",
TWP

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1994


                             503 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                   December 22, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: LARGO-SEMINOLE TIMES; BUSINESS DIGEST; Pg. 7

DISTRIBUTION: LARGO-SEMINOLE TIMES; CLEARWATER TIMES; NORTH PINELLAS TIMES

LENGTH: 536 words

BYLINE: CHRISTINA K. COSDON

BODY:


   BANKING

   Republic Bank has opened an office at 1478 Main St. in Dunedin. This is the
bank's 12th office in Pinellas County and 21st on the west coast of Florida.



   Steven H. Cohn of Barnett Bank's main Clearwater office at 600 Cleveland  St.
has been promoted to senior vice president, commercial real estate. He has
eight years experience in commercial real estate lending. He worked for  SunBank
of Tampa Bay as an assistant vice president and senior underwriter  before
joining Barnett five years ago.

FINANCING

   Kevin Williams has joined O.J. Mortgage Company at 2744 Summerdale Drive N,
Suite 209, Clearwater. He most recently worked for Great Western Bank and was
its top originator this year.

HEALTH CARE

   A team of scientists has joined forces at Tampa Bay Research Institute's
Laboratory of Gene Therapeutics,  10900 Roosevelt Blvd., to conduct research  on
cures for cancers and viral diseases. The team, under the direction of
laboratory director Dr. Jean-Numa Lapeyre, includes Dr. Ken Stirling from
Dartmouth University, Dr. Anita Joubel from the Pasteur Institute in France,
Dr. Elena Martsen from the Shemaykin Institute of Moscow University, Dr. Masud
Ansari from Brock University in Canada and Dr. Ming Zeng from Beijing Medical
College in China. Each scientist is working on a specific project involving
gene therapy.

INSURANCE

   The National Structured Settlement Trade Association, in conjunction with
the University of Notre Dame, has given the designation of certified  structured
settlement consultant to Robert D. Reid of Financial Settlement  Services in
Clearwater.

   To earn the designation, Reid had to complete a course of more than 60  hours
that included insurance casualty claims practice, state and federal laws  on
tort settlements, negotiation and business ethics. According to the
association, Reid is one of only 70 professionals around the country to have
earned the designation.

   Financial Settlement Services settles insurance claims through the use of
structured settlements, which involve the purchase of annuities to fund
payments over a period of time. The office is at 2531 Landmark Drive, Suite
201.

REAL ESTATE

   Margo J. Drayton-Lombardi has joined Wikle Properties at 3302 U.S. Alt. 19
N, Palm Harbor, as an associate and will be responsible for brokering
residential properties. She has lived 25 years in Pinellas County and has 15
years experience as a residential appraiser. She is on the board of the West
Coast Chapter of the Appraisal Institute in Tampa and has received an
appointment to serve on the regional ethics and counseling panel of the
Appraisal Institute in Chicago.



   Gary W. Havener has joined Sun Vista Realty at 19139 Gulf Blvd., Indian
Shores, as a Realtor associate.

News of businesses and business people can be faxed to the Business Digest at
445-4119 or mailed to Business Digest, Clearwater Times, Largo-Seminole Times
and North Pinellas Times, 710 Court St., Clearwater, Fl. 34616. Photos can be
sent, but not all will be used and they cannot be returned.

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); STEVEN H. COHN ; ROBERT D. REID

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1994


                             504 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   December 19, 1994, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A10, NOTEBOOK

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: A new chocolate age

BYLINE: From local and wire dispatches

BODY:


   A new age in chocolate production is upon us, a Penn State University food
scientist believes. Imagine, if you can, a world where chocolate not only is
cheaper to make, but lower in fat.

   Greg Ziegler, speaking at the recent annual meeting of the American Institute
of Chemical Engineers in San Francisco, said his research suggested that the
amount of expensive cocoa butter used to make chocolate could be drastically
reduced without harming chocolate's physical properties and flavor. The trick is
to have the right combination of sizes of cocoa and sugar particles, he said.

Boosting gene therapy

   A University of Pittsburgh scientist says a commonly used chemotherapy drug,
cisplatin, may prove a useful tool in performing gene therapy.

   Leaf Huang, a pharmacologist, reports in the Dec. 15 issue of the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science that experiments in mice showed that
cisplatin primed cancer cells so that they responded better to gene therapy.

   Gene therapy is still in the early stages of testing. The idea is to treat
some cancers, congenital diseases and other ailments, such as arthritis, by
adding beneficial genes to cells. One method of introducing these beneficial
genes is by encasing them in tiny spheres of fat, called liposomes, and
injecting them.

   In the Pitt experiments, Huang and his colleagues transplanted human ovarian
tumors into two groups of mice. One group was injected with cisplatin and, a
week later, with liposomes containing a new gene. The second group was injected
only with the liposomes. Huang found that the transferred genes were more likely
to become active in the tumor cells of those mice who had been pretreated with
cisplatin. The cisplatin did not enhance gene expression in noncancerous cells.

   Just how cisplatin accomplishes this feat is uncertain, the researchers said.


Dusting for prints

   Evidence that sexual orientation is to some degree determined by prenatal
events is bolstered by a Canadian study linking certain fingerprint patterns to
homosexuality.

   Researchers at the University of Western Ontario, reporting in this month's
issue of the journal Behavioral Neuroscience, note that 30 percent of homosexual
men have more ridges in the fingerprint patterns on their left hands than on
their right. Fourteen percent of heterosexuals displayed the same pattern.

   Most gays, researchers Jeffrey Hall and Doreen Kumura emphasize, have the
same patterns as their straight counterparts -- more ridges on the right
fingerprints than on the left. No women were included in the study.

Smoking ages arteries

   Cigarette smoking not only can make people look older by adding facial
wrinkles, it can prematurely age the walls of blood vessels, researchers say.

   The walls of arteries naturally thicken with age. But Grethe Tell, head of
epidemiology at Bowman Gray School of Medicine in Winston-Salem, N.C., reports
this month in the journal Circulation that cigarette smokers add the equivalent
of 10 years of aging to their arteries. That increases their risk of heart
attack and stroke.

   Among 5,116 people age 65 and over, Tell's team found clinically significant
narrowing of the carotid arteries in 4.4 percent of people who never smoked, 7.3
percent of former smokers and 9.5 percent of smokers.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1994


                             505 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    DECEMBER 19, 1994, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 1235 words

HEADLINE: Boys' Illness Leads Medical Sleuth on Genetic Hunt

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    Nearly 20 years ago, two young boys with elfin faces and a baffling set of
ailments were brought by their parents to a Denver hospital. Puzzled physicians
asked a young researcher, Dr. Edward McCabe, to take a look.

   The boys were mentally retarded and small, and they had weak muscles. A few
years earlier, county welfare officials had taken the older boy away, suspecting
child abuse because the tot suffered so many broken bones. The parents got him
back when the foster family found his bones kept breaking.  Then the couple had
a second boy with the same problems.

   McCabe, then being trained in children's metabolic disorders, embarked on an
odyssey of medical detective work and intimate involvement with the family.

   That fixation helped lead to an announcement last week by a team of Italian,
American, German and British researchers of the final step in the atom-by-atom
identification of the genetic errors found in the two youngsters.

   The scientific report in the journal Nature describes the gene for a disease
called adrenal hypoplasia congenita, one of at least three closely related
genetic disorders those Colorado boys had.

   This constellation of diseases is so rare that the full description of the
genes responsible will not, by itself, much alter the lives of many people.

   But the long voyage of discovery illustrates the strides made by genetic
science in just two decades. Broadly, the results are part of the global effort
called the Human Genome Project, which is aimed at unraveling the mysterious
tapestry of human heredity. In the wings is not only the ability to detect and
diagnose hundreds and perhaps thousands of inherited diseases, but also the
knowledge to prevent them or, through gene therapy, perhaps eventually cure many
of them.

   In an interview last week, McCabe, now chief of pediatrics at the University
of California at Los Angeles School of Medicine, described the chance encounter
with the family in Colorado and what followed.

   ''I was just called in to work up the case,'' he said. ''They were honest,
sort of unsophisticated country people who lived up north of Denver.  They were
good parents, but the kids were sick.''

   Medical tests showed that both boys had oddly high levels of glycerol in
their blood. Glycerol, commonly used in hand lotions, should only exist in
traces in human tissue. After eliminating such possible sources as glycerol
suppositories, McCabe concluded that a derangement in the boys' metabolism of
fat was at work.

   With two brothers and reports from the family of an uncle who had died
suddenly as a child in Nebraska with similar problems, a genetic defect was
clearly the culprit. ''But back then, we had practically no way to find the gene
responsible and wouldn't know what to do about it even if we had.''

   Further study showed that the boys actually had three diseases. The first,
previously unrecognized, was dubbed glycerol kinase deficiency. The second, the
cause of the muscle weakness, closely resembled the well-known disease, Duchenne
muscular dystrophy.

   The third was discovered a short time later, after the older boy suddenly
died within a day of a minor operation on his eyes. ''The parents insisted on an
autopsy,'' McCabe said. ''They remembered the child abuse charges and did not
want anybody thinking they had hurt their son.''

   The autopsy revealed the boy's adrenal glands, atop his kidneys, to be small
and malformed. The glands provide many of the hormones, such as natural
steroids, that provide the body with the ability to cope with shock.  McCabe
ordered the surviving brother protected from major stress, and he was put on a
regular dose of steroids to compensate for his medical problems.

   Scientifically, the coincidence of the three diseases in two brothers
indicated that the boys had somehow inherited a defect that damaged three
neighboring genes.

   McCabe kept working on the ailment at Baylor College of Medicine in Texas. By
the mid-1980s, it was clear that the three genes were on the X-chromosome, a
long string of genes whose roles include determination of sex characteristics.

   He found himself heading a group at Baylor competing with groups in Great
Britain to clone, or copy and fully map, the gene for glycerol kinase
deficiency, and wound up in a three-way tie.

   Two of the teams, including McCabe's, then set their sights on the third of
the linked defective genes, the one that stunts adrenal glands.

   That scientific rivalry turned to fruitful cooperation, thanks to the
intervention of Giovanna Camerino, a genetics researcher at the University of
Sassari in Italy. She called McCabe and his chief competitor, Anthony Monaco of
John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, to suggest that they cooperate with her group
and with a fourth team led by Thomas Meitinger in Munich, Germany, to define the
molecular sequence of the remaining gene for the adrenal disorder.

   During the past two years, linked largely by fax and electronic computer
mail, the four teams laboriously put together the full sequence of molecules.

   Now, 18 years after meeting the two sick little boys, McCabe knows in detail
what was wrong with them. The damaged genes that cause Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, glycerol kinase deficiency and adrenal hypoplasia lie next to one
another on what geneticists label the short arm of the X- chromosome. Something
had knocked out the middle gene in the two boys and damaged the two flanking
genes. Their mother had a 50-50 chance of passing the disease to any son, and a
50-50 chance of passing the defective genes to any daughters who, while well,
could pass it on to their sons.

   The research has produced tests to detect the defects in developing fetuses,
allowing girls and women in affected families to be told whether they carry the
gene. Knowledge of the genes' structures should lead to better therapies that
could block some of the signs of the disease. The third gene discovered, for
adrenal hypoplasia, also may be involved in a host of other critical functions,
including proper brain development.

   So far, McCabe has diagnosed about 50 boys with the same group of ailments.
While retarded and vulnerable to many diseases, they are affectionate and
active.

   He also has kept in close touch with the family in Colorado and the surviving
son. While extremely retarded, he is a cheerful young man and has finished
special education classes.

   ''We talk in medicine about taking information from the bench (laboratory) to
bedside and back,'' McCabe said. ''In this case, we have done it.''

   ISOLATING SOURCE OF GENETIC DISORDERS

   An international team of medical researchers has identified and isolated the
genes for several relatively rare genetic diseases. They are neighbors on the
X-chromosome, is closely linked to sex determination. A new report describes
their identification aided in part by study of boys who inherited damage to all
three genes. Shown are symptoms associated with defects in each gene.


   AHC (adrenal hypoplasia congenita):

   Defects linked to:

   * Inability to cope with physical stress, often causing death at young age

   * Delayed puberty


   GK (glycerol kinase deficiency):

   Defects linked to:

   * High levels of glycerol in blood due to improper processing of fat

   * Episodes of vomiting and stupor


   DMD (Duchenne muscular dystrophy):

   Defects linked to:

   * Muscular deterioration and weakness.

   * Possible mental retardation.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1994


                             506 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1994 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      December 18, 1994 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. AA-01

LENGTH: 1858 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy operation a first Blocked-artery experiment an
alternative to amputation of leg

BYLINE: Gina Kolata, The New York Times

BODY:

   BRIGHTON, Mass. - The tiny cardiac catheterization room at St. Elizabeth's
Hospital was never meant to hold two dozen doctors, nurses and visitors, all
wearing heavy lead aprons to protect them from a constant barrage of X-rays.

   But last Wednesday was a day most of the crowd in the room had anticipated
for years. It was the day when Dr. Jeffrey Isner and one of his associates, Dr.
Robert Schainfeld, were attempting the first gene therapy for vascular disease.

   If the experiment succeeded, it would herald a revolution in the treatment of
vascular disease that might eventually replace bypass surgery with gene therapy.

   The idea was to add genes to arteries that would direct the formation of new
blood vessels to grow around an area blocked by plaque. If it worked, it would
be a sort of auto-bypass.

   The room was electric with excitement as the procedure, scheduled to take two
hours, got under way. Dr. Kenneth Walsh, a molecular biologist who supervised
the preparation of the DNA for the experiment, said he saw the moment as a
turning point.

   "Every now and then you reach a milestone where things tomorrow are not going
to be the same as today," he explained. And this morning, in this crowded room,
was just such a time, he added.

   The patient, lying on the operating table, sedated with morphine and Valium
injections, breathing through an oxygen mask, was Michael Ruo, 54, a man from
Foxborough, Mass., who felt that gene therapy was his last best hope. He had an
artery in his leg that was so severely blocked that his leg would have to be
amputated if the highly experimental treatment did not succeed.

   The journey toward this day began several years ago when researchers
discovered that a substance, dubbed vascular endothelial growth factor, or vegF,
can encourage new blood vessels to sprout out of an artery.

   VegF was first discovered by cancer researchers who noticed that tumors use
it to grow new blood vessels to supply themselves with nourishing blood. Then
investigators found that fetuses also use vegF to grow blood vessels. It seemed
to be the body's own signal to grow new vessels.

   The discovery of vegF, and the isolation of the human vegF gene, gave Isner
an idea. Cardiologists had long known that some people naturally form collateral
blood vessels that can bypass blocked arteries, but most people do not make them
or do not make enough of them to successfully divert blood.

   Perhaps, Isner reasoned, if he supplied vegF genes to the smooth muscle cells
lining an artery wall next to a blockage, the genes might force new blood
vessels to grow.

   It was an ideal setting for gene therapy. One of the most difficult aspects
of gene therapy is finding a good way to get the genes into cells. But muscle
cells are among the few in the body that actually take up so-called naked DNA,
genes that are not packaged in viruses or wrapped in membranes.

   Once the genes get into the cells, they remain active for a few weeks,
directing cells to make proteins. So vegF genes might remain active just long
enough for new blood vessels to sprout. And since naked DNA is quickly degraded
in the bloodstream, genes that did not migrate into the smooth muscle cells
would be destroyed.

   Isner and his colleagues began by experimenting on rabbits. They would tie
off an artery in an animal's leg and then add vegF genes to the smooth muscle
cells lining the artery.

   Within three to 10 days, new blood vessels started to bud out from the
artery. Within three weeks, they grew around the blockage and hooked up again
downstream, diverting the blood around the obstruction.

   Buoyed by this success, the investigators applied to the National Institutes
of Health and the Food and Drug Administration for approval to try the gene
therapy on patients.

   They wanted to start with patients who had blocked arteries in their legs and
who, for various medical reasons, were not candidates for bypass surgery or
balloon angioplasty. These patients, unlike people with blocked coronary
arteries, cannot be treated with drugs. No drugs are effective for their
condition.

   Instead, they faced amputations of their legs, a procedure that is very
risky. Isner said that 20 percent of them die in the hospital and 40 percent are
dead within a year of the surgery. So, Isner said, they were the patients who
had the most to gain and the least to lose from gene therapy.

   Isner estimated that 30,000 to 40,000 patients in the United States each year
have such severe blockages in their leg arteries that they have constant and
unrelenting pain in their legs or have ulcers on their legs that cannot heal.

   Eventually, Isner said, if the treatment for blockages in the leg succeeded,
the investigators would like to move on to the heart and try to use gene therapy
to enable patients to essentially grow their own bypasses.

   On Nov. 15, Isner's group got its final approval to try the gene therapy on
12 patients, and they immediately began looking for the first qualified
volunteer. Ruo was more than ready.

   In a telephone interview the night before the gene therapy procedure, Ruo,
who is overweight and a smoker, said heart disease ran in his family and that he
began to have symptoms of it in his early 40s.

   Eleven years ago, blood flow to his left leg was obstructed by plaque, but
his doctors corrected it with bypass surgery. Six years ago, he had triple
bypass surgery on his coronary arteries. Last April, he nicked his right ankle
and noticed that the cut would not heal.

   "I tried to clean it, I put Band-Aids on it, but it kept growing," he said.
Finally, in July, he went to his cardiologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in
Boston for help.

   Ruo's doctor said that the artery feeding Ruo's leg was blocked, but said he
could do another bypass upstream of the blockage to facilitate blood past the
segment of his artery that had been blocked 11 years ago combined with balloon
angioplasty downstream at the latest obstruction to try to open it. Ruo was
confident that the operation would succeed.

   "It went so beautifully the last time," he said. But the procedure failed and
Ruo's doctor told him that he would have to amputate his leg below the knee. "I
suggested to him that we find a second opinion," Ruo said. So his doctor
referred him to Isner.

   Isner agreed with the first doctor's assessment, but asked if Ruo was
interested in participating in the gene therapy experiment. By this time, Ruo's
blockage had grown worse. The blood flow to his leg had slowed to a trickle, at
best. Not only was the ulcer still present, but it was causing unremitting
discomfort.

   "It's 24 hours a day, more like a burning sensation than pain, like somebody
put an ice pick on my ankle or put something burning hot there," he said. When
he heard about the gene therapy, Ruo jumped at the chance. "Anybody in the world
would be a fool not to try this," he said.

   So, on Wednesday morning at 10:30, Ruo lay draped on a narrow operating
table, his abdomen numbed with Novocain so he would not feel the catheters
threaded through his arteries. An X-ray machine loomed above him and it was on
during virtually the entire operation.

   Ruo wore his eyeglasses, but seldom opened his eyes in his
Valium-and-morphine-induced stupor. Every now and then he groaned with pain from
his ulcer. The worst position for someone with an ulcer like his is lying flat,
as he had to for the gene therapy, because gravity cannot assist the blood in
dribbling through the vessels.

   The challenge for Isner and Schainfeld was to find the best place to insert
the genes. They had to find a place in the artery next to the blockage that was
wide enough to insert the genes and that had intact and healthy smooth muscle
cells that were not marred by plaque.

   To get a clear view of the lining of Ruo's arteries, the doctors inserted a
catheter that contained a minuscule ultrasound probe at its tip. The ultrasound
probe bounced sound waves off the artery wall, generating a crisp, clear picture
of Ruo's blood vessel, a sort of Fantastic Voyage point of view. At the same
time, a computer calculated the exact diameter of the artery as the catheter
traveled down it.

   It turned out that no segments of Ruo's main artery were usable for the gene
therapy. Isner and Schainfeld were reduced to using a small fragile branch off
the artery, a place where, Isner said, a cardiologist would never think of
inserting a balloon.

   "We are a pretty aggressive group and we do some severely diseased limbs, but
this was really pushing the envelope," Isner said.

   Finally, after more than two hours of studying Ruo's vessels with X-rays and
catheters, the investigators were ready to go. The genes are inserted into the
artery on the surface of a balloon and the researchers used a seemingly enormous
number of genes, expecting that just 1 percent or less would actually be taken
up by the cells.

   The 16 trillion vegF genes that would be used to coat the balloon were in
less than a drop of liquid in a tiny test tube. Isner inflated a small
sausage-shaped balloon that was just the right size to fit in the tiny artery
and dripped the gluey fluid onto it.

   One of his assistants blew unheated air through a hair dryer in an attempt to
speed up the drying of the liquid onto the balloon. When the first application
of genes had dried, Isner dripped some more of the genes on until, finally,
after about half an hour, all the fluid was on the balloon and the coating of
genes had given the balloon a pearly sheen.

   Isner deflated the balloon and put a protective sheath over it. Then he
threaded the balloon, in its sheath, into Ruo's artery, stopping at the exact
spot in the delicate branch where the genes were to be inserted. He slipped off
the sheath and holding the balloon in place, inflated it for six minutes, while
the muscle cells took up the genes.

   When it was over, after five hours instead of the two they had thought it
would take, the researchers breathed a sigh of relief.

   "We've done a lot of animals in our lab and you really think you know what
you're doing," Isner said. "But once you start doing it in a patient, you
realize that there are limits to what you can learn in animals."

   And that is particularly so, Isner said, "because the patients who are going
to be candidates for this procedure at this point are patients who do not have
much circulation left to deal with. These are not the patients we are used to
doing angioplasty on."

   Now it is all over but the waiting. Isner said that although his group can
look for the growth of new blood vessels with various tests, the real proof that
they succeed will be if Ruo's ulcer starts to heal. "That's the bottom line,"
Isner said. "That's the only thing that's important."

   Walsh, the molecular biologist, said that if Ruo did not grow new blood
vessels or did not grow enough of them, there was always room to modify the
experiment for future patients, adding more genes, for example.

   But, Isner said, he thinks Ruo and the patients who follow him will not lose
much by participating in the study, even if the gene therapy does not succeed
for them.The patients have no other options.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: New York Times/Rick Friedman STILL KICKING: Michael Ruo, left,
the first bypass-gene-therapy patient, is examined by Dr. Jeffrey Isner at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital in Brighton, Mass.  N.Y. Times News Service Helping the
Body Do Its Own Bypass

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1994


                             507 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 49;   Column 2;   Metropolitan Desk;   Second Front

LENGTH: 3219 words

HEADLINE: Death in the Mail -- Tracking a Killer: A special report.;
Investigators Have Many Clues and Theories, but Still No Suspect in 15 Bombings

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL and N. R. KLEINFIELD

BODY:

   They have thought he might be a sullen student or teacher. They have thought
he might be an enraged airline or computer worker. They have thought he might be
someone at the post office or in a lumberyard. They have thought he might work
at a factory that makes artificial limbs.

   When he resurfaced last Saturday, mailing a package that killed an
advertising executive named Thomas J. Mosser at his home in North Caldwell,
N.J., investigators once again found themselves grimly sifting for clues to a
bomber who has baffled them for 16 years and now seems to have escalated his
rampage. The early returns, investigators said, have been achingly familiar --
no especially tantalizing leads to freshen a scent that remains faint at best --
but the searchers hint that they are exploring some new directions.

    A $1 million reward, posted in 1993, still awaits anyone who helps find the
wiliest mail bomber in modern history, one who has struck 15 times, killing 2
people and wounding 22. In further hopes of eliciting leads from the public,
investigators have deliberately chosen to share an unusual amount of information
in the case, which they call Unabom because of the early university and airline
targets.

   Extensive interviews last week with investigators, including officials of the
Federal task force based in San Francisco assigned to the case, reveal a more
detailed picture of a remarkably exhaustive manhunt -- thousands of leads,
hundreds of suspects and endless computer searches into everything from the
initials of someone's name to the phases of the moon. At one point last year,
the trail led to an ex-convict who disappeared after he was questioned.

   And yet, to the consternation of investigators, all the thousands of clues
and theories have produced no solution. They do not know who the bomber is.

   But some intriguing links have emerged. One of the more captivating ones is
that the bomber is trying to say something through wood or trees. First,
authorities noticed that all the bombs had various forms of wood in them, an
illogical material rare in an explosive. The second device actually had tree
twigs glued to it.

   Then there are the names. One target was Percy Wood, who lived in Lake
Forest, Ill. He got a bomb inside a novel, "Ice Brothers," published by Arbor
House, whose symbol is a tree leaf. Moreover, some of the fake return addresses
the bomber wrote on parcels referred to trees or wood. One listed Ravenswood,
another Forest Glen Road. It may mean nothing, or it may mean a great deal, that
Mr. Mosser lived on Aspen Drive.

   To investigators who have spent years staring at this maddening puzzle, the
recurring wood motif suggested its own swarm of possibilities. Was the bomber a
crazed environmentalist? A demented lumberjack? Or, in an enigmatic case flush
with blind alleys and an interminable web of theories, was it one more ploy in a
macabre game?

   The Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Postal Service and the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms are all actively searching for the bomber. Jim R.
Freeman, the special agent in charge of the San Francisco office of the F.B.I.,
is flying to Washington to personally brief Louis J. Freeh, the F.B.I. Director,
on Monday. How close are they to catching him?

   "How close?" asked Mr. Freeman. "One phone call away with the right tip. One
computer run. Or years away."

A Pattern Emerges
Computers, Planes And Lots of Wood

    It was the third bomb, in November 1979, that first outlined the dimensions
of the problem.

   An explosive designed to go off at high altitude caught fire without
exploding in a mailbag aboard an American Airlines flight from Chicago to
Washington. Twelve passengers suffered smoke inhalation. The bomb, nearly intact
in its juice-can container, was dissected by an F.B.I. bomb examiner in
Washington named Christopher Ronay. The label was scorched but seemed to be
addressed to a business ending in "lines" in northwest Washington. Since the
bomb was mailed in Chicago, Mr. Ronay sent photos to the Chicago authorities.

   The photos reminded the Chicago police of a device found in May 1979 at the
Tech building of Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill. They sent the remains
to Mr. Ronay.

   "Both had two initiators, which is unusual, that were identical," he said.
"Each was carved in a round dowel form with grooves cut into it on each side for
the wire. There were identical wire leads, and so on. I had never seen the
design before in the thousands of bombs I had examined. The chances of two
different people making them were nil. We knew we had a serial bomber."

   Some time later, the F.B.I. learned of an earlier bomb found in an unmailed
package in May 1978 in the engineering department's parking lot at the Chicago
campus of the University of Illinois. Mr. Ronay concluded that it, too, came
from the same hands. Presumably, it was the bomber's debut.

   For tactical reasons, the authorities did not yet announce the presence of a
serial bomber. And, given the evidence they had, they treated it as a Chicago
matter.

   In June 1980, he struck anew, mailing the bomb-in-a-novel to the home of
Percy Wood, the president of United Airlines, in Lake Forest, a Chicago suburb.
Now the investigation intensified, especially into anyone vindictive against the
airlines. United itself had recently laid off thousands of workers; they came
under suspicion. Investigators again pondered the American Airlines bomb. The
bomber could not have known what flight would carry a mailed package, but 70
percent of the mail out of Chicago at the time went on United. Was he playing
those odds?

   A curious clue emerged. The initials FC were inscribed in a piece of metal on
the bomb received by Mr. Wood. They showed up either on a metal tag or tapped
into the metal on seven of the next eight bombs.

   What did they signify? Who knew? Investigators pursued many people, as well
as companies, with those initials. They speculated it might be an obscene phrase
directed at computers. Thought was given to the fact that the identifying
letters on the license plates of foreign diplomats were FC. To this day, the
initials remain one more mystery.

   Three more strikes occurred over the next two years, over broader territory.
A bomb was dismantled in a business classroom at the University of Utah in Salt
Lake City. Another, mailed from Utah, exploded at Vanderbilt University in
Nashville. A third exploded after being placed at the University of California
at Berkeley.

   Authorities homed in on the seeming likelihood that the bomber had lived
around Chicago, then moved to Utah and on to California. They devised lists of
people who had done that. There were many.

   No strong suspect emerged. But there were several new clues. A note was left
with the Berkeley bomb: "Wu -- it works! I told you it would -- R.V."
Investigators looked into countless Asians named Wu as well as people and groups
with the initials R.V. And a janitor described a thin stranger with a mustache
who was in the building at the time, but it was never clear if he was the
bomber.

   By now, investigators had noticed the unusual presence of wood in the bombs
-- including birch, walnut, mahogany and cottonwood -- as well as the wood
connections to some victims. One bomb had four varieties of wood.

   "I think the wood is some sort of calling card," said Mr. Ronay, who worked
on the case until his recent retirement from the F.B.I. "Maybe he's a woodsman
or wants to save the trees. Wood is a significant part of the case."

   Investigators began looking into environmental groups and into lumberyard
workers.

Growing Deadlier
New Technology Creates a Murderer

    For nearly three years, the bomber was silent. Some investigators thought he
was dead. Other suspected he was in prison or a mental hospital, or out of the
country. It was conjectured that he had multiple personalities, and that for
three years he was the other person. Some agents supposed that for three years,
he simply wasn't angry at anybody.

   His fury returned. Between May and December 1985, he struck four times -- a
bomb placed in a computer room at the University of California at Berkeley, a
bomb mailed to a fabrication division of the Boeing Company in Auburn, Wash., a
bomb mailed to a psychology professor's home and one left behind a computer
rental store in Sacramento, Calif.

   The bombs had the telltale signs -- with one important difference. Instead of
smokeless powder, they now contained a chemical combination that burned longer
and hotter. The new bombs were far more lethal. And the Sacramento one killed
Hugh Campbell Scrutton, the computer store's owner. The bomber was now a
murderer.

   Every incident implied new possibilities. The Boeing bomb, only the second
not to explode, was enclosed in a wooden box with various cutouts and niches. An
investigator noticing it said, "That's how prostheses are shipped." He consulted
a doctor specializing in prosthetics, who agreed. Investigators began checking
factories and doctors dealing in artificial body parts.

   "That's how things can get away from you," said Mr. Ronay, who never thought
much of that lead. "Someone makes a quantum leap -- wooden box; it's got to be
prostheses. Some delicate aircraft parts are shipped in wooden boxes. That was
looked at. Could he work at an aircraft parts maker? They really worked at the
university and aircraft angles. They still are."

   Eleven bombings now, the first death. No hot lead. In meetings between
investigators, the frustration resulted in a decision: Go public. Shortly after
the Scrutton death, the F.B.I. announced that it was pursuing a serial bomber.

   Many more leads poured in. The mail bomber always used stamps, not metered
postage, presumably to avoid having to deal with a post office clerk.
Investigators noticed that the postage was either the precise amount or slightly
more than necessary. They looked into whether the bomber might work at a post
office. Nothing.

   The bomber remained a ghost. Was it a man or a woman? A teen-ager or a
retiree? A giant or a dwarf?

Some Answers
A Witness And a Rash of Tips

    The next attack gave some answers.

   In February 1987, the bomber left a bag containing a bomb in the parking lot
of a computer company in Salt Lake City. As he did, a woman sitting inside an
office looked directly into his face.

   She described to police a white man, 25 to 30 years old, about 6 feet,
weighing about 165 pounds, with a small mustache, reddish-blond hair and a ruddy
complexion. She said he was wearing sunglasses with smoked lenses and had a
sweatshirt hood over his head. The police prepared a sketch from her description
and made it public.

   The sketch eliminated innumerable possibilities. And it brought a rash of
tips, many from former wives.

   Behavorial experts began drafting theoretical profiles of the bomber, drawn
from his methodology and interviews with serial bombers. He was described as a
loner of high intelligence who was quiet, meticulous, a maker of lists, an ideal
neighbor. He was likely to drive an old car but keep it in good condition. He
probably had difficulty dealing with other people, especially women. Or he could
be nothing like that.

   The bomber either makes his parts or uses common household items with
identifying marks scraped off. He has even made screws himself, though he mostly
uses commercial ones. Investigators gathered scrap metal from junkyards and
trash bins in areas where bombs had been mailed and tested them to see if they
might be the same batches from which he drew his materials.

   No possibility was readily discounted. In pursuit of patterns, investigators
studied academic calendars, phases of the moon, the positions of stars. They did
computer searches of almanac information to see whether the bombings coincided
with historical anniversaries.

   The sketch remained the biggest breakthrough. But it also may have frightened
the bomber. For more than six years, nothing was heard from him. The
investigation wound down. Maybe this time he was dead.

A Letter
A Public Dare And a Rare Lapse

    He was not. Within the space of two days in June 1993, he sent bombs to a
geneticist at the University of California at San Francisco and to a computer
scientist at Yale University.

   For the first time, he also spoke to the world. The New York Times received a
letter from Sacramento, postmarked before the bombings, in which the bomber
claimed to be part of an anarchist group calling itself FC. The letter included
a nine-digit number, written in the form of a Social Security number, to be used
to authenticate future communications.

   Because of his methods, investigators say they do not believe that the bomber
is working in concert with others; and if he were, they think a $1 million
reward would have impelled someone to inform.

   After much internal debate, the F.B.I. decided to announce that the bomber
left FC on many of the bombs.

   Other theories arose. One of the June targets worked in the field of
massively parallel computing and the other in gene therapy. Both of those
technologies figure prominently in the movie "Jurassic Park." The bombs were
mailed the week the movie opened.

   The nine-digit number in the letter was seized on. Investigators looked into
whether it might be a real Social Security number and found that it matched the
number of a small-time career criminal from Northern California who had, at one
point, also lived in Sacramento. It turned out he was in prison during the
bombings last year, and the authorities did not feel he could be the culprit.
They said they might want to talk to him again. But he recently violated parole
and vanished.

   Another promising clue emerged from the letter, possibly the bomber's only
mistake since apparently being seen in 1987. From the letter, investigators were
able to discern an impression of a message the bomber may have written on
another slip of paper: "Call Nathan R Wed 7 pm."

   Authorities laboriously pursued that lead. Driver's license records and phone
books were scrutinized throughout the country to identify anyone named Nathan
with a middle or last name beginning with R. Ten thousand Nathan R's poured
forth. Agents interviewed them all. Nothing.

   Given the bomber's success, investigators feel he must have tested some of
his devices outdoors. People are unlikely to blow up bombs in their bathrooms.
The authorities prowled into rock quarries and deserts, and sought out forest
rangers who may have seen people testing explosives.

   A few months ago, investigators talked again with the Salt Lake City witness.
She had never been entirely happy with the police sketch, and investigators
brought in a new artist who redid it, notably filling out the hair style. The
artist also added aging to the face. The new sketch was shown to the public
after the Dec. 10 bombing.

The Latest Attack
Promising Clues, Too Many of Them

    Last Saturday's bombing that killed Mr. Mosser has not yet introduced any
clearly important clues, the authorities said, though there is much still to be
studied. The FC initials were not found in the debris, the third consecutive
bomb missing them. There was, however, wood. Moreover, the bomb contained a
chemical mixture he had never used before that was more powerful, suggesting an
escalation. The package it came in bore a fictitious name and address, H. C.
Wickel of the Department of Economics of San Francisco State University, and was
mailed from San Francisco.

   In the last week, something like 5,000 tips or theories have poured into the
"800" number of the task force, as well as numerous E-mail messages. Last week,
the task force appealed for help to computer users over the Internet, the vast
computer communications network.

   Still, investigators have yet to find a common thread among the victims --
scholars, computer people, airline people, high-technology people -- and no one
seemed to share anything with an advertising executive. It has been pointed out
that some of the clients of Mr. Mosser's company, Young & Rubicam, are computer
companies. It has been pointed out that his brother is an immunologist. It has
been pointed out that he lived on a street named after a tree.

   Investigators continue to sniff into the prevalence of wood, though Mr.
Freeman of the F.B.I. said that several other lines of inquiries that he would
not discuss were "more interesting."

   Some bombs went to places, some to specific people. Of the 15 bombs, seven
went to or were sent from California. Nine involved universities. Investigators
say they believe there is something in those frequencies, and are especially
keen on the possibility that he lives in California. Several times, the bomber
sent innocent-sounding messages to victims ahead of his bombs, diabolical
enticements to open the packages personally.

   They are reconstructing the Mosser package and plan to show it to mail
carriers in San Francisco in the hopes that it will be recognized. They are also
asking if anyone in San Francisco knows of someone who recently relocated to the
city or if anyone had a house guest in early December who asked that they mail a
package, allowing the possibility that the bomber did not mail the bomb himself.

   They are now looking into advertising, a previously unexplored field. Some
agents, however, say they think the bomber has gravitated from sending bombs
with a purpose to simply playing a devilish game with law enforcement. Agents
said that the bomber's sending a letter to a newspaper suggests that he craves
notoriety. That he mailed the latest bomb from San Francisco, right under the
noses of the task force, may imply he is mocking his pursuers.

   "We don't know the motive," Mr. Freeman said. "Is it revenge? Is it
publicity? We see a consistent span of targets. If you were to try to ascribe a
motive, it's only a theory, a theory that he hates computers, hates airlines,
hates universities, hates professors. But we don't know if he hates at all."

   Or, as Mr. Ronay put it: "Even something outlandish is possible. Maybe he got
cut off by these guys in traffic."

   Suspects do keep cropping up. A handful, investigators said, were compelling
enough to be put under surveillance for a while. A few years ago, a university
worker was scrutinized. He was outspokenly contemptuous of computers and
technology. His initials were F. C.

   "The guys went nuts over that," Mr. Ronay said. "They ran it to the ground.
He sure looked good. But he was out of the country at some points and there were
other things that made it clear he couldn't possibly have done it."

   By now, given all the people they have spoken to, investigators think it is
entirely possible that they have interviewed the bomber himself.

   "He may well be in our files," one agent said.

   "The problem is not that there are no leads; there are too many," said James
Cavanaugh, an agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms who has
worked on the case. "And Unabomber hasn't told us enough. I feel he wants to
tell us more."

   No one is giving up. They remain hopeful that at some point, if he has not
already, the bomber will brag of his deeds to someone who will turn him in. Or
that he will slip up. "Unabomber is human," said Mr. Cavanaugh. "He has a flaw.
When we find it, we'll catch him."

GRAPHIC: Photos: A letter sent to The New York Times in June 1993, shortly
before two bombings, warned of "a newsworthy event." The authorities said the
author was behind a string of bombings in the 1970's and 80's. David Gelernter,
a Yale professor, was injured by a letter bomb last year when he opened a
package mailed to his office. He held his two sons, Joshua, 3, and Daniel, 6, at
their home in Woodbridge, Conn. (Carl David Labianca); The phone room at the San
Francisco office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which is heading the
case of 15 serial bombings. Agents have have talked to forest rangers and 10,000
people named Nathan R. (George Olson for The New York Times)(pg. 52); A lack of
clues is not the problem in the hunt for a serial bomber. The leads on the desk
of an agent at the San Francisco office of the F.B.I. are marked "Best,"
"Medium" and "Worst." The "Best" pile is empty; those leads go out immediately.
(George Olson for The New York Times)(pg. 49)

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994


                             508 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 December 18, 1994, Sunday, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10D

LENGTH: 433 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH ADVANCES TRANSPLANTS OF ANIMALS' SPERM-MAKING CELLS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   Scientists have reported the first experiments showing that it is possible to
transplant sperm-making cells from one animal into another.

   In experiments at the University of Pennsylvania, reproductive physiologist
Ralph Brinster made one mouse produce sperm that carry the genes - the
biological inheritance - of another mouse. By simply transplanting the
sperm-making cells - spermatogonia - from one mouse into another, he permanently
changed the recipient's sperm, so it carried only the donor's genes.

   The experiments were done in mice that were naturally sterile, or in mice
whose sperm stem cells had been killed by chemical treatments.

   Two reports published recently in The Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences by Brinster and two co-workers show, in essence, that it is possible to
transfer one family's genetic inheritance directly into the male reproductive
system of another, without vows, marriage, in-laws and all that.

   George Seidel, an animal physiologist at Colorado State University, said
Brinster's achievement is also an important step toward the cloning of adult
animals. "It really is a method of cloning, in a direct sense; you can make an
individual produce progeny" similar to those that would be produced by "the one
from which you took the cells."

   The sperm-making cells from a prize bull, for example, could be implanted
into the testes of less-valuable bulls, making them carriers of the valuable
genes and immortalizing the prize bull's genetic line.

   The cells being transplanted are called stem cells because they must divide
in several steps to make viable sperm cells. These unique cells are present at
birth, keep dividing throughout life, and - unlike a female's eggs - are quickly
replaced by the body if needed.

   In a telephone interview, Brinster said his new technology raises three
important possibilities:

   - It may help understand "the basic biology of how sperm is made," allowing
researchers to explore "the kinds of factors that enhance sperm production.
Simple biological questions can be addressed."

   - Once the sperm-making cells can be grown in culture, they will be ideal
targets for genetic engineering and gene therapy experiments. Genetic changes
made in sperm cells would be routinely passed along in following generations.

   - "Third," Brinster said, "you may be able to put the stem cells from other
species into the mouse, such as taking stem cells from a bull to get bull sperm
made by a mouse." Special mice born without natural immunity would be used, to
avoid rejection of the implanted bovine cells.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1994


                             509 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1994 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                        December 16, 1994, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 11B

LENGTH: 529 words

HEADLINE: Despite promising finds, much gene therapy still beyond reach

BYLINE: Gordon Slovut; Staff Writer

BODY:

    The widespread use of gene therapy to treat many of the 4,000 known genetic
diseases may be a decade or more away, the head of gene therapy for the National
Institutes of Health said Thursday in Minneapolis.

    Dr. R. Michael Blaese and NIH scientists said researchers must make major
technical advances before gene therapy can become commonplace.

    Theories abound on how to use it, but "we don't have a clue [at the moment]
as to what to do with most genetic diseases," Blaese told a seminar audience at
the University of Minnesota.

    However, he added, there have been some promising developments.

    One of them is the use of gene-carrying mouse cells to infect brain-cancer
cells with a treatable virus. The cancer cells then are wiped out with powerful
antibiotics.

    He said the successful treatment was possible because, unlike normal brain
cells, cancerous brain cells divide and multiply. That made it possible to
target only cells that were dividing and multiplying, and to avoid harming the
healthy cells, which Blaese called "bystanders."

    Beginning nearly two years ago, NIH scientists injected mouse cells, each
carrying a gene for a herpeslike virus, into the tumors of 15 people suffering
from a deadly form of brain cancer known as glioblastoma.

    The virus-carrying mouse cells penetrate only cells that are dividing.

    The patients then were given intravenous ganciclovir, an antiviral drug that
kills herpes-type viruses.

    Researchers hoped the drug would wipe out the virus-laden cancer cells,
leaving the healthy brain cells unaffected.  Conventional cancer therapies such
as chemotherapy and radiation sometimes damage healthy cells along with cancer
cells, limiting how much they can be used in delicate areas such as the brain,
Blaese said.

    He said he hopes people who have glioblastomas won't call or write to him
asking to be enrolled in the trial, which has ended.  People with the brain
tumor often are understandably desperate and willing to volunteer for
experimental therapies, he said.

    Of the 15 patients treated, six are alive.  One has survived for 23 months,
and his cancer does not seem to have returned, Blaese said.  In half of the
other survivors, there is no evidence that the tumor has returned or resumed
growing.

    Blaese said it's too soon to tell whether the therapy holds significant
promise as a treatment.  "There is a variable outlook [even without treatment]
for some of the patients," he said.

    The next trials of the technique will be at the University of Iowa, the
University of California, San Francisco, and the University of Washington, he
said.

    Blaese, 55, is a graduate of the University of Minnesota Medical School who
completed a residency in pediatrics at the university and worked with Dr. Robert
Good, the pediatrician and immunologist who headed the team that performed the
nation's first successful bone marrow transplant.

    The university's Institute of Genetics recently received a five-year federal
grant to do research on the treatment of several rare genetic diseases.


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1994


                             510 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                     December 15, 1994 Thursday PM EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 171 words

HEADLINE: NEARING GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   British scientists said yesterday they had taken an important step toward
developing gene therapy, which doctors hope can be used to cure inherited
diseases.

   In a report in the science journal Nature, they said they had produced a
tailor-made protein that stops uncontrolled cell growth. Cancer kills when cells
divide rapidly - one example is a tumor.

   Sir Aaron Klug of Britain's Medical Research Council, who worked on the
project, said the protein had been tried only on mouse cells in a test tube. It
works at the DNA level. DNA is the basic genetic building block of life.

   The protein "binds" to the surface of the gene, stopping it from going into
action.

   "This is the first time anybody has designed a protein to bind to a target of
a particular sequence of DNA," Klug said in a phone interview.

   Klug and colleagues used their synthetic protein on a gene that causes acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, a relatively rare form of cancer. But there was a good
deal of information available about the gene.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             511 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 15, 1994, Thursday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A10, HEALTH ROUNDUP

LENGTH: 804 words

HEADLINE: Panel impugns fat-checking device

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:


   An electronic fat-checking device that helps doctors decide if a patient is
too stout or too skinny may be unreliable, and health decisions should not be
based on it without more research, an expert committee said yesterday.

   A panel of doctors and scientists assembled by the National Institutes of
Health said the method can give distorted or useless information, and appears to
have little value in measuring small changes in body fat. The method involves a
''bioelectrical impedance analysis,'' or BIA meter.

   The committee said BIA devices are manufactured by a number of companies and
are widely used in doctors' offices, sports and fitness clubs and in hospitals.
In some cases, data from the devices are used to adjust diets or to direct
clinical treatments.

   Yet, there is little effort to standardize the measurements or to assure that
devices are operated by properly trained personnel, the panel found.

   The BIA machine attempts to determine the level of body fat by measuring the
flow of electricity between two electrodes. In most cases, the electrodes are
attached to the wrist and ankle and a very light amount of electrical current is
applied. By gauging the flow of current, the device measures the water in body
tissue. The water content, in turn, is used to estimate the percentage of body
fat.

   BIA data, however, can be affected by body shape, by the amount of moisture
on the skin, by food or beverages, by nearby appliances and even by muscle mass,
the experts said. As a result, formulas for converting water content to body fat
estimates may not be accurate for specific individuals, the committee said.

   ''We're not saying that BIAs shouldn't be used, but that they should be used
properly and within the limitations of the method,'' said Dr. Dennis M. Bier, a
member of the committee and a professor at Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston. Used improperly, the BIAs ''gives data that is unreliable and has no
meaning,'' he said.

Angioplasty safer at hospitals that do a lot of them

BOSTON

   A major study shows the chances of surviving angioplasty are considerably
better at hospitals where they are routine. Even though the risk is small no
matter where they are done, the death rate is about one-third higher at
hospitals that perform only one or two a week.

   ''We found a very strong relationship. The lower the volume hospitals have,
the higher their mortality,'' said Dr. James G. Jollis of Duke University
Medical Center in Durham, N.C., the study's principal author.

   More than 300,000 Americans have angioplasties annually. Their doctors
temporarily inflate tiny balloons to open up clogged heart arteries.

   The latest study, published in today's New England Journal of Medicine, is
the first to show that volume truly does predict success. It was based on a
review of all 217,836 angioplasties performed on Medicare patients from 1987
through 1990. Medicare patients are over 65. Typically they account for
one-quarter to one-half of all angioplasties performed.

   The study found that 3.7 percent of angioplasty patients died in hospitals
that did fewer than 50 a year on Medicare patients, compared with 2.7 percent in
those that did more than 100.

Protein called a key step toward gene therapy

LONDON

   British scientists said yesterday they had taken an important step toward
developing gene therapy, which doctors hope some day can be used to cure people
of inherited diseases.

   In a report in the science journal Nature, they said they had produced a
tailor-made protein that stops uncontrolled cell growth. Cancer kills when cells
divide rapidly -- one example is a tumor.

   Sir Aaron Klug of Britain's Medical Research Council, who worked on the
project, said the protein had only been tried out on mouse cells in a test tube.
It works at the DNA level. DNA is the basic genetic building block of life.

   The protein ''binds'' to the surface of the gene, stopping it from going into
action.

Tests promising for new substance to fight herpes

LONDON

   Canadian scientists reported today that they had found a new substance that
seems to work against herpes, a virus that afflicts people in the form of
venereal disease, shingles, chicken pox and cold sores.

   The synthetic peptide -- a simple compound formed by amino acids -- stops
herpes from replicating itself. It works in test tubes and in laboratory animals
but has not been tested in humans.

   Michel Liuzzi and colleagues at Bio-Mega/Boehringer Ingelheim Research Inc in
Laval, Quebec, called their substance BILD 1263.

   ''This compound suppresses the replication of HSV (herpes simplex virus)-1,
HSV-2 and acyclovir-resistant HSV strains in cell culture, and also strongly
(helps) the anti-viral activity of acyclovir,'' they wrote in the science
journal Nature.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1994


                             512 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;   Page 1;   Column 4;   Science Desk;   Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1948 words

HEADLINE: Novel Bypass Method: A Dose of New Genes

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

DATELINE: BRIGHTON, Mass.

BODY:

   THE tiny cardiac catheterization room at St. Elizabeth's Hospital was never
meant to hold two dozen doctors, nurses and visitors, all wearing heavy lead
aprons to protect them from a constant barrage of X-rays. But last Wednesday was
a day most of the crowd in the room had anticipated for years. It was the day
when Dr. Jeffrey Isner and one of his associates, Dr. Robert Schainfeld, were
attempting the first gene therapy for vascular disease. If the experiment
succeeded, it would herald a revolution in the treatment of vascular disease
that might eventually replace bypass surgery with gene therapy.

   The idea was to add genes to arteries that would direct the formation of new
blood vessels to grow around an area blocked by plaque. If it worked, it would
be a sort of auto-bypass.

    The room was electric with excitement as the procedure, scheduled to take
two hours, got under way. Dr. Kenneth Walsh, a molecular biologist who
supervised the preparation of the DNA for the experiment, said he saw the moment
as a turning point. "Every now and then you reach a milestone where things
tomorrow are not going to be the same as today," he explained. And this morning,
in this crowded room, was just such a time, he added.

   The patient, lying on the operating table, sedated with morphine and Valium
injections, breathing through an oxygen mask, was Michael Ruo, a 54-year-old man
from Foxborough, Mass., who felt that gene therapy was his last best hope. He
had an artery in his leg that was so severely blocked that his leg would have to
be amputated if the highly experimental treatment did not succeed.

   The journey toward this day began several years ago when researchers
discovered that a substance, dubbed vascular endothelial growth factor, or vegF,
can encourage new blood vessels to sprout out of an artery. VegF was first
discovered by cancer researchers who noticed that tumors use it to grow new
blood vessels to supply themselves with nourishing blood. Then investigators
found that fetuses also use vegF to grow blood vessels. It seemed to be the
body's own signal to grow new vessels.

   The discovery of vegF, and the isolation of the human vegF gene, gave Dr.
Isner an idea. Cardiologists had long known that some people naturally form
collateral blood vessels that can bypass blocked arteries, but most people do
not make them or do not make enough of them to successfully divert blood.
Perhaps, Dr. Isner reasoned, if he supplied vegF genes to the smooth muscle
cells lining an artery wall next to a blockage, the genes might force new blood
vessels to grow.

   It was an ideal setting for gene therapy. One of the most difficult aspects
of gene therapy is finding a good way to get the genes into cells. But muscle
cells are among the few in the body that actually take up so-called naked DNA,
genes that are not packaged in viruses or wrapped in membranes. Once the genes
get into the cells, they remain active for a few weeks, directing cells to make
proteins. So vegF genes might remain active just long enough for new blood
vessels to sprout. And since naked DNA is quickly degraded in the bloodstream,
genes that did not migrate into the smooth muscle cells would be destroyed.

   Dr. Isner and his colleagues began by experimenting on rabbits. They would
tie off an artery in an animal's leg and then add vegF genes to the smooth
muscle cells lining the artery. Within 3 to 10 days, new blood vessels started
to bud out from the artery. Within three weeks, they grew around the blockage
and hooked up again downstream, diverting the blood around the obstruction.

   Buoyed by this success, the investigators applied to the National Institutes
of Health and the Food and Drug Administration for approval to try the gene
therapy on patients. They wanted to start with patients who had blocked arteries
in their legs and who, for various medical reasons, were not candidates for
bypass surgery or balloon angioplasty. These patients, unlike people with
blocked coronary arteries, cannot be treated with drugs. No drugs are effective
for their condition. Instead, they faced amputations of their legs, a procedure
that is very risky. Dr. Isner said that 20 percent of them die in the hospital
and 40 percent are dead within a year of the surgery. So, Dr. Isner said, they
were the patients who had the most to gain and the least to lose from gene
therapy. Dr. Isner estimated that 30,000 to 40,000 patients in the United States
each year have such severe blockages in their leg arteries that they have
constant and unrelenting pain in their legs or have ulcers on their legs that
cannot heal.

   Eventually, Dr. Isner said, if the treatment for blockages in the leg
succeeded, the investigators would like to move on to the heart and try to use
gene therapy to enable patients to essentially grow their own bypasses.

   On Nov. 15, Dr. Isner's group got its final approval to try the gene therapy
on 12 patients, and they immediately began looking for the first qualified
volunteer. Mr. Ruo was more than ready.

   In a telephone interview the night before the gene therapy procedure, Mr.
Ruo, who is overweight and a smoker, said heart disease ran in his family and
that he began to have symptoms of it in his early 40's. Eleven years ago, blood
flow to his left leg was obstructed by plaque, but his doctors corrected it with
bypass surgery. Six years ago, he had triple bypass surgery on his coronary
arteries. Last April, he nicked his right ankle and noticed that the cut would
not heal. "I tried to clean it, I put Band-Aids on it, but it kept growing," he
said. Finally, in July, he went to his cardiologist at Brigham and Women's
Hospital in Boston for help.

   Mr. Ruo's doctor said that the artery feeding Mr. Ruo's leg was blocked, but
said he could do another bypass upstream of the blockage to facilitate blood
past the segment of his artery that had been blocked 11 years ago combined with
balloon angioplasty downstream at the latest obstruction to try to open it. Mr.
Ruo was confident that the operation would succeed. "It went so beautifully the
last time," he said. But the procedure failed and Mr. Ruo's doctor told him that
he would have to amputate his leg below the knee. "I suggested to him that we
find a second opinion," Mr. Ruo said. So his doctor referred him to Dr. Isner.

   Dr. Isner agreed with the first doctor's assessment, but asked if Mr. Ruo was
interested in participating in the gene therapy experiment. By this time, Mr.
Ruo's blockage had grown worse. The blood flow to his leg had slowed to a
trickle, at best. Not only was the ulcer still present, but it was causing
unremitting discomfort. "It's 24 hours a day, more like a burning sensation than
pain, like somebody put an ice pick on my ankle or put something burning hot
there," he said. When he heard about the gene therapy, Mr. Ruo jumped at the
chance. "Anybody in the world would be a fool not to try this," he said.

   So, on Wednesday morning at 10:30, Mr. Ruo lay draped on a narrow operating
table, his abdomen numbed with Novocain so he would not feel the catheters
threaded through his arteries. An X-ray machine loomed above him and it was on
during virtually the entire operation.

   Mr. Ruo wore his eyeglasses, but seldom opened his eyes in his
Valium-and-morphine-induced stupor. Every now and then he groaned with pain from
his ulcer. The worst position for someone with an ulcer like his is lying flat,
as he had to for the gene therapy, because gravity cannot assist the blood in
dribbling through the vessels.

   The challenge for Dr. Isner and Dr. Schainfeld was to find the best place to
insert the genes. They had to find a place in the artery next to the blockage
that was wide enough to insert the genes and that had intact and healthy smooth
muscle cells that were not marred by plaque. To get a clear view of the lining
of Mr. Ruo's arteries, the doctors inserted a catheter that contained a
minuscule ultrasound probe at its tip. The ultrasound probe bounced sound waves
off the artery wall, generating a crisp, clear picture of Mr. Ruo's blood
vessel, a sort of Fantastic Voyage point of view. At the same time, a computer
calculated the exact diameter of the artery as the catheter traveled down it.

   It turned out that no segments of Mr. Ruo's main artery were usable for the
gene therapy. Dr. Isner and Dr. Schainfeld were reduced to using a small fragile
branch off the artery, a place where, Dr. Isner said, a cardiologist would never
think of inserting a balloon. "We are a pretty aggressive group and we do some
severely diseased limbs, but this was really pushing the envelope," Dr. Isner
said.

   Finally, after more than two hours of studying Mr. Ruo's vessels with X-rays
and catheters, the investigators were ready to go. The genes are inserted into
the artery on the surface of a balloon and the researchers used a seemingly
enormous number of genes, expecting that just 1 percent or less would actually
be taken up by the cells. The 16 trillion vegF genes that would be used to coat
the balloon were in less than a drop of liquid in a tiny test tube. Dr. Isner
inflated a small sausage-shaped balloon that was just the right size to fit in
the tiny artery and dripped the gluey fluid onto it. One of his assistants blew
unheated air through a hair dryer in an attempt to speed up the drying of the
liquid onto the balloon. When the first application of genes had dried, Dr.
Isner dripped some more of the genes on until, finally, after about half an
hour, all the fluid was on the balloon and the coating of genes had given the
balloon a pearly sheen.

   Dr. Isner deflated the balloon and put a protective sheath over it. Then he
threaded the balloon, in its sheath, into Mr. Ruo's artery, stopping at the
exact spot in the delicate branch where the genes were to be inserted. He
slipped off the sheath and holding the balloon in place, inflated it for six
minutes, while the muscle cells took up the genes.

   When it was over, after five hours instead of the two they had thought it
would take, the researchers breathed a sigh of relief. "We've done a lot of
animals in our lab and you really think you know what you're doing." Dr. Isner
said. "But once you start doing it in a patient, you realize that there are
limits to what you can learn in animals." And that is particularly so, Dr. Isner
said, "because the patients who are going to be candidates for this procedure at
this point are patients who do not have much circulation left to deal with.
These are not the patients we are used to doing angioplasty on."

   Now it is all over but the waiting. Dr. Isner said that although his group
can look for the growth of new blood vessels with various tests, the real proof
that they succeed will be if Mr. Ruo's ulcer starts to heal. "That's the bottom
line," Dr. Isner said. "That's the only thing that's important."

   Dr. Walsh, the molecular biologist, said that if Mr. Ruo did not grow new
blood vessels or did not grow enough of them, there was always room to modify
the experiment for future patients, adding more genes, for example.

   But, Dr. Isner said, he thinks Mr. Ruo and the patients who follow him will
not lose much by participating in the study, even if the gene therapy does not
succeed for them. The risks are low, about a 1 percent chance that all the
poking and probing with catheters would break a clot loose and that it might
travel to the lungs or heart, Dr. Isner said. And the patients have no other
options.

   "The other thing to keep in mind is that if we don't do this, he is
definitely going to lose his leg," Dr. Isner said. And, he added, "there's
always a chance that you might get lucky the first time out."

GRAPHIC: Photo: First bypass-gene-therapy patient, Michael Ruo, has condition
checked by Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Brighton, Mass.
(Rick Friedman for the New York Times) (pg. C3)

Diagram: "Helping the Body Do Its Own Bypass"

    In an experimental treatment for blockage in a major leg artery, the gene
for a protein that stimulates growth of new blood vessels was inserted. Doctors
hope that after several weeks, new growth will bypass the blockage. (Source:
Jeffrey Horowitz/St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston) (pg. C3)

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1994


                             513 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   December 10, 1994, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 1500 words

HEADLINE: FDA Selects Clarksburg For $ 600 Million Campus;
Project Would Transform Rural Maryland Town

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Karl Vick, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration yesterday anointed tiny Clarksburg as its
future home, promising to transform a one-stoplight village into an
international research center while completing the march of Montgomery County
development up Interstate 270.

   The preliminary decision means that almost 6,000 federal jobs now scattered
among dozens of buildings around the county will move to a sprawling, $ 600
million campus carved from abandoned farmland by 2003.

   If the project receives final approval in June after an environmental impact
study, the FDA's 539 acres will stand as the northern anchor of a biotechnology
corridor that begins with the National Institutes of Health in the south.

   "It's a form-giver," said Montgomery Planning Director Robert W. Marriott Jr.
"It's like NIH and Bethesda. What are five things you think of when you think of
Bethesda? NIH is always one of them, and FDA will be like that."

   The site, known as the Clarksburg Triangle, hugs the western side of I-270
about 10 miles north of Gaithersburg and four miles south of the Frederick
County line. It was selected from among three sites designated as finalists
after Congress determined that FDA offices long scattered around Montgomery
would remain in the county.

   Competition was keen for what might be the last huge federal development in
Maryland's most populous county. But the winning landowners -- who last spring
asked the government to buy their land -- said yesterday the government isn't
offering enough money for their property.

   Many experts have predicted the price of land for a new campus would top $
100 million. But a spokesman for the three families that own the parcel -- the
Gosnells, the Fallers and the Gussins -- said they were "disappointed" with the
offer of the General Services Administration, which acts as the government's
landlord.

   "As a result, we must now reach a decision whether we should even participate
further in this federal procurement process," the owners said in a terse news
release issued hours after the site announcement.

   The alternative to negotiation would be for the government to take the
property and let a court set a price.

   "They have told us if they cannot come to an agreement they will condemn it,"
said Mark Glagola, the Washington real estate broker for the owners.

   The GSA official overseeing the project said he could not discuss prices.
"Negotiations are only beginning," said Jag Bhargava, a development director.

   County officials, who remained neutral in the competition, indicated that the
comparatively low land prices in the now rural area helped sway the joint
GSA-FDA panel toward the Clarksburg site.

   The rival sites were the King Farm, a 441-acre parcel near the Shady Grove
Metro stop at the northern end of the Red Line's western leg and the Marriott
Milestone site in Germantown on the east side of I-270 just south of the
Clarksburg Triangle. Both stand in the heart of development and are zoned for
higher density use than the FDA needs -- another factor favoring Clarksburg,
county officials said.

   But Clarksburg is so remote that it also will be the most expensive to
prepare. County planners estimated the cost of improving roadways and installing
water and sewer lines at $ 44 million $ 51 million for the Clarksburg site. That
compares with estimates of $ 34 million for the King Farm and no additional
public cost for the Marriott site in Germantown.

   "The only sewer up there goes to Comsat," said County Council member Nancy
Dacek (R-Potomac), referring to the satellite communications company off I-270.
"There is no other sewer up there."

   Planners also are considering adding an I-270 interchange that would feed a
new road to the FDA site at its southern border. The current border, West Old
Baltimore Road, recently was barred from widening when the county designated it
a "rural and rustic" road.

   Congress so far has appropriated $ 325 million toward the consolidation
project, which includes a smaller campus in Prince George's County. It will be
the responsibility of the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission and the county
to provide the infrastructure improvements, but it remains to be seen who will
pay. Local pressure will continue on the federal government to help.

   "The county executive is going to work closely with the congressional
delegation, the state and the county to find a reasonable and equitable way to
pay for the costs associated with bringing the FDA to Montgomery County," said
David Weaver, spokesman for new County Executive Douglas M. Duncan. "But the
long-term returns on this consolidation will far outweigh the upfront costs."

   Development long has been expected in the scenic, rolling countryside north
of Germantown. Earlier this year, county officials approved a long-range plan
that anticipated housing 43,000 people in the vicinity of a village with an
existing population of 1,500.

   But the FDA announcement hurries everything. The agency's timetable calls for
completing purchase of the land by June and beginning construction in 1996.

   When the campus is completed in 2003, its four "centers" will feature
clusters of low-rise laboratory buildings and office buildings standing six or
seven stories.

   The new Montgomery campus will house the FDA commissioner's headquarters and
the FDA branches that regulate pharmaceuticals, advanced medical machinery and
biotechnology. It is planned to have state-of-the art laboratories to handle
some of the government's most complex regulatory work. The design has been
commissioned by a Philadelphia firm, the Kling-Lindquist Partnership.

   "Clarksburg is the final frontier of Montgomery County. The federal
government's decision today hammers that home," said Gus Bauman, past chairman
of the Montgomery County Planning Board. "Clarksburg is just a village today,
but it will become a city soon, the same as Rockville and Gaithersburg."

   Some in Clarksburg had hoped for something a little different. The long-range
plan called for keeping a downtown suited to walking. The FDA's decision means
the plan must be amended, officials said.

   "I think if you talk to people around here, they're all going to tell you
pretty much the same thing," said Norman Mease, a cattle farmer who has lived in
the area for 32 years. "It's possibly going to open up Clarksburg to more rapid
development than we were prepared for. If you look at Clarksburg today and what
it's going to become, the impact is what you would call extreme."

   Some of that impact is likely to extend over the Frederick County line.
Frederick County Commissioner Bruce L. Reeder said he hoped the new FDA
headquarters would spur economic development a few miles north in his county.

   "I hope some of the spillover comes our way. Otherwise, [the FDA's decision]
will only lead to more people living in Frederick County and commuting elsewhere
for work," Reeder said. "We need more businesses to locate in Frederick County."

   "It can't but help to bring new business," said Joe Lebherz, executive
director of the Frederick Chamber of Commerce. "The whole region should
benefit."

   An agency spokesman said that a good many FDA employees already commute to
Montgomery from the north. And Bhargava, of the GSA, said the site selectors
took into account that the majority of employees approaching Clarksburg from the
south would be going home against traffic.

   Proximity to mass transit also was a key factor, Bhargava said, but no site
-- even the one opposite Shady Grove -- was close enough to a Metro stop to
forgo the need for the shuttle buses the FDA plans to provide from the the
subway.

   Area planners have talked about extending Metro to Clarksburg, but Marriott
said the county plan foresees nothing more ambitious than a light rail line from
Shady Grove, and that wouldn't be for at least 20 years.

   FDA employees greeted the announcement with ambivalence. "I think that,
generally, Clarksburg isn't served with the same kind of public transportation
that we have here," said Lois Ann Beaver, an FDA associate director for
international organizations at one of the agency's Rockville offices.

   Beaver, of Rockville, said she has to travel to the District a couple times a
week for meetings.

   "It takes me an hour as is it," she said. "So if we were in Clarksburg, I
guess we'd have to drive to Shady Grove [Metro stop], then get on and ride
downtown. That's probably an hour and a half. That's a big chunk out of my
workday."

   Meanwhile, officials exulted at the prospect of attracting more of the
companies that have long done business with the FDA.

   "Any agency that has as much economic impact as the FDA certainly will
increase the critical mass of people," said James Barrett, chairman and chief
executive of Genetic Therapy Inc., a 160-worker firm off I-270 in Gaithersburg.

   "I think it's a fantastic opportunity for the county. It will really add
another pole to the axis."

   Staff writers Dan Beyers and Terry M. Neal contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: MAP, BRAD WYE; MAP, TWP

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1994


                             514 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 9, 1994 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 184 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO and CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Qualcomm Inc. said it received a $3.3 million order from Landstar System Inc.
for 1,000 of the company's OmniTRACS satellite fleet management units, which
will be installed in 1,000 owner-operated trucks out of Landstar's 9,000-truck
affiliated fleet.

   The new order comes with options for additional orders, but the $3.3 million
value does not include the price of messaging and other services.

   Qualcomm said it will install the devices throughout 1995. Telios
Pharmaceuticals Inc. said Eli Lilly & Co. is terminating the joint collaboration
involving research and development of therapeutic products for osteoporosis.

   Telios said Lilly felt its commitment to other later-stage product candidates
warranted a focusing of its resources. Telios said it will seek another
corporate sponsor to continue the research program. Viagene Inc. has begun a
phase two study of its gene therapy treatment for HIV-infected patients, the
first study ever to test the effectiveness of a gene transfer product. Cypros
Pharmaceutical Corp. said that it has extended the special exercise period of
its Class A warrants for 31 days.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             515 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



               December 8, 1994 Thursday, FINAL / MEDINA / SUMMIT

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFLY

BODY:

   BEREA

   SATELLITE AIDS CLASS

   About 25 students from Berea schools yesterday joined thousands of young
people from around the country on a special satellite television network. In the
live TV broadcast, the students heard about advancements in genetic research and
gene therapy from noted scientists, including Dr. Steven Rosenberg, chief of
surgery at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., and Dr. Nancy Wexler,
professor of clinical neuropsychology at Columbia University in New York. The
broadcast was part the Achievement Television Network, based in Los Angeles, and
was relayed in Greater Cleveland by WVIZ Channel 25.

   CLEVELAND HEIGHTS

   DOGS MAY BE CONFINED

   Dogs accused of biting humans or other pets will be confiscated and
quarantined by the city until their guilt or innocence is established, according
to a proposed city ordinance precipitated by two dog attacks over the summer. In
one, an elementary school-aged boy was attacked by a dog that escaped a tall
fence. The boy required stitches. The other incident involved a Rottweiler that
got out of a house and attacked a smaller dog being walked by a woman. If the
ordinance passes, an accused dog would be confiscated and placed in a pound. If
found guilty, the dog's owner is responsible for the expense.

   EAST CLEVELAND

   MAN SHOT AT SHAW HIGH

   A Garfield Heights man, 20, was in stable condition at Meridia Huron Hospital
under police guard yesterday after he was shot in the left shoulder by police
during a confrontation outside Shaw High School Tuesday evening. Police said the
shooting had nothing to do with the basketball game taking place at the school.
Police said the gunman has a record of drug arrests.

   LORAIN COUNTY

   2 COMPANIES TO EXPAND

   Two manufacturing companies plan to expand in eastern Lorain County.
Technifab Engineered Products Inc., a new company formed by a Canadian foam
product manufacturer, hopes to expand and eventually build a new facility in
North Ridgeville. ECP Corp., a Cleveland manufacturer of electronic housing
equipment for industry, is considering building a new plant in Avon's Chester
Rd. Industrial Park. Both companies hope to finalize plans in the next few
weeks.

COLUMN: BRIEFLY

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1994


                             516 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     December 8, 1994 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 416 words

HEADLINE: SATELLITE LINKS SCIENTISTS WITH STUDENTS IN BEREA

BYLINE: By V. DAVID SARTIN; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

DATELINE: BEREA

BODY:

   It isn't hard to keep a teenager on the telephone for an hour. But staying on
the horn for an hour to talk to a scholarly panel might be another story.

   ChrisDolton,a Midpark High School ninth-grader, and about 25 other students
from Berea schools yesterday did it with great pleasure. They joined thousands
of young people from around the country on a special satellite television
network.

   In the live TV broadcast, the students heard about advancements in genetic
research and gene therapy from noted scientists, including Dr. Steven Rosenberg,
chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Maryland, and Dr.
Nancy Wexler, professor of clinical neuropsychology at Columbia University in
New York.

   Rosenberg heads a pioneering team that has treated cancer patients by
installing altered genes in the human body. Wexler led the effort to discover
the gene that causes Huntington's disease.

   Dolton was selected among the Berea students to wait on the telephone for a
chance to pose a query for the panel.

   "It was exciting," said Dolton. "I was nervous." He had dialed an 800 number
during the lecture, made a connection and heard instructions to wait for the
possibility to get through to the panel.

   He looked as if he had swallowed a science book when the broadcast announcer
said he was ready to take a question from Chris in Ohio.

   "Do you believe in using genetic engineering to change sex, hair or eye color
of an unborn child?" asked the young student.

   With quick dispatch, the experts said they believed gene therapy should only
be used to heal the sick.

   Nick Stepanovich, a Berea ninth-grader who had authored the question, said he
was surprised and pleased by the response. He thought the scientists would
somehow qualify their answer to open the door to research or other work with
genes.

   "I don't think you should [manipulate genes at will] because there are
certain things you shouldn't mess with," said Nick.

   The broadcast was part the Achievement Television Network, based in Los
Angeles, and was relayed in Greater Cleveland by WVIZ Channel 25. An estimated
200 school districts in northeast Ohio could have been linked to the network,
but the Berea students were the only ones able to get through for a question.

   The network is a unique opportunity for students to hear experts, said
Barbara K. Youel, a Berea teacher.

   "The chances of getting these speakers at our local school on our budget is
next to zilch," said Youel.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1994


                             517 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1994 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            December 4, 1994 Sunday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: NORTHWEST LIVING; Pg. L02

LENGTH: 1294 words

HEADLINE: `FESTIVAL OF TREES' GROWS ON BIDDERSIn one Ear

BYLINE: Bev Butterworth of the Oregonian

BODY:

   Sunday, December 4, 1994 `FESTIVAL OF TREES' GROWS ON BIDDERS

   In one Ear

   Summary

   An auction raises $106,000 to aid cancer research at Providence

   ``Festival of the Trees'' opened Wednesday night with a sit-down dinner at
the Oregon  Convention Center. Marv and Rindy Ross' Trail Band got people in a
holiday  mood with a Christmas program before bidding began for 57 decorated
Christmas  trees. The auction raised $106,000 to support innovative research
involving  gene therapy for the treatment of cancer at Providence Medical
Center.

   Deep pockets were out that rainy night. Top bidder was Blue Line
Transportation. It paid $7,500 for the Character Christmas Tree. Decorated
with favorite characters from storybooks, cartoons, television and movies, it
was surrounded by more toys -- and they all went with the package. More than
101 Dalmatians perched on Dalmatian mountain. The tree will be given to the
Dougy Center for Grieving Children.

   The tree was decorated by Cecil and Betty Allen of Yakima, Wash., and their
Portland daughters, Sherry Vargo and Stephanie Allman, who spent a year
gathering the toys that surrounded the tree.

   Preston Neupert, 8, was the youngest bidder. She got cold feet when a tree
she liked went for $2,300. She was successful in getting a Frosty the Snowman
Tree for $800. Between bids she talked things over with her mother, Julie
Neupert, and their pals, Sandy Patchin and daughter Katie.

   Others who ducked out of the rain to soak up some Christmas spirit were
Kari Axelson, Susan Chu, Halli Schlegel with daughter Misty, Harry and Kaaren
Demorest, Jean Auel and Fran Conedera and daughter Gina.

   Members of the opening night committee included Skip and Carol Hinman, Dr.
Freeman and Judith Fitch, Ede Schmidt, Larry Troyer and many employees and
friends of Providence Medical Center. Auctioneer Doug Peterson was assisted by
Julie Emry, KATU (2) news anchor, and Randy O'Neill, KXL disc jockey.

   HIGH DESERT MUSEUM:  Tuesday night, Utah rancher Frank Bohman received the
prestigious Earle A. Chiles Award, given by the High Desert Museum and the
Chiles Foundation.

   Through careful stewardship of land he's lived on all his life, Bohman has
increased grazing capacity, water yield and game population. Bill Wessinger,
head of the selections committee, presented him with the $10,000 cash prize.

   The banquet held in Miller Hall at the World Forestry Center was attended
by the pillars of philanthropy in the state. Among them: John Blackwell, Earle
M. Chiles, Pam Selis, former Oregon Gov. Rob and Pat Straub, Cliff and Doris
Carlsen, Bill Swindells, Ned and Sis Hayes, Peter and Barbara Schenck, Bend,
Roger and Wendy Johnson, Nancy Wilgenbusch, Jordan Schnitzer, Bob and Sally
Praegitzer, Fred Fosmire, Sun River, Peter and Alice Koehler, Tumalo, Bob and
Marjorie Chandler, Bend, and Don Kerr, president of The High Desert Museum,
and his wife, Cameron.  PORTLAND JEWISH ACADEMY:  Like Rosh Hashana and Yom
Kippur, the Portland Jewish Academy Auction comes around once a year. Steven
Stone, who headed the 33rd annual event Nov. 17, described it as very
successful -- it raised $63,000 for the operating budget.

   The benefit at Mittleman Jewish Community Center featured an Israeli
dinner: couscous, moussaka and Israeli meatballs for starters.

   Todd Tolson, KEX disc jockey who assisted Seattle auctioneer Mardi Newman,
bought the ultimate New Year's Eve package -- tickets to the Pavarotti concert
at the Oregon Convention Center.

   A bit of mystery surrounded one donation, a stained-glass window donated by
Riverside Community Church. The window supposedly came from Congregation Neveh
Zedek -- the synagogue that collapsed while being moved from old South
Portland during urban renewal in the '60s.

   Gesher, an organization that does outreach work with unaffiliated Jews,
purchased the window, which will be displayed during worship services held in  a
private home.

   An offer of an afternoon cruise for 500 on the Spirit of Portland became a
community event. Couples who wanted to be counted in agreed they would spend
$60 a couple for the outing.

   Auction chairman Stone bought a piece of jewelry by Michael Nutter for his
wife, Sherry. Al and Rosann Levi's son, Tory, will collect their auction
purchase -- orthodontia from Richard Garfinkle.

   Academy students from preschool to fifth grade made items for auction. Art
teacher Selene Robinowitz and Annelie Mullin, chairwoman of the silent
auction, were supervisors. Working clocks that students made from old car
hubcaps brought $25 each; their appliqued pillows were in the $100 range.

   Guests at the party included Jeff Lawn, Gary Singer, Lewis Horowitz,
Douglas Kagel, Michael and Bob Liebman, Kathy Phelps with daughter Chelsea,
Diane Nemer, Ezra and Marilynn Rabie, Rosanna and Ricardo Berdichevsky,Tony
and Priscilla Kostiner, Lou and Frieda Tobin,  and Ruth Gavish, director of
the Academy, and her husband, Yigael

   SERVICE OF REMEMBRANCE:  The Alzheimer's Association's candlelight ceremony
Nov. 17 at the World Trade Center remembered ``those who can no longer
remember for themselves.''

   Julie Emry, KATU (2) news anchor, introduced Kris Inman,  Karen Bruck,
Barbara Savage and Linda Bessant, who each read original poems honoring loved
ones they have lost or are losing to the disease.

   Liz McKinney, director of the Alzheimer's Foundation, and state Sen. Bob
Shoemaker spoke. The program and music by the the Oregon Repertory Singers
under the direction of Gil Seeley left not a dry eye in the house.

   Among good friends of the agency who attended were Joan Steinfeld,  Ken
Grimsley, Debbie Rashidi and Sue Johnston.

   ``They came to carry a flame of remembrance for loved ones in darkness,''
says Dee Johnson, the agency's family support director. ``We're saying to
families there are others who have been there. We can't change things but we
can be here for you.''

   FOUNDER'S DAY:  Alumni and friends of Oregon Episcopal School celebrated
Founder's Day and the 125th anniversary of its predecessor, St. Helen's Hall,
on Nov. 17.

   Great applause erupted when Beatrice Paget, class of '15, the oldest Hall
alumna, was introduced at the dinner at Multnomah Athletic Club.

   Two former headmasters returned. Peter Sipple, now headmaster of Moravian
Academy, came from Bethlehem, Pa., with his wife, Margaret, and the Rev.
Malcolm Manson, now headmaster of Grace Cathedral School for Boys, came from
San Francisco. They were welcomed by Oregon Episcopal School headmaster Peter
Stevens and his wife, Hope.

   More applause greeted Betsy Johnson, class of '68, when she received the
Distinguished Alumni Award for her philanthropic work in the community as well
as with the school.

   Master of ceremonies Gerry Frank offered some unique remembrances -- the
school is on the site of the former Frank estate. Chet Orloff, executive
director of the Oregon Histroy Center, spoke about Oregon heroes. ROTARY
BENEFIT:  The annual East Portland Rotary Club auction drew a capacity crowd
to Multnomah Athletic Club on Nov. 19. And it raised more than $50,000 for 10
local agencies working with children and the elderly, and for multifaceted
agencies such as the American Red Cross, Goodwill Industries, Salvation Army
and St. Vincent dePaul Center.

   The festive fund-raiser featured a steak and salmon menu and diverse roster
of items ranging from a pinball machine to a salmon bake for 12 at Worth and
Barbara Caldwell's house. Beverly Butterworth's column appears Sundays and
Tuesdays. She can be reached at 221-8386 or by mail at 1320 S.W. Broadway,
Portland 97201.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photos  by JENNY DUCHENE for The Oregonian

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = Bev Butterworth of the
Oregonian Staff

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             518 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 3, 1994, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 61

LENGTH: 169 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme therapy backed for testing;
Business, Briefly

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp. yesterday said it received approval from a National Institutes
of Health advisory committee to pursue a new way of delivering its human gene
therapy to cystic fibrosis patients.

   Before the human testing can begin, the Food and Drug Administration must
still give its approval for the trials. The Cambridge biotechnology company said
the test, which calls for delivering the gene in a disabled common cold virus,
will be conducted on up to 40 patients at the Floating Hospital for Children,
the New England Medical Center, and at Massachusetts General Hospital.

   Unlike previous tests, this one will involve giving some patients the virus
in an aerosol mist that is inhaled into the nose. The two-part - nose and lungs
- protocol is the first approved for human testing by the National Institutes of
Health advisory committee and the company hopes this approach will be the final
delivery form for cystic fibrosis gene therapy, according to Alan Smith,
Genzyme's senior vice president.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1994


                             519 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    December 3, 1994 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 292 words

HEADLINE: HOLD THE LETTUCE! CELEBRATE DISCOVERY OF THE FAT GENE IN STYLE

BODY:

   Those excessively heavy people long concerned with the way they fill out
their jeans can now take some relief in science's suggestion that the fault may
lie in their genes.

   A 40-year search involving mostly portly mice has led to discovery of the fat
gene, now dubbed the Ob Gene by the researchers at Rockefeller University in New
York City.

   Before you sell your stock in Jenny Craig, two notes of caution:

   Excessive fatness is not recognized until a person weighs at least 20 percent
more than what's considered his or her ideal weight. Folks tipping the scale at
a mere 19 percent above may get little from this scientific breakthrough and
presumably will continue to feel the social pressure to eat double-fudge premium
ice cream only when no one is looking.

   Meantime, some legitimately ample folks told Inquirer reporter Karen Heller
that they fear being seen now as "genetic freaks," or targets for some genetic
final solution for fat people. Since scientists believe that an anti- fat drug
will not be developed until the next century, and gene therapy will take much
longer to become available, those fears probably will not be realized anytime
soon.

   Caution aside, there is reason to party. Science has now determined that no
amount of diet, exercise or spiritual awareness will bring on instant slimness
in some who are obese, so the critically thin among us ought to pay for the
champagne floats and truffles to celebrate.

   After the party, people who are more than 20 percent underweight and have
suffered various insults and degradations since childhood - "Hey, Beanpole! Get
a body, Tiny! Yo Slim, where's your shadow? Honeybun, eat up before you waste
away!" - should demand a 40-year study to find the "Skinny Gene."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             520 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    December 1, 1994 Thursday SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 027

LENGTH: 874 words

HEADLINE: Ch. 38 says new boss will play ball; Researchers struggling to make
progress toward cure

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   WSBK-TV general manager Dan Berkery is upbeat about having a fourth corporate
boss in a dozen years, despite the new owner's plans that eventually will alter
WSBK's sports-and-movie image.

   Viacom Inc., which owns the fledgling Paramount Stations Group, confirmed
yesterday's exclusive Boston Herald report of its $ 100 million-plus purchase of
Channel 38 from New World Communications. FCC approval of the sale could take
about 90 days.

   "It's a very positive move, because this is the first time our ownership will
be sensitive to the needs of an independent station," Berkery said. Storer and
Gillett owned the station prior to New World.

   Berkery said he hasn't spoken with network officials and doesn't know his own
status. He's been at Channel 38 since 1977.

   WSBK is among three independents that Viacom is buying (with Philadelphia's
WGBS and Miami's WBFS). They join WKBD in Detroit, Dallas' KTXA, Houston's KTXH
and Washington's WDCA in launching the United Paramount Network Jan. 16.

   Viacom has sold three Fox affiliates - Philly's WTXF, San Antonio's KRRT and
WLFL in Raleigh-Durham, N.C., - and is reportedly in discussions to sell its
three NBC and two CBS stations.

   Paramount will become the nation's sixth network on Jan. 16 with "Star Trek:
Voyager." Warner Bros.' WB Network starts Jan. 11 and includes WLVI-TV (Channel
56).

   FCC approval won't be at hand on time, but expect WSBK to air "Voyager" and
other new Paramount shows on Monday and Tuesday nights anyway.

   In addition to "Voyager's" Monday 8-9 p.m. hour are "Platypus Man," a
half-hour sitcom from the producers of "Golden Girls" (starring Richard Jeni)
and "Pig Sty," a half-hour sitcom from the "Cheers" production team.

   Paramount will introduce two Tuesday shows Jan. 17. "Marker" at 8 p.m. is a
Hawaii-based drama from Stephen J. Cannell, who cranked out "Rockford Files" and
Fox's "21 Jump Street." It will star Richard Grieco. That one will be followed
at 9 by "The Watcher," an anthology series.

   While there is concern that Channel 38's heavy sports schedule of Celtics,
Bruins and Red Sox games will conflict with Paramount's prime-time plans, WSBK
already occasionally bumps sportcasts to game-broadcast switches with NESN. (As
part of the deal with New World, Viacom will pick up 20 percent ownership of
NESN as well.) occasionally occur already and could solve most of the new
network's Monday- and Tuesday-night conflicts. This season, the Bruins had only
two Monday and two Tuesday games on the slate, which never happened due to the
lockout.

   Even though only the 1995 Red Sox season remains on WSBK's current contract,
sports won't be moving off WSBK anytime soon - nor should Paramount want a
switch, considering that home-team airings Sox, Bruins and Celtics games are
popular with the same 18-to-49 year-old male target audience that embraces the
lucrative "Star Trek"franchise.

   The Bruins are committed to a minimum of 40 games a season on WSBK through
the 2000-2001 campaign and the contract is transferable to the new owner. So are
four seasons of Celtics' road telecasts.

   Viacom's existing stations embrace sports and Channel 38 would appear to fit
right in - until the network expands beyond two nights. Detroit's WKBD airs
Tigers, Pistons and Red Wings action. Houston's KTXH has the Astros and Rockets.
And Miami's WBFS carries three teams.

   AIDS research has little to show for itself, 13 years after the start of the
epidemic and one year after the nation's top doctors, scientists and activists
gathered in Boston to find ways to improve the situation.

   "The same roadblocks exist today," said Dr. Richard Marlink of the Harvard
AIDS Institute, who helped organize the "summit" last November.

   Of the suggestions made by the group, few have been enacted. The government
created a drug development task force, "but it hasn't come up with any
recommendations," he said.

   The meeting was set up after the Berlin AIDS Conference in 1993. The idea was
to find an easier way to use basic research findings in clinical settings.

   Marlink said incentives don't exist to encourage companies to work together.
He said the best hope is to use anti-viral drugs in combination "similar to the
early advances in cancer therapy." There are now four approved AIDS anti-viral
drugs.

   In addition to anti-viral therapy, scientists are looking at gene therapy,
vaccine therapy, immune therapy and drugs to control AIDS without directly
attacking the virus.

   "Part of the reason for our frustration is that all of the trials that have
been completed to date are ones that started several years ago," said Dr. Calvin
Cohen, an AIDS specialist.

   "There are a lot of new trials going on that will take another year or so for
us to get the results. I'm optimistic."

   Marlink isn't so hopeful. "Until we really mount an effort to make it a
national priority to find a cure, we won't come up with the solution for a long
time," he said.

   Despite lack of progress on basic research, doctors report increased success
in managing people with AIDS and preventing and treating infections that can
kill them.

   Cohen said people are living, on average, two years after being diagnosed
with AIDS. Ten years ago, the average life expectancy was one year.


LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1994


                             521 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                           December 1, 1994 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: Researchers struggling to make progress toward cure

BYLINE: Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   AIDS research has little to show for itself, 13 years after the start of the
epidemic and one year after the nation's top doctors, scientists and activists
gathered in Boston to find ways to improve the situation.

   "The same roadblocks exist today," said Dr. Richard Marlink of the Harvard
AIDS Institute, who helped organize the "summit" last November.

   Of the suggestions made by the group, few have been enacted. The government
created a drug development task force, "but it hasn't come up with any
recommendations," he said.

   The meeting was set up after the Berlin AIDS Conference in 1993. The idea was
to find an easier way to use basic research findings in clinical settings.

   Marlink said incentives don't exist to encourage companies to work together.
He said the best hope is to use anti-viral drugs in combination "similar to the
early advances in cancer therapy." There are now four approved AIDS anti-viral
drugs.

   In addition to anti-viral therapy, scientists are looking at gene therapy,
vaccine therapy, immune therapy and drugs to control AIDS without directly
attacking the virus.

   "Part of the reason for our frustration is that all of the trials that have
been completed to date are ones that started several years ago," said Dr. Calvin
Cohen, an AIDS specialist.

   "There are a lot of new trials going on that will take another year or so for
us to get the results. I'm optimistic."

   Marlink isn't so hopeful. "Until we really mount an effort to make it a
national priority to find a cure, we won't come up with the solution for a long
time," he said.

   Despite lack of progress on basic research, doctors report increased success
in managing people with AIDS and preventing and treating infections that can
kill them.

   Cohen said people are living, on average, two years after being diagnosed
with AIDS. Ten years ago, the average life expectancy was one year.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             522 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    December 1, 1994 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS DISCOVER A GENE LINKED TO OBESITY / IT'S LONG BEEN THOUGHT
THAT WEIGHT IS TIED TO HEREDITY. NOW, A BREAKTHROUGH DISCOVERY MAY ONE DAY LEAD
TO NEW TREATMENTS.

BYLINE: Jim Detjen, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A gene that may play a central role in controlling whether people are fat or
thin has been discovered by a team of scientists at Rockefeller University in
New York City.

   The discovery of an obesity gene in mice - and its likely counterpart in
humans - could eventually lead to drugs or medical procedures that may help the
75 million Americans who are seriously overweight, the scientists said. It might
also someday lead to treatments for hypertension, diabetes, cancer and other
diseases associated with obesity.

   The findings, which cap a 40-year search for an obesity gene, are being
reported today in the scientific journal Nature.

   "This finding is a major breakthrough because it gives researchers a powerful
new tool for understanding gene mechanisms that control body weight," said
Torsten Wiesel, a Nobel laureate who is president of Rockefeller University. "We
now anticipate many additional discoveries in the field and eventually even the
possibility of devising new drug therapies to treat obesity."

   Orien Tulp, an obesity researcher at Drexel University, said that the
isolation and cloning of the gene is a "major step forward." But he said that
the development of drugs based upon this finding is still probably a decade
away.

   For more than two centuries, researchers have been struggling to understand
the scientific reasons some people tend to be fat and others thin. Because
identical twins - people with the same genes - tend to have similar weights even
when raised apart, scientists have long believed that heredity plays an
important role in determining a person's weight.

   Jeffrey Friedman, head of the research team announcing today's discovery,
said that a number of genes are believed to control whether a person has
difficulty controlling his or her weight. But he said that there are reasons to
believe that one in particular, known as the Ob gene, may be the crucial gene
involved in the process.

   Friedman is an associate investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute at Rockefeller University.

   According to Friedman, the Ob gene appears to cause the fat cells of a mouse
- or a person - to secrete a protein that advises the brain how much fat the
mouse has left in storage. In turn, the brain either stimulates or suppresses
the appetite, and regulates the metabolism.

   If an animal gets too fat, an unusually high amount of the protein signals
the brain that it's time for the body to either eat less, get more exercise or
take some other corrective measures. If an animal gets too thin, the resulting
low level of the protein serves as a signal to the brain to activate the
appetite.

   In this way, the mouse will adjust its feeding and activity to keep its
weight normal.

   But when the gene is defective, this signaling mechanism breaks down and the
brain of the mouse never learns that ample fat is in storage. Such mice get so
fat that they can weigh three times as much as their siblings, he said.

   Since 1950, he said, scientists have known that some kind of genetic mutation
in mice was responsible for cases of extraordinary obesity, but they had not
pinpointed its nature or location. The Ob gene is located on the seventh
chromosome in people and the sixth chromosome in mice, he said.

   Friedman said he and his colleagues are now searching for the particular
protein in the blood that helps regulate an animal's weight. If one can be
found, it may be possible to develop drugs that help people control their
weight.

   In time it may also be possible to develop diagnostic tests that can help
predict whether a person has a tendency to become fat or thin, he said.
Eventually it may even be possible to develop forms of gene therapy, or alter a
person's genes, in order to help people control their weight.

   Friedman cautioned, however, that much more needs to be understood about the
genetics of regulating weight and that drugs and diagnostic tests are not likely
to become available until after the turn of the century. It may take much longer
to develop forms of gene therapy for obesity, he said.

   Friedman said that his team is now beginning gene studies on people who live
on the Micronesian island of Kosrae, where the incidence of obesity is extremely
high.

   Other Rockefeller University scientists who contributed to today's scientific
report are Yiying Zhang, Ricardo Proenca, Margherita Maffei, Marisa Barone and
Lori Leopold.

   Obesity researchers say that three out of 10 Americans are considered obese,
or weigh 20 percent or more over their ideal body weights. Obesity is the
commonest nutritional disorder in Western societies.

   Weight problems tend to be inherited with between 60 percent and 90 percent
of the variability in people's weight due to their genes, scientists say.
Environmental factors such as diet and exercise account for the rest.

   Friedman said he is hopeful that their discovery could change the way many
people feel toward people who are obese.

   "Overall, the public tends to underestimate the importance of heredity in
obesity," he said.

   "I'd be pleased if these findings help make people more tolerant of the many
millions of Americans who struggle to keep their weight under control."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             523 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   December 1, 1994, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A7

LENGTH: 386 words

HEADLINE: Baboon bone marrow may help AIDS fight

BYLINE: Charles Petit, San Francisco Chronicle

BODY:


   In a medical gamble that could provide an end-run around AIDS, San Francisco
and Pittsburgh doctors are planning to inject bone marrow cells from baboons
into people with advanced cases of the disease.

   The AIDS virus directly attacks the human immune system. The scientists
reason that if the immune system of a person with AIDS were replaced with
corresponding cells from baboons, which appear impervious to most forms of the
AIDS virus, the patient may be able to battle back against the infection.

   The experiment, which could start within a year, is driven by frustration at
the failure of standard medicine to provide breakthroughs against HIV, the virus
that causes AIDS. It also is fraught with potential dangers.

   The strategy is the brainchild of Dr. Suzanne Ildstad, a transplant surgeon
and director of the division of cellular therapeutics at the University of
Pittsburgh, a center of pioneering research into transplant procedures.

   She has teamed up with Dr. Steven Deeks, an AIDS specialist at the University
of California at San Francisco. They expect the first experiments to be
conducted on volunteers from patients on the AIDS ward of San Francisco General
Hospital.

   ''The easy solutions have not worked,'' Ildstad said. She said a baboon cell
transplant is a natural extension of other efforts, by several research teams,
to genetically modify human immune system cells to resist HIV infection.

   ''It is a natural form of gene therapy,'' she said. ''If one is considering
genetically modifying human cells to be resistant, why not use a naturally
resistant cell?''

   The idea is being reviewed by the 13-member UCSF Committee on Human Research,
which has asked Deeks and Ildstad for more information on their proposal before
deciding whether to permit it.

   A source on the committee said ''we have a very long list of questions. This
is a complicated experiment and I don't think we are going to give it approval
any time very soon.''

   Deeks, however, said he hopes to have answered the review committee's
questions by early next year. If he is given the go-ahead, he will immediately
begin recruiting volunteers. Until that happens, however, people interested in
taking part should not try to sign up, and only four volunteers are expected to
be treated in the first year or so.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1994


                             524 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   DECEMBER 1, 1994, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 844 words

HEADLINE: Baboons Provide Hope for AIDS Research
 Approval sought to inject cells from bone marrow

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    In a medical gamble that could provide an end-run around AIDS, San Francisco
and Pittsburgh doctors are planning to inject bone marrow cells from baboons
into people with advanced cases of the disease.

   The AIDS virus directly attacks the human immune system. The scientists
reason that if the immune system of a person with AIDS were replaced with
corresponding cells from baboons, which appear impervious to most forms of the
AIDS virus, the patient may be able to battle back against the infection.

   The experiment, which could start within a year, is driven by frustration at
the failure of standard medicine to provide breakthroughs against HIV, the virus
that causes AIDS. It also is fraught with potential dangers.

   The strategy is the brainchild of Dr. Suzanne Ildstad, a transplant surgeon
and director of the division of cellular therapeutics at the University of
Pittsburgh, a center of pioneering research into transplant procedures.

   She has teamed up with Dr. Steven Deeks, an AIDS specialist at the University
of California at San Francisco. They expect the first experiments to be
conducted on volunteers from patients on the AIDS ward of San Francisco General
Hospital.

   ''The easy solutions have not worked,'' Ildstad said during a recent visit to
the Bay Area. She said a baboon cell transplant is a natural extension of other
efforts, by several research teams, to genetically modify human immune system
cells to resist HIV infection. ''It is a natural form of gene therapy,'' she
said. ''If one is considering genetically modifying human cells to be resistant,
why not use a naturally resistant cell?''

   The idea is being reviewed by the 13-member UCSF Committee on Human Research,
which has asked Deeks and Ildstad for more information on their proposal before
deciding whether to permit it. A source on the committee said ''we have a very
long list of questions. This is a complicated experiment and I don't think we
are going to give it approval any time very soon.''

   Deeks, however, said he hopes to have answered the review committee's
questions by early next year. If he is given the go-ahead, he will immediately
begin recruiting volunteers. Until that happens, however, people interested in
taking part should not try to sign up. Only four volunteers are expected to be
treated in the first year or so.

   Among the concerns is that the grafted monkey cells could carry hidden
viruses of their own that would only add to the medical problems of people
infected with HIV.

   It is also possible that the implanted monkey immune system would attack the
human host. In addition, preparing people with advanced AIDS for the procedure
involves first deliberately weakening their own immune systems, potentially
compounding problems caused by HIV. Moreover, the treated person would probably
remain infected and a potential source of disease to others.

   But if it works as well as some studies suggest, the specially purified
baboon cells would take root in the bone marrows of their human host and
multiply to assemble a new, AIDS-proof system for fighting disease. It would
take over the job from patients' own immune systems collapsing from the assault
by HIV.

   Although HIV often infects tissues other than those of the immune system, it
is hoped that a vigorous baboon immune system would then stem progress of the
disease throughout a patient's body.

   Effective immune systems must respond quickly to invading organisms, such as
viruses or bacteria, while not attacking normal tissues of the host organism.
''The charm of this new technique,'' Deeks said, ''is that the bone marrow of
humans and baboons can learn to recognize each other as 'self,' so they don't
attack one another.''

   Ildstad came up with the idea as part of her leading role in a major
multi-institutional effort to find ways to use animal organs -- with baboons and
pigs the leading contenders -- for human transplant. After several failed
efforts in the past 15 years, many scientists now believe that improved methods
of controlling rejection of alien tissue make the time ripe for a new round of
experiments. New AIDS-proof immune systems are just examples of techniques that
may provide new hearts, kidneys, or other organs.

   Ildstad made a key discovery that paves the way for moving immune systems
among different species. Within the bone marrow, she found, are two separate
populations of cells that must be transplanted together. For years, scientists
have known that so-called stem cells provide the raw material for growth of a
wide range of disease-fighting cells in the bloodstream, including the
T-lymphocytes ravaged by HIV. Ildstad recently discovered a second line, called
facilitating cells, that must accompany stem cells if they are to set up shop in
a new host.

   Already, she and other groups have shown that immune systems from mice can be
put into rats, and vice versa, two species more different than humans and
baboons. She also has established human-derived immune systems in baboons
without apparent ill effect on the animals.


LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1994


                             525 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 1, 1994 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3:2,4,5,7,8; B-2:1,6

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: USC reveals plan for $30 million medical implant-research center

BYLINE: REX DALTON, Staff Writer

DATELINE: La Jolla

BODY:

   La Jolla -- USC has launched a $30 million fund-raising drive to build a
Transplantation Biology Institute and other research facilities to offer
high-tech medical techniques to patients. The fund drive and the expanding organ
transplantation programs at the USC School of Medicine and its affiliated
hospitals were described yesterday to a group of influential USC supporters at a
meeting in La Jolla. Two leading heart specialists recruited in recent years to
USC told the USC Planning and Development Council in San Diego of the
university's efforts to offer the latest research procedures to patients. "The
medical tradition we are creating at USC is very exciting," said Dr. Vaughn A.
Starnes, a surgeon who vaulted USC's transplantation program into the big time
two years ago with a novel lung transplant procedure. Starnes performed the
first operation where lobes of the lungs of two living parents were transplanted
into their daughter, whose lungs had been destroyed by cystic fibrosis. "Two
years later she is doing very nicely," said Starnes, who was a heart-lung
transplant surgeon at Stanford University before coming to USC. The planned
Transplantation Biology Institute will conduct research on methods of preventing
the body from rejecting grafted organs.

   It will also perform research on gene-therapy techniques and on the biology
of vessels and major organs. The $30 million also is to fund a Neurologic
Institute, which will conduct research on the brain and nervous system.

   Starnes said about $3 million of the $30 million has been raised since the
fund drive started last spring. Officials say the recruitment of physicians,
like Starnes, and planned research facilities are part of a comprehensive plan
by USC to compete against large hospital groups by offering patients
state-of-the-art procedures by national authorities. Dr. David P. Faxon was
brought in last year as the new chief of cardiology at USC as part of this
effort.

   Faxon also spoke yesterday to the USC Planning and Development Council, a
group of 55 supporters that recommend policies for the university. Faxon noted
he is conducting research into the biological processes by which coronary
vessels become blocked after being opened with techniques such as balloon
angioplasty.

   That technique involves the insertion of a catheter with an inflatable
balloon at its end into a blocked vessel. Some of his research focuses on
addressing the "scarring" of arterial walls that is believed to lead to the
recurrence of blockages in vessels. "We are looking at research to solve this,"
said Faxon.

   "I can't say we have a cure.

   But I feel confident we will find one in the near future." Early next year,
the transplantation program at the USC University Hospital in Downtown Los
Angeles will be expanded with the addition of a liver transplant service,
Starnes said. A University of Pittsburgh surgeon has been recruited and is
expected to join USC's faculty in January, Starnes added.

   Doctors at USC now perform heart, lung, and kidney transplants, along with an
experimental procedure involving transplantation of insulin-producing cells from
the pancreas to treat diabetes. When USC opened its heart transplant program, it
became the seventh heart transplant program in the Los Angeles region, Starnes
said.

   There would be at least three liver transplant programs in the Los Angeles
area when USC starts its operation. While some authorities have argued that
there are too many organ transplant programs in major metropolitan areas such as
Los Angeles, Starnes said that a medical school must offer a full array of
transplant procedures to train the best physicians.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             526 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   November 29, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: SPERM RESEARCH GIVES STERILE MICE FERTILITY

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: RickWeiss

BODY:

   Researchers have transferred immature sperm cells into sterile male mice,
rendering them fertile. The feat promises to speed scientists' understanding of
the complex process by which sperm cells mature in the testes, perhaps leading
to treatment for some types of male sterility.

   The work also could hasten the day when researchers make permanent changes in
a family's genetic heritage by altering the make-up of sperm cells. But
scientists emphasized that major technical and ethical barriers remain.

   In mice, men and other animals, sperm develop from primordial cells called
spermatogoniae that constantly reproduce throughout the male's life. Each of the
millions of spermatogonia goes through developmental changes within the testes,
culminating in the formation of a mature sperm.

   Ralph L. Brinster and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania School of
Veterinary Medicine removed testes from young mice and dissolved them in enzymes
to release the spermatogoniae from the maze of tubules within. Using very fine
glass pipettes, they injected some of these cells directly into the testicular
tubules of other mice that had been sterilized by sperm-killing chemicals. In 42
of 126 testes that received the injections, the spermatogoniae took up permanent
residence and developed into mature sperm.

   Most remarkable, Brinster said, was that the immature sperm cells were
apparently able to find their way to the proper parts of the recipient testes,
organizing themselves within the tubules in a formation necessary for their
survival and reproduction. Observations of that process could reveal secrets of
sperm development, he said, perhaps offering clues about the process in men who
fail to produce viable sperm.

   Eventually, Brinster said, the injection technique could be used in germ-line
gene therapy in which scientists would remove spermatogoniae from men with an
inherited defect, insert new genes into those sperm-forming cells and inject the
corrected cells back into their testes. But no one has yet learned how to keep
spermatogoniae alive outside the body, Brinster said, a step that would be
necessary since the gene insertion process must be performed in laboratory
dishes. Indeed, no one has successfully inserted new genes into544436325 Such
experiments would renew the ethical debate over making permanent changes in
family lines. One concern is that scientists inserting a new gene into sperm
cells might inadvertently disrupt other genes. Any resulting deformity would be
permanent and show up in all offspring for generations.

   Although the National Institutes of Health committee that oversees gene
therapy research opposes such experiments, Brinster and other researchers
suspect that it's only a matter of time before such work is approved.

   "It will be the same as it was with somatic gene therapy," Brinster said,
referring to the non-heritable genetic changes now being performed on hundreds
of patients suffering from various genetic diseases. "At first, everyone was
saying, 'Why are we doing this?' Now, nobody even questions that it is the right
thing to do."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994


                             527 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   November 26, 1994, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 12A, IN THE NATION

LENGTH: 645 words

HEADLINE: Swerving car caused 6 deaths, witness says

SOURCE: From Wire Reports

BODY:


   A woman injured in a fiery highway crash that killed six people says she saw
a car swerve in front of a pickup just before the truck drove into oncoming
traffic, and she wants the driver of the car that swerved to come forward.

   "I wish people in the community would make the person who caused this
accident to give himself up," Marilyn LaBoy said yesterday.

   The Thursday night collision occurred when a Chevrolet pickup northbound on
Interstate 57 jumped the median into the southbound lanes and collided with a
car. A second car then hit the wreckage.

   The six dead included the driver of the pickup and his wife, and the
occupants of the first car, one of whom was a 2-year-old boy.

Research team solves gene therapy problem

   Gene therapy, the bright hope for fighting many of mankind's worst illnesses,
has always had a major drawback: directing the appropriate disease-fighting gene
to exactly the right tissues.

   Now, researchers at the University of California in San Francisco say they
have achieved a laboratory breakthrough: They have modified a retrovirus so it
transport genes into specific human cells for treatment.

   The development has the potential for use in gene therapy for red blood cell
disorders such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemias -- an inherited chronic
anemia.

   Yuet Wai Kan, whose team developed the targeting method, cautioned yesterday
that the technique -- which involves an altered retrovirus -- has been used only
in the laboratory and not in humans.

Doctor suspended for leaving operation

   A neurosurgeon's license was suspended after an investigation revealed that
he left a patient's brain exposed for 25 minutes while he got lunch.

   The state medical board also said Dr. Raymond Sattler forgot the names of
surgical equipment during an operation, told a nurse to drill holes in a
patient's head and work on the outer brain even though she was not trained to do
so, and ordered intravenous fluids to be given to him during a procedure because
he thought he was going to pass out.

   When Dr. Sattler left the brain exposed, no other physician was present to
care for the patient, the board said.

   The board indefinitely suspended Dr. Sattler's license Wednesday. He did not
return calls to his office.

Parents allegedly left 6-year-old in charge

   A couple are accused of child neglect for going to a Rolling Stones concert
and leaving their three youngest children, ages 2 to 4, in the care of their
"really mature" 6-year-old daughter.

   Craig and Kathie Cote of Marathon told authorities they considered hiring a
baby sitter to watch the children, but decided against it when Sachi offered to
be in charge.

   "I'm sure that people who don't know us would think it was a very selfish
thing to do and very careless, but it wasn't," Mrs. Cote said. "They might say,
'How can you leave a 6-year-old girl with three younger kids?' But she is really
mature."

   Authorities were called to the motel Saturday after Sachi appeared at the
front desk in tears, looking for help to get the younger children to bed.

Farmers sue to stop presence of wolves

   The American Farm Bureau Federation and other farm groups filed a lawsuit
yesterday to stop a plan that calls for reintroducing gray wolves into
Yellowstone National Park and Idaho, the clerk's office said.

   A U.S. Fish and Wildlife plan, announced earlier this year, calls for
transporting 15 gray wolves to Yellowstone and 15 to central Idaho per year over
the next three to five years.

   Ranchers vehemently oppose the reintroduction of wolves because they fear the
animals will not be contained in the park and will kill livestock and spread
diseases such as rabies and brucellosis.

   The re-introduction -- wolves have been absent from the park since the 1920s
-- is scheduled to begin in January, using wolves brought in from Canada.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1994


                             528 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                           November 26, 1994 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHROUGH IN GENE THERAPY? SCIENTISTS SAY RETROVIRUS MAY DIRECT
TREATMENT TO CELLS

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Gene therapy, the bright hope for fighting many of mankind's worst illnesses,
has always had a major drawback: directing the appropriate disease- fighting
gene to exactly the right tissues.

   Now, researchers at the University of California in San Francisco say they
have achieved a laboratory breakthrough: They have modified a retrovirus so it
can transport genes into specific human cells for treatment.

   A retrovirus, such as HIV, implants itself in certain cells and causes
disease much later.

   The development has the potential for use in gene therapy for red-blood- cell
disorders such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemias, an inherited chronic
anemia.

   "In principle, the approach demonstrated here should be broadly applicable,
allowing production of a wide range of viruses . . . that can deliver genes to
specific tissues or organs for the treatment of genetic diseases and cancer,"
said the researchers in the current issue of Science.

   Yuet Wai Kan, whose team developed the targeting method, cautioned in an
interview yesterday that the technique - which involves an altered retrovirus -
has been used only in the laboratory and not in humans.

   "Gene therapy is the hot topic now," he said.

   Many gene therapy treatments rely on taking cells out of the body, infecting
them with genes and returning them. This is the procedure in bone marrow
transplants and in other treatment of some cancers.

   Kan said his method offers the potential of using a syringe to inject the
genes and not having to remove cells from the body. But, he cautioned, "This is
theoretical."

   The researchers' next step is to make a virus that will home in on early bone
marrow cells and certain cancers.

   "We now have the possibility of infecting a specific type of cell," he added.
"One can imagine you could target cancer cells, very early bone marrow cells or
lymphocytes for treatment of HIV or AIDS infection."

   The magazine Science is the journal of the American Academy for the
Advancement of Science.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             529 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  November 26, 1994, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A6

LENGTH: 698 words

HEADLINE: Cubans return home

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   More than 300 Cubans have climbed, walked and jumped out of U.S. military
camps on the southeast tip of Cuba to swim back home. The U.S. government
refuses to use the word ''escape'' when referring to the Cubans, who must cross
two rows of razor-sharp concertina wire, jump off a 30-foot cliff and swim a
mile before navigating a minefield. The officially accepted word for this
journey is ''departure.'' There are 22,617 Cubans -- men, women and young
children -- living in dusty camps and sleeping on cots under canvas tents. Only
322 of the refugees have made it from the camps to the United States, all of
them over age 70, under age 18 or suffering from illness.

Cuba phone overload

FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.

   At least three American long-distance phone companies began direct-dial
service to Cuba yesterday afternoon -- and the lines were immediately jammed. As
a result, many callers heard busy signals and recordings when they tried to make
direct contact with family and friends in Cuba. Yesterday marked the first time
in three decades that U.S. residents could call the island directly.

Cultist still sought

NEW YORK

   Did David Berg die or has the missing leader of the Children of God
sex-for-salvation cult gone underground to evade worldwide charges of child
abuse? Followers said late Thursday that the 75-year-old ''sexual evangelist''
died after a brief illness but refused to say when or where. Law enforcement
sources said yesterday that Interpol's worldwide manhunt for the fugitive cult
leader was continuing, and disaffected former group members said the
announcement of Berg's death could be a ruse to throw his pursuers ''off the
scent.''

Suit against wolves

CHEYENNE, Wyo.

   The American Farm Bureau Federation and other farm groups filed a lawsuit
yesterday to stop a controversial plan that calls for reintroducing gray wolves
into Yellowstone National Park and Idaho, the clerk's office said. A U.S. Fish
and Wildlife plan calls for transporting 15 gray wolves to Yellowstone and 15 to
central Idaho per year over the next three to five years. Ranchers vehemently
oppose the reintroduction of wolves because they fear the animals will not be
contained in the park and will kill livestock. The re-introduction -- wolves
have been absent from the park since the 1920s -- is scheduled to begin in
January using wolves brought in from Canada.

Gene therapy advance

WASHINGTON

   Gene therapy, the bright hope for fighting many of mankind's worst illnesses,
has always had a major drawback: directing the appropriate disease-fighting gene
to exactly the right tissues. Now, researchers at the University of California
in San Francisco say they have modified a retrovirus so it transports genes into
specific human cells for treatment. The researchers' next step is to make a
virus that will home in on early bone marrow cells and certain cancers.

Faked research

WASHINGTON

   Federal investigators have concluded that a former MIT researcher faked
research on antibodies, raising false hope that she had discovered a way to
transfer resistance to disease, officials said yesterday. The federal Office of
Research Integrity said it found Thereza Imanishi-Kari guilty of 19 allegations
of misconduct, including charges she lied to cover up her actions. Her results
were published in the April 25, 1986, issue of the journal Cell in an article
coauthored by Nobel laureate David Baltimore.

Elvis leaves Internet

CHAPEL HILL, N.C.

   Elvis has left the Internet. A computer system at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill was home for almost a year to the ''Elvis Home Page,'' a
billboard accessible through the SunSITE destination on the Internet web of
computer links. Fans could access sound clips of Elvis Presley's recordings,
photos and even a ''Cyber Graceland Tour'' with images of The King's Memphis
home. The free billboard was taken off line this month at the request of the
Presley estate's lawyers because it included copyright material. The estate,
Elvis Presley Enterprises Inc., might want to do its own version of Elvis in
cyberspace sometime, said lawyer Mark Lee.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994


                             530 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                   November 26, 1994, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 285 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may soon have better delivery

SOURCE: An Associated Press Report

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Gene therapy, the bright hope for fighting many of mankind's worst illnesses,
has always had a major drawback: directing the appropriate disease-fighting gene
to exactly the right tissues.

   Now, researchers at the University of California in San Francisco say they
have achieved a laboratory breakthrough: They have modified a retrovirus so it
transports genes into specific human cells for treatment.

   The development has the potential for use in gene therapy for red blood cell
disorders such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemias - an inherited chronic
anemia.

   "In principle, the approach demonstrated here should be broadly applicable,
allowing production of a wide range of viruses ... that can deliver genes to
specific tissues or organs for the treatment of genetic diseases and cancer,"
said the researchers in the current issue of Science.

   Yuet Wai Kan, whose team developed the targeting method, cautioned in an
interview Friday that the technique - which involves an altered retrovirus - has
been used only in the laboratory and not in humans.

   Many gene therapy treatments rely on taking cells out of the body, infecting
them with genes and returning them. This is the procedure in bone marrow
transplants and in some other cancer treatments.

   Kan said his method has the potential of using a syringe to inject the genes
without having to take cells out of the body. "This is theoretical," he
cautioned.

   The researchers' next step is to make a virus that will home in on certain
cancers early.

   "We now have the possibility of infecting a specific type of cell," he added.
"One can imagine you could target cancer cells ... or lymphocytes for treatment
of HIV or AIDS infection."

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1994


                             531 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       November 26, 1994 Saturday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY BREAKTHROUGANNOUNCED

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Gene therapy, the bright hope for fighting many of mankind's worst illnesses,
has always faced a major obstacle: directing the appropriate disease-fighting
gene to exactly the right tissues.

   Now, researchers at the University of California in San Francisco say they
have achieved a laboratory breakthrough: They have modified a retrovirus to
transport genes into specific human cells for treatment.

   The development has the potential for use in gene therapy for red blood cell
disorders such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemias - an inherited chronic
anemia.

   "In principle, the approach demonstrated here should be broadly applicable,
allowing production of a wide range of viruses . . . that can deliver genes to
specific tissues or organs for the treatment of genetic diseases and cancer,"
the researchers said in the current issue of Science.

   Yuet Wai Kan, whose team developed the targeting method, cautioned Friday
that the technique - which involves an altered retrovirus - has been used only
in the laboratory and not in humans.

   "Gene therapy is the hot topic now," he said.

   Many gene therapy treatments rely on taking cells out of the body, infecting
them with genes and returning them. This is the procedure in bone marrow
transplants and in other treatments for some cancers.

   Kan said his method potentially will use a syringe to inject the genes
instead of removing cells from the body. "This is theoretical," he said.

   The researchers' next step is to make a virus that will home in on early bone
marrow cell abnormalities and certain cancers.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1994


                             532 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   November 25, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: C; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: New technique can alter genes in sperm

BYLINE: New York Times

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK -- For the first time, a scientist has developed a
technique that can allow the alteration of genes in sperm, passing
the changes to the animal's progeny.

   It is a development, ethicists say, that brings the brave new
world of gene manipulation hurtling ever closer and raises
troubling questions about what science has wrought and how society
should deal with new technologies that have enormous potential for
relieving human suffering but that also have enormous potential for
misuse.

   The implications of the experiments are so profound that one
ethicist said they cried out for a national meeting of geneticists,
ethicists and lawyers to decide whether this path should be pursued
and, if so, with what precautions.

   Gene therapy has so far involved only cells, like lung cells,
that die when with the individual does, and most experts thought
that genetic modifications of sperm or eggs were far in the future.

   The new work has surprised experts and is expected to touch off a
debate over the profound consequences of changing genes of
generations to come.

   The experiments, by Dr. Ralph Brinster of the University of
Pennsylvania and his colleagues, were in mice, and Brinster and
others say there are many steps between these experiments with mice
and any experiments with other animals.  But Brinster and other
experts in biology and ethics stressed that they opened the door to
similar studies in large animals like horses and cattle that are
bred commercially, and eventually also in humans.

   Brinster focused on a group of early-stage sperm cells,
called stem cells, that reside in the testes and are the source of
all the sperm a male produces.  Sperm stem cells can divide to form
more stem cells and they can also divide to form a more
differentiated cell that will continue along a developmental path
that leads to the production of sperm.

   Since the stem cells are the genetic source of all sperm
cells, genes in the stem cells will appear in all the sperm derived
from them.  And those genes, in turn, will appear in every cell of
the animal's offspring.

   If the genes of a sperm stem cell are altered, so are the
genes of an animal's entire lineage.  This is a manipulation that is
conceivable only with sperm.  There are no such stem cells for eggs,
which are made only during the fetal period.  A female is born with
all the eggs she will ever have.


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1994


                             533 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    November 25, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 231 words

HEADLINE: Researchers find vehicle for gene repair

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Gene therapy researchers have built a custom delivery van that ships genes
only to selected cells - moving science a step closer to making gene therapy a
reality.

   Gene therapy is the scientific community's hottest new scheme for treating
disease. The basic idea is to insert a specific gene into a cell to repair a
problem and restore function.

   Delivery vans with promise are viruses, which contain the machinery needed
for infecting cells and inserting genes.

   Scientists can remove the virus' own genes and insert whatever new genes they
want. But so far, the viruses tested haven't been selective enough about which
cells they infect.

   In today's Science, Yuet Wai Kan of the University of California, San
Francisco, and his team, report on a viral van customized to home in on one type
of cell and ignore others.

   Kan used a mouse virus with a homing device that recognizes only a certain
mouse protein. He removed that homing device and replaced it with one that
recognizes only a specific target on human blood cells.

   When the virus was mixed in a test tube with different human cells, it
infected only those with the new target.

   If it is as successful when Kan moves the work from the test tube to live
animals "it would be milestone," he says.

   Experiments are now underway to target the virus to cancer cells and to blood
cells affected by sickle cell anemia.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1994


                             534 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 24, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: Pertussis vaccine seen limiting risk;
Medical Notebook / RICHARD SALTUS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    A new type of whooping cough vaccine has proved effective and free of the
side effects - like high fevers, convulsions and brain damage - that, though
rare, have made many parents in this country fear vaccination against the
illness, the National Institutes of Health said.

   The results of a US-sponsored test in Sweden, where authorities have not
recommended whooping cough vaccinations since 1979, showed the vaccine was 71
percent effective in protecting infants from whooping cough, or pertussis.

   The acellular vaccine - meaning it contains no whole cells, just a protein
that stimulates immunity - "proved to be remarkably safe," an NIH statement
said. "The incidence of all side effects, local and systemic, was far below that
reported when infants receive the currently used whole-cell vaccine," the
statement said. In Massachusetts, whole-cell vaccine is used in all five of the
routine pertussis shots.

   Made by AMVAX, a subsidiary of North American Vaccine Inc., the vaccine was
tested in Goteborg, Sweden, with support from the National Institute of Child
Health and Development.

Gene trial aims to reroute blood

    The Food and Drug Administration has given its approval for a gene therapy
experiment at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, testing a treatment aimed at
creating new blood flow to the legs and feet of patients suffering from blocked
arteries.

   The experiment is scheduled to begin next week under the direction of Dr.
Jeffrey Isner, chief of cardiovascular research, and represents the first
clinical trial in the United States of gene therapy for a heart or blood vessel
disease.

   The volunteers, patients with artery blockages that cause severe pain or skin
ulcers that won't heal, will have a balloon catheter inserted into the blocked
vein through a small incision near the groin. The balloon will be coated with a
solution that delivers genes to the cells lining the blood vessel. Those genes
will produce a protein to spur the growth of new blood vessels around the
blockage, forming a new route for blood flow. If successful, the treatment will
reduce pain and enhance healing in the patients' feet and legs, and potentially
open a door to gene therapy for coronary disease.

Diarrhea flare-up tied to apple cider

    A student-run agricultural fair in central Maine was the source of an
outbreak of diarrhea and vomiting caused by a parasite that flourished in cider
pressed from apples during the fair last year, says an epidemiological report on
the incident.

   At least 160 students and school staff members became ill after drinking the
cider containing an organism known as Cryptosporidium, which is a major cause of
acute diarrhea in developing countries and has caused large outbreaks of illness
in the United States in recent years when it contaminated drinking water. The
report in this week's Journal of the American Medical Association says the
outbreak in Maine is the first known case of Cryptosporidium being transmitted
by food.  They suspect that farm animals grazing in the orchard contaminated the
apples, which were not sufficiently washed before being pressed into cider.

Weight control seen vulnerable to aging

    Add another insult to the body caused by aging: As people get older, they
lose the ability to adjust and control their weight, leaving them more
vulnerable than younger individuals to extreme changes, particularly weight
loss.

   These are the findings of experiments reported this week in JAMA by
scientists from the US Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center
on Aging at Tufts University and researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and the University of California in San Francisco.

   Previously, it was thought that older people lose weight and become
malnourished mainly because their appetite worsens or because of dental
problems. However, when the researchers purposely underfed or overfed young and
old volunteers for three weeks, they found that the older subjects were less
likely to adjust their subsequent intake to compensate for weight gain or loss.
The study provides the first evidence, the researchers say, that aging causes
deterioration in the biological mechanisms that govern food intake.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1994


                             535 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 22, 1994, Tuesday, Valley Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 3; Column 1

LENGTH: 1312 words

HEADLINE: BLOOD MONEY;
MEDICINE: TINY HEMACARE HAS A POTENTIALLY PROMISING PLASMA TECHNIQUE IN THE
FIGHT AGAINST AIDS. BUT THE COMPANY NEEDS $10 MILLION MORE TO FINISH THE
PROJECT.

BYLINE: By JILL LEOVY, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

DATELINE: SHERMAN OAKS

BODY:

   In the fight against AIDS, it's often easier to drum up hope than money.
That's been the experience at HemaCare Corp., a small, money-losing blood-plasma
products company now at a turning point in its struggle to fund research on a
potential treatment for AIDS.

   It's not intended as a cure or a vaccine. The treatment involves what is
known as passive hyperimmune plasma therapy. Whole plasma, the liquid part of
blood that contains proteins, is taken from donors who are HIV-positive but are
in the earliest stages of the disease and have healthy immune systems. The
plasma is sterilized, then infused into other patients whose AIDS is further
advanced and whose immune systems are failing, in hopes of slowing the disease.

   Some doctors and AIDS patients, tired of waiting for a so-called magic bullet
against AIDS, say anything that shows some sign of helping should be pursued.
HemaCare has "got a promising HIV therapy and it's been held up in development
because the company is undercapitalized," said Dr. Paula Sparti, a physician in
Miami who treats AIDS patients. "This should go forward, and it's not going
forward clearly because of money."

   Since buying rights to the therapy -- called Immupath -- in 1989 from
Montreal-based Medicorp Inc., HemaCare has plowed nearly $8.5 million into its
development. The company has lost money four straight years, as the research
costs absorbed profits from its main business of collecting plasma and platelets
from donors to sell to hospitals and providing mobile treatment services for
blood-disorder patients.

   Last year HemaCare lost $2.5 million on revenues of $11.8 million, and
through the first nine months of this year it lost another $1.6 million on
revenue of $8.2 million.

   And before the next and most expensive phase of research can go forward,
HemaCare must persuade investors to pony up another $10 million to complete the
final phase of human trials before going to the Food and Drug Administration for
approval of the treatment. Meanwhile, HemaCare's current cash reserves are only
about $1 million.

   Promising results from clinical trials on 220 patients in 1991 were presented
to a conference of scientists in New York last month. HemaCare's CEO Hal
Lieberman concedes that a dearth of capital has slowed research, but he says the
firm won't give up. "This is too good a product to walk away from," he said.

   The company has held discussions with several potential partners, Lieberman
said, although it has failed in past years to find the right partner.

   HemaCare's research has drawn the attention of hundreds of AIDS patients,
including some so convinced of its merits that they volunteered as guinea pigs
for the human trials, thus giving HemaCare the most precious thing they have:
their time.

   The therapy is based on the observation that people with the human
immunodeficiency virus can stay healthy for years before their immune systems
deteriorate. Investigators think the reason is that the body mounts a successful
attack against the AIDS virus at first but is slowly overwhelmed. By
transferring plasma from healthy, HIV-infected patients to less healthy ones,
they hope to capture the antibodies produced in the early stages of infection
and transfer them to patients whose immune systems are worn down.

   It's a relatively low-tech approach to the disease, and it's certainly not a
cure. But advocates speculate that Immupath could slow the progress of AIDS and
reduce some of its symptoms, essentially "holding the virus in check," explained
Dr. Joshua Levy, HemaCare's medical director, who leads Immupath research.

   Because the treatment consists of infusions of proteins the body naturally
produces, it's unlikely to create the toxic side effects of antiviral drugs,
such as AZT, Levy contends. And because it pools different antibodies from many
donors, the treatment may stand a better chance of remaining effective despite
the HIV virus' constant mutations, he argues.

   *

   HemaCare's most recent study showed some encouraging results. Only one of the
21 people receiving the largest doses of plasma died during the yearlong study,
while in a similar group of 21 people receiving a placebo, six died. Due to the
results, all the participants are now receiving the therapy instead of a placebo
and will continue even though their portion of the study has ended.

   The company must now get approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
to go forward with testing Immupath on 400 people with AIDS. The FDA has put the
approval on hold pending additional studies of the product's safety.

   Michael Dwiggins, 45, is among the HIV-positive volunteers who took part in
the earlier study. His condition was diagnosed in 1990 and he was probably
infected several years before. The HemaCare plasma transfusions are lengthy and
uncomfortable, but "you feel quite energized afterward," he said. Since
beginning the therapy, he said, his condition has remained fairly stable.

   At least two other limited studies on passive hyperimmune therapy have
recorded some similar effects, although one study of advanced AIDS patients in
New York recorded no great benefit.

   Despite some promising results, skepticism has long dogged HemaCare's
efforts. After all, AIDS has preoccupied the world's best scientists and biggest
medical-research companies for years, and HemaCare seems an obscure and unlikely
contender. Moreover, Wall Street is less than enthused with HemaCare's recent
studies. The price of HemaCare's stock has declined more than 40% since March of
this year, and closed Monday at $3.50 per share.

   Although HemaCare's approach is reasonable, antibodies are just one element
of the immune system's response to infection, said Dr. Daniel Kuritzkes,
assistant professor of medicine at the University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center in Denver. Many scientists think they may be among the least effective of
those mechanisms, he said. Other treatments, such as hormones that stimulate the
immune system and gene therapies, show more promise and may prove more
economical, he said.

   Critics are even more doubtful about whether wide-scale treatment of AIDS
using passive hyperimmune therapy is feasible. For Immupath to work, HemaCare
must have a constant stream of HIV-positive plasma donors who are willing to
give plasma every few weeks.

   Dr. Michael Roth, a Beverly Hills physician who treats AIDS patients with the
still-experimental passive hyperimmune therapy, said the treatment appears to be
beneficial but organizing a steady parade of donors for his practice is
"cumbersome and time-consuming." Donors drop out, even when they are paid, and
replacements must be recruited. "This will never be a large-scale treatment. . .
. You can't mass-produce it like a pill," Roth said.

   Financial analysts also doubt that this treatment will ever be a big
moneymaker for HemaCare, even if it is effective. "The issue is not, will it
work? It is, will it be practical?" said Joyce Lonergan, a biotechnology analyst
with Cowen & Co. in New York.

   HemaCare's Lieberman countered that organizing a national system of donor
centers is exactly the sort of thing HemaCare -- a blood and plasma company --
does best.

   "This drug will be expensive but so is getting sick," Lieberman said, adding
that the treatment could cost about $1,000 per month per patient. "What we are
doing is cumbersome and expensive. . . . But there isn't anything else."

   The company is also considering testing a related product called intravenous
immune gamma globulin -- in essence, a distillation of antibodies derived from
human plasma. HemaCare is building a production plant in Valencia to
mass-produce treated whole plasma as well as the more concentrated immune gamma
globulin.

   But, of course, for all this to happen HemaCare needs more money and
encouraging results both in the lab and on Wall Street.

CORRECTION-DATE: November 29, 1994, Tuesday, Valley Edition

CORRECTION:
FOR THE RECORD

   HemaCare research -- In a Nov. 22 story, The Times understated the money
needed by HemaCare Corp. for future research on an AIDS-therapy product called
Immupath. The company said that it would need $10 million for the continuing
development of Immupath. In fact, the company meant that $10 million would only
pay for the next stage of research, and that its total Immupath research cost
may reach $20 million.

GRAPHIC: Photo, HemaCare CEO Hal Lieberman pledges to pursue research into
passive hyperimmune plasma therapy. "This is too good a product to walk away
from," he says. ; Photo, Blood-platelet donors relax during two-hour process at
HemaCare facility, part of the company's non-HIV business, which helps fund its
AIDS research project.  RICHARD DERK / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1994


                             536 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words

HEADLINE: Gene Technique Could Shape Future Generations

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   For the first time, a scientist has developed a technique that can allow the
alteration of genes in sperm, passing the changes to the animal's progeny.

   It is a development, ethicists say, that brings the brave new world of gene
manipulation hurtling closer and raises troubling questions about what science
has wrought and how society should deal with new technologies that have enormous
potential for relieving human suffering but also have enormous potential for
misuse.

    The experiments, preliminary as they are, seem likely to rekindle a
longstanding ethical debate since they raise far-reaching possibilities for
altering the human lineage. [Page C10.] One ethicist said the new experiments
should prompt a national meeting of geneticists, ethicists and lawyers to decide
whether this path should be further pursued and, if so, with what precautions.

   Gene therapy has so far involved only cells, like lung cells, that die when
the individual does, and most experts thought that genetic modifications of
sperm or eggs were far in the future.

   The experiments have been performed in mice by Dr. Ralph Brinster of the
University of Pennsylvania, a leading expert in reproductive physiology. He and
his colleagues emphasize that there are many more steps that need to be taken
before the experiments can be repeated in humans or other animals.

   But he and other experts in biology and ethics stressed that they opened the
door to similar studies in large animals like horses and cattle that are bred
commercially, and eventually in humans. The university has applied for a patent
on the process.

   Dr. Brinster focused on a group of early-stage sperm cells, called stem
cells, that reside in the testes and are the source of all the sperm a male
produces. Sperm stem cells can divide to form more stem cells and they can also
divide to form a more differentiated cell that will continue along a
developmental path that leads to the production of sperm.

   Since the stem cells are the genetic source of all sperm cells, genes
inserted into the stem cells will appear in all the sperm derived from them. And
those genes, in turn, will appear in every cell of the animal's offspring,
altering its lineage.

   Dr. Brinster and his colleagues found that they could gather stem cells from
the testes of mice that had marker genes in all their cells, inject the sperm
stem cells into the testes of other animals and see the marker genes' effects in
the next generation.

   In one study, the researchers used a gene that made sperm cells stained blue
so they could see the cells that had inherited the gene. They transplanted sperm
stem cells with the gene into animals they had made sterile by treatment with a
chemical and were able to follow the marker gene for two generations. In an
experiment now being conducted, Dr. Brinster and his colleagues gave genetically
sterile mice sperm stem cells from distinctively colored mice. The coloration
should allow him to track the genes in their offspring.

   Dr. Brinster's work is described in two papers appearing today in The
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The articles are accompanied by
a commentary by Dr. Martin Dym, a cell biologist at Georgetown University
Medical Center in Washington, who wrote that the findings "could have
far-reaching clinical consequences" in treating infertility and genetic
disorders.

   Dr. Dym said in an interview that for laboratory scientists like himself, the
work was "a major advance." It provides methods that can allow investigators to
understand the development of sperm and the unique nature of sperm stem cells.
But, he added, the work was also fraught with difficult ethical implications.

   Dr. Richard Sherins, a male infertility specialist at the Genetics and I.V.F.
Institute in Fairfax, Va., said Dr. Brinster had created "a wonderful model" for
research into the causes and treatment of male infertility. "Sperm development
is not well understood," he said, making it difficult to diagnose and treat many
men who are infertile.

   Dr. Brinster said the method would allow researchers to study the production
of sperm in ways that were never possible before. For example, he said,
scientists could treat sperm stem cells with growth factors or hormones to
understand how sperm production is controlled. Or they could put sperm stem
cells from a rat, which takes 55 days to produce mature sperm from stem cells,
into a mouse, which makes sperm in 35 days, to determine whether it is the stem
cells or the testicular environment that controls the rate that sperm develop.

   In addition, Dr. Brinster said, the method could be used to put genes from
one species into sperm of another species, putting, for example, genes from a
chicken into sperm from a rat in an effort to study gene functions and
development.

   "Imagine that you have an old bull that is about to expire," Dr. Brinster
said. "You could do a small biopsy and take out the spermatogonial stem cells.
Then you could expand those cells in vitro and freeze them.  Then that bull is
alive forever." Unlike semen banks, in which a limited number of samples can be
obtained and stored, the sperm stem cells are an infinitely renewable source of
new stem cells, Dr. Brinster noted.

   One of the first clinical applications, Dr. Dym said, might be to preserve
the fertility of men undergoing cancer therapy, which can make men sterile. A
man could save his sperm stem cells before the treatment. After treatment, he
could have the stem cells injected into his testes, where they would generate
sperm. Dr. Dym said urologists he had spoken to estimated this could be feasible
within five years.

   The most controversial application would be the genetic modification of all
of an individual's sperm, eliminating a gene for an inherited disease, for
example, or adding a gene that would make a person healthier. This is germ-line
gene therapy, a possibility that until now had seemed the stuff of science
fiction and was awaited with trepidation by many ethicists.

   Dr. Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, who has been following Dr. Brinster's work, said that although it
was "still preliminary," now was the time to discuss its applications. "If we
want ethics, law and public policy to stay abreast, we have to start talking,
thinking and worrying now," he said.

   Dr. Ronald M. Green, who is director of the ethics institute and a professor
of religion at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H., said the implications of the
new work were so consequential that they cried out for a national debate. He
suggested a meeting of experts and interested parties like one at Asilomar,
Calif., that took place two decades ago when scientists first learned the
rudiments of genetic engineering and decided to halt their work voluntarily
until they could debate its safety and implications for society.

   "The community of scientists, ethicists, lawyers and public officials really
have to sit down together," Dr. Green said. "It's just a short step from mouse
to humans."

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Inheritable Gene Modification: Some Ethical Issues"

ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR:

Health professions have a moral obligation to use the best available treatment
methods.

Parents have rights of autonomy and rights of access to available technologies
for the purposes of having a healthy child.

Inhertitable gene modification is more efficient and cost-effective that tissue
cell gene therapy.

The value of freedom of scientific inquiry and the intrinsic value of knowledge
support such research.

ARGUMENTS AGAINST:

The process is an expensive intervention and has limited applicability.

Alternative strategies are available for preventing genetic diseases. Risks are
unavoidable; mistakes are irreversible.

There will be inevitable pressures to use inheritable gene modification for
enhancement of offspring.

(Adapted from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences and N.A. Wivel and
L. Walters in Science, Vol. 262) (pg. C10)

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1994


                             537 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 10;  Column 2;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: Ethicists Wary Over New Gene Technique's Consequences

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   ETHICISTS said new work on sperm stem cells could have a variety of
consequences, ranging from potentially beneficial to deeply troubling.

   The research is giving some ethicists pause because it could enable
scientists to add or delete genes in sperm stem cells. Since any genetic
manipulations will be inherited in perpetuity, this sort of germ-line gene
therapy has always been regarded with trepidation.

    Could such a genetic experiment go awry, creating dread diseases in
generations to come? Or could the line between curing disease and enhancing the
human race become so blurred that parents, as a matter of course, change their
genes to insure that their children, and their children's children, are svelte,
smart and athletic?

   Until now, these were hypothetical concerns. Although scientists are already
adding genes to cells, like lung or liver cells, that die with an individual, no
one knew how to change the genes of sperm or eggs.

   "Generally speaking, the belief was that germ-line gene therapy was a far-off
possibility," said Dr. Ronald M. Green, a professor of religion and director of
the ethics institute at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H.  Nonetheless, he
said, "the consensus as I understand it in the bioethics community is
extraordinary wariness."

   It is one thing, Dr. Green said, to introduce new genes -- ones that will not
be inherited -- in "a desperate attempt" to treat a disease. Even then,
scientists cannot say for sure whether the gene therapy might not have some dire
consequence in decades to come.

   But it is another thing entirely, Dr. Green said, to alter a person's
lineage. "It opens the possibility of creating new and serious genetic
disorders," he said, through hubris combined with a profound ignorance of how
genes interact and what a gene added to a stem cell today might do to future
generations.

   Alta Charo, a lawyer and ethicist at the University of Wisconsin in Madison,
said there was also a genuine debate among scientists and ethicists over whether
science should even try to eliminate genetic diseases through germ-line therapy.
The idea is that some of these disease-causing genes may have a purpose that
scientists do not understand. By eliminating a disease, humans might forgo the
even greater benefits that might accrue if they could understand the gene's
purpose. Added to that is a concern about "the deliberate extinction of
anything," Ms. Charo said.

   But Ms. Charo said she for one is not convinced by these cautions against
using germ-line gene therapy to eliminate diseases. Some diseases, she said, are
"so devastating that to prevent them would always seem to justify new
techniques, including germ-line therapy."

   Dr. Ronald Munson, a medical ethicist at the University of Missouri in St.
Louis, agreed. He said he believed medicine had a "therapeutic imperative" to
use germ-line gene therapy to rid people of inherited diseases. "I am very
excited by the possibility of eliminating literally thousands of inherited
diseases," he said. "It seems to me a possibility that would be morally wrong
not to explore."

   Ms. Charo said people were often emotional and uninformed in their reactions.
"I watch as people start at extremes, the extreme that this is unnatural, that
it is against the order of the universe, that it is against God's order, if you
are religious," she said. "I just wish there was a single thing in life that
could be so simple."

   Ms. Charo added that those who feared genetic tinkering might not realize
that eliminating a few disease-causing genes would have little effect on the
human gene pool. "The genetic inheritance is huge, it's vast," Ms. Charo said,
"and it is constantly being changed by spontaneous mutations that arise and
recreate old effects and create new effects."

   But then, of course, comes the slippery slope. Would eliminating an obesity
gene be therapy or eugenics? If it is acceptable to eliminate obesity, what
about enhancing intelligence or musical talent?

   "This is the emerging issue in the genetics of reproduction," said John A.
Robertson, a professor of law and bioethics at the University of Texas at
Austin. "How much can parents control their offspring's characteristics? Where
is the line between therapy and enhancement? If the child becomes a commodity to
please the parents and if this has germ-line effects, then we are affecting
future generations as well."

   But although society may argue about the implications of germ-line therapy
and sperm stem cell transfers, the research is almost guaranteed to continue.

   Dr. Ralph Brinster of the University of Pennsylvania, whose work on sperm
stem cells gives rise to the possibility of germ-line gene therapy in humans,
said, "I don't think there is any way to hold back knowledge." He said he
thought it was best to understand early on what was coming, "so we can decide
how to handle it," but that, essentially, the genie was out of the bottle.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1994


                             538 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    November 22, 1994 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: A GENETIC ADVANCE SPURS HOPE AND FEAR THE WORK OF THREE PHILA.
SCIENTISTS COULD LEAD TO NEW CURES. SOME ALSO SEE A POTENTIAL FOR ABUSE.

BYLINE: Jim Detjen, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Three Philadelphia scientists have developed techniques to transplant sperm
cells in mice that might someday lead to permanent cures for serious genetic
diseases in people.

   The techniques may also open the way to reversing some kinds of infertility
and to creating "improved" species of farm animals, such as cows that produce
more milk.

   But the same techniques also raise the specter of eugenics - using science to
create a superior human race.

   The findings by Ralph L. Brinster, a pioneering genetics researcher at the
University of Pennsylvania veterinary school, and two of his colleagues are
being published in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

   "This research is extremely significant," said Martin Dym, chairman of the
cell biology department at the Georgetown University Medical Center. "If you can
modify human sperm, you have the potential for someday eradicating hereditary
diseases such as cystic fibrosis.

   "But it's a controversial area because this research also offers the prospect
of making everyone look like you or me - that's what Hitler tried to do," he
said.

   "Ralph Brinster and his colleagues don't have this in mind, but there are
some who believe this opens the doors to making 'designer genes' in people."

   In April a British publication, The New Scientist, reported that Penn had
applied for a U.S. patent on techniques similar to those announced today.

   In two journal articles today, Brinster, James Zimmermann and Mary Avarbock
showed that cells taken from the testis of a fertile male mouse can be
transplanted into the testis of an infertile mouse. That once-infertile mouse
can then successfully transfer these genes to his offspring.

   Brinster, who gained international attention in 1982 when he genetically
engineered a giant mouse, holds the Richard King Mellon chair at the Penn
veterinary school. He is a pioneer in the development of transgenic animals and
has been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, one of science's highest
honors.

   Brinster said he has spent the last four years developing these "enabling
techniques" in mice. "I believe that in the future these techniques could be
applied to any species, including people," he said.

   "But it took 10 years between the development of the first gene therapy
techniques and the approval of these techniques for use in people," he said. "I
think we are talking about a similar time period before these (new) techniques
are used in people."

   In gene therapy experiments underway at Penn and other institutions around
the world, scientists are attempting to correct defects in genes that cause
disease in the body's cells. This form of "somatic cell gene therapy" will
generally not permanently cure a patient.

   However, if ways can be found to modify the germ cells - such as sperm - in
people, it may be possible to permanently cure hereditary diseases such as
muscular dystrophy, hemophilia and sickle-cell anemia. That's because the germ
cells are the only cells in the body that are passed down from generation to
generation.

   Brinster emphasized that while he is working to develop these techniques, he
is making no judgment about whether they should be used. "I'm not advocating
it," he said. "There should be a lively debate about it. But if people should
choose to use germ-line therapy, this is a method that might be considered in
the long term."

   Dym said he believed that these techniques might someday be used to correct
some types of infertility. For example, he said that when people are treated for
Hodgkin's disease with radiation, they are often cured - but usually left
sterile.

   He said that if Brinster's methods are perfected, it might be possible to
remove nascent sperm cells before radiation treatment. Then, after radiation
therapy, the primitive sperm cells - known as spermatogonia - could be
reintroduced into the person and he would be fertile.

   Brinster said that much more work needs to be done before these techniques
can be used in people. He said ways must be found to grow these genetically
altered sperm cells outside of the body and to understand the basic biology of
how sperm grow and develop.

   Dym said he believed that the advances made by Brinster would encourage many
more scientists to do scientific research in this area.

   "His work has already generated a lot of excitement in the scientific
community," he said. "If his work can be brought to fruition, it has the
potential of being one of the most significant advances in the field of
biology."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             539 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 22, 1994, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 769 words

HEADLINE: Sperm gene therapy can last for all generations

BYLINE: Jim Detjen, The Philadelphia Inquirer

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:


   Three University of Pennsylvania scientists have developed techniques to
transplant sperm cells in mice that might someday lead to permanent cures for
serious genetic diseases in people.

   The techniques may also open the way to reversing some kinds of infertility
and to creating ''improved'' species of farm animals, such as cows that produce
more milk.

   But the same techniques also raise the specter of eugenics -- using science
to create a superior human race.

   The findings by Ralph L. Brinster, a pioneering genetics researcher at the
University of Pennsylvania veterinary school, and two of his colleagues are
being published in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

   ''This research is extremely significant,'' said Martin Dym, chairman of the
cell biology department at the Georgetown University Medical Center in
Washington. ''If you can modify human sperm, you have the potential for someday
eradicating hereditary diseases such as cystic fibrosis.

   ''But it's a controversial area because this research also offers the
prospect of making everyone look like you or me -- that's what Hitler tried to
do.

   ''Ralph Brinster and his colleagues don't have this in mind, but there are
some who believe this opens the doors to making 'designer genes' in people.''

   In April a British publication, the New Scientist, reported that Penn had
applied for a European patent on techniques similar to those announced today.

   In two journal articles today, Brinster, James Zimmermann and Mary Avarbock
showed that cells taken from the testicle of a fertile male mouse can be
transplanted into the testicle of an infertile mouse. That once-infertile mouse
can then successfully transfer these genes to his offspring.

   Brinster, who gained international attention in 1982 when he genetically
engineered a giant mouse, holds the Richard King Mellon chair at the Penn
veterinary school. He is a pioneer in the development of transgenic animals and
has been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, one of science's highest
honors.

   Brinster said he has spent the last four years developing these ''enabling
techniques'' in mice. ''I believe that in the future these techniques could be
applied to any species, including people,'' he said.

   ''But it took 10 years between the development of the first gene therapy
techniques and the approval of these techniques for use in people,'' he said.
''I think we are talking about a similar time period before these (new)
techniques are used in people.''

   In gene therapy experiments under way at Penn and other institutions around
the world, scientists are trying to correct defects in genes that cause disease
in the body's cells. This form of ''somatic cell gene therapy'' will generally
not permanently cure a patient.

   However, if ways can be found to modify the germ cells -- such as sperm -- in
people, it may be possible to permanently cure hereditary diseases such as
muscular dystrophy, hemophilia and sickle-cell anemia. That's because the germ
cells are the only cells in the body that are passed down from generation to
generation.

   Brinster emphasized that while he is working to develop these techniques, he
is making no judgment about whether they should be used. ''I'm not advocating
it,'' he said. ''There should be a lively debate about it. But if people should
choose to use germ-line therapy, this is a method that might be considered in
the long term.''

   Dym said he believed that these techniques might someday be used to correct
some types of infertility. For example, he said that when people are treated for
Hodgkin's disease with radiation, they are often cured -- but usually left
sterile.

   He said that if Brinster's methods are perfected, it might be possible to
remove nascent sperm cells before radiation treatment. Then, after radiation
therapy, the primitive sperm cells -- known as spermatogonia -- could be
reintroduced into the person and he would be fertile.

   Brinster said that much more work needs to be done before these techniques
can be used in people. He said ways must be found to grow these genetically
altered sperm cells outside the body and to understand the basic biology of how
sperm grow and develop.

   Dym said he believed that the advances made by Brinster would encourage many
more scientists to do scientific research in this area.

   ''His work has already generated a lot of excitement in the scientific
community,'' he said. ''If his work can be brought to fruition, it has the
potential of being one of the most significant advances in the field of
biology.''

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, N.Y. Times News Service: (Inheritable gene
modification: some ethical issues)

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1994


                             540 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 22, 1994, Tuesday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 986 words

HEADLINE: Sperm gene therapy can last for all generations

BYLINE: Gina Kolata, The New York Times

BODY:


   For the first time, a scientist has developed a technique that can allow the
alteration of genes in sperm, passing the changes to the animal's progeny.

   It is a development, ethicists say, that brings the brave new world of gene
manipulation hurtling ever closer and raises troubling questions about what
science has wrought and how society should deal with new technologies that have
enormous potential for relieving human suffering but that also have enormous
potential for misuse.

   The implications of the experiments are so profound that one ethicist said
they cried out for a national meeting of geneticists, ethicists and lawyers to
decide whether this path should be pursued and, if so, with what precautions.

   Gene therapy has so far involved only cells, like lung cells, that die when
with the individual does, and most experts thought that genetic modifications of
sperm or eggs were far in the future. The new work has surprised experts and is
expected to touch off a debate over the profound consequences of changing genes
of generations to come.

   The experiments, by Dr. Ralph Brinster of the University of Pennsylvania and
his colleagues, were in mice, and Brinster and others say there are many steps
between these experiments with mice and any experiments with other animals. But
Brinster and other experts in biology and ethics stressed that they opened the
door to similar studies in large animals like horses and cattle that are bred
commercially, and eventually also in humans. The university has applied for a
patent on the process.

   It was reported in April that Brinster and colleague Jim Zimmerman, also of
Penn, had applied for a European patent for genetically engineered ''designer
sperm'' that would allow a father to pass down only ''healthy'' genes to his
children.

   Brinster focused on a group of early-stage sperm cells, called stem cells,
that reside in the testes and are the source of all the sperm a male produces.
Sperm stem cells can divide to form more stem cells and they can also divide to
form a more differentiated cell that will continue along a developmental path
that leads to the production of sperm.

   Since the stem cells are the genetic source of all sperm cells, genes in the
stem cells will appear in all the sperm derived from them. And those genes, in
turn, will appear in every cell of the animal's offspring.

   If the genes of a sperm stem cell are altered, so are the genes of an
animal's entire lineage. This is a manipulation that is conceivable only with
sperm. There are no such stem cells for eggs, which are made only during the
fetal period. A female is born with all the eggs she will ever have.

   Brinster and his colleagues found that they could gather stem cells from the
testes of mice that had marker genes in all their cells, micro-inject the sperm
stem cells into the testes of other animals and see the marker genes' effects in
the next generation.

   In one study, the researchers used a gene that made sperm cells stained blue
so they could see the cells that had inherited the gene. They transplanted sperm
stem cells with the gene into animals they had made sterile by treatment with a
chemical and were able to follow the marker gene for two generations.

   In an experiment now being conducted, Brinster and his colleagues gave
genetically sterile mice sperm stem cells from distinctively colored mice. The
coloration should allow him to track the genes in their offspring.

   Brinster's work is published in two papers appearing today in The Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. The articles are accompanied by a
commentary by Dr. Martin Dym, a cell biologist at Georgetown University Medical
Center in Washington, who wrote that the findings ''could have far-reaching
clinical consequences'' in treating infertility and genetic disorders.

   Brinster said the method could be used to put genes from one species into
sperm of another species, putting, for example, genes from a chicken into sperm
from a rat in an effort to study gene functions and development.

   One of the first clinical applications, Dym said, might be to preserve the
fertility of men undergoing cancer therapy, which can make men sterile. A man
could save his sperm stem cells before the treatment. After treatment, he could
have the stem cells injected into his testes, where they would generate sperm.
Dym said urologists he had spoken to estimated this could be feasible within
five years.

   The most controversial application would be the genetic modification of all
of an individual's sperm, eliminating a gene for an inherited disease, for
example, or adding a gene that would make individuals healthier. This is germ
line gene therapy, a possibility that until now had seemed the stuff of science
fiction and was awaited with trepidation by many ethicists.

   Dr. Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, who has been following Brinster's work, said that although it was
''still preliminary, still early,'' now was the time to discuss its
applications. ''If we want ethics, law and public policy to stay abreast, we
have to start talking, thinking and worrying now,'' he said.

   Dr. Ronald M. Green, who is director of the ethics institute and a professor
of religion at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H., said the implications of the
new work were so consequential that they cried out for a national debate.

   He suggested a meeting of experts and interested parties like the one at
Asilomar, Calif., that took place two decades ago when scientists first learned
the rudiments of genetic engineering and decided to voluntarily halt their work
until they could debate its safety and implications for society.

   ''The community of scientists, ethicists, lawyers and public officials really
have to sit down together,'' Green said. ''It's just a short step from mouse to
humans.''

   LIB1

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, N.Y. Times News Service; (Inheritable gene
modification: some ethical issues)

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1994


                             541 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     November 22, 1994 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS ALTER GENES IN SPERM

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA; NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   The implications of the experiments are so profound that one ethicist said
they cried out for a national meeting of geneticists, ethicists and lawyers to
decide whether this path should be pursued and, if so, with what precautions.

   Gene therapy has so far involved only cells, like lung cells, that die when
the individual does, and most experts thought that genetic modifications of
sperm or eggs were far in the future. The new work has surprised experts and is
expected to touch off a debate over the profound consequences of changing genes
of generations to come.

   The experiments, by Dr. Ralph Brinster of the University of Pennsylvania and
his colleagues, were in mice, and Brinster and others say there are many steps
between these experiments with mice and any experiments with other animals. But
Brinster and other experts in biology and ethics stressed that they opened the
door to similar studies in large animals like horses and cattle that are bred
commercially, and eventually also in humans. The university has applied for a
patent on the process.

   Brinster focused on a group of early-stage sperm cells, called stem cells,
that reside in the testes and are the source of all the sperm a male produces.
Sperm stem cells can divide to form more stem cells and they can also divide to
form a more differentiated cell that will continue along a developmental path
that leads to the production of sperm.

   Since the stem cells are the genetic source of all sperm cells, genes in the
stem cells will appear in all the sperm derived from them. And those genes, in
turn, will appear in every cell of the animal's offspring.

   If the genes of a sperm stem cell are altered, so are the genes of an
animal's entire lineage. This is a manipulation that is conceivable only with
sperm. There are no such stem cells for eggs, which are made only during the
fetal period. A female is born with all the eggs she will ever have.

   Brinster and his colleagues found that they could gather stem cells from the
testes of mice that had marker genes in all their cells, micro-inject the sperm
stem cells into the testes of other animals and see the marker genes' effects.

   In one study, the researchers used a gene that made sperm cells stained blue
so they could see the cells that had inherited the gene. They transplanted sperm
stem cells with the gene into animals they had made sterile by treatment with a
chemical and were able to follow the marker gene for two generations.

   In an experiment now being conducted, Brinster and his colleagues gave
genetically sterile mice sperm stem cells from distinctively colored mice. The
coloration should allow him to track the genes in their offspring.

   Brinster's work is published in two papers appearing today in the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. The articles are accompanied by a
commentary by Dr. Martin Dym, a cell biologist at Georgetown University Medical
Center in Washington, who wrote that the findings "could have far-reaching
consequences" in treating infertility and genetic disorders.

GRAPHIC: CHART BY: NEW YORK TIMES ; INHERITABLE GENE MODIFICATION: SOME ETHICAL
ISSUES; SOURCE: ADAPTED FROM PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES AND
N.A. WIVEL AND L. WALTERS IN SCIENCE, VOL 262.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1994


                             542 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        November 22, 1994 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: SPERM CELL ALTERATION RAISES ETHICAL CONCERN

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA 1994, The New York Times

BODY:

   For the first time, a scientist has developed a technique that can allow the
alteration of genes in sperm, passing the changes to the animal's progeny.

   It is a development, ethicists say, that brings the brave new world of gene
manipulation hurtling ever closer and raises troubling questions about how
society should deal with new technologies that have enormous potential for
relieving human suffering but that also have enormous potential for misuse.

   The implications of the experiments are so profound that one ethicist said a
national meeting was sought of geneticists, ethicists and lawyers to decide
whether this path should be pursued and, if so, with what precautions.

   Gene therapy has so far involved only cells, like lung cells, that die when
the individual does, and most experts thought that genetic modifications of
sperm or eggs were far in the future. The new work has surprised experts and is
expected to touch off a debate over the profound consequences of changing genes
of generations to come.

   The experiments, by Dr. Ralph Brinster of the University of Pennsylvania and
his colleagues, were on mice, and Brinster and others say there are many steps
between these experiments with mice and any experiments with other animals. But
Brinster and other experts in biology and ethics stressed that they opened the
door to similar studies in large animals like horses and cattle that are bred
commercially, and eventually also in humans. The university has applied for a
patent on the process.

   Brinster focused on a group of early-stage sperm cells, called stem cells,
that reside in the testes and are the source of all sperm a male produces.
Sperm stem cells can divide to form more stem cells and they can also divide to
form a different cell that will continue along a developmental path that leads
to the production of sperm.

   Since the stem cells are the genetic source of all sperm cells, genes in the
stem cells will appear in all the sperm derived from them. And those genes, in
turn, will appear in every cell of the animal's offspring.

   If the genes of a sperm stem cell are altered, so are the genes of an
animal's entire lineage. This is a manipulation that is conceivable only with
sperm. There are no such stem cells for eggs, which are made only during the
fetal period. A female is born with all the eggs she will ever have.

   Brinster and his colleagues found that they could gather stem cells from the
testes of mice that had marker genes in all their cells, micro-inject the sperm
stem cells into the testes of other animals and see the marker genes' effects in
the next generation.

   In one study, the researchers used a gene that made sperm cells stained blue
so they could see the cells that had inherited the gene. They transplanted sperm
stem cells with the gene into animals they had made sterile by treatment with a
chemical and were able to follow the marker gene for two generations.

   In an experiment now being conducted, Brinster and his colleagues gave
genetically sterile mice sperm stem cells from distinctively colored mice. The
coloration should allow him to track the genes in their offspring.

   Brinster's work is published in two papers appearing today in The Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. The articles are accompanied by a
commentary by Dr. Martin Dym, a cell biologist at Georgetown University Medical
Center in Washington, who wrote that the findings "could have far-reaching
clinical consequences" in treating infertility and genetic disorders.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1994


                             543 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                          November 19, 1994, SATURDAY

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: GRANT MAY LET BIOMEDICAL COMPANY CONSOLIDATE HERE

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   A Columbus biomedical company has been awarded a $ 2 million federal grant to
develop a line of donor cells for vascular surgery and therapeutic
''miniorgans.''

   The award could hasten plans by Progenitor Inc., 1507 Chambers Rd., to move
all or part of its research staff - now in Athens, Ohio - to Columbus, according
to Ralph Snodgrass, vice president for research.

   ''It would certainly be more convenient to have our scientific and management
staff under one roof,'' Snodgrass said. A decision will be made in the next few
months.

   Progenitor is among 47 companies nationwide sharing $ 137 million from the
advanced technology program of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The program is
designed to help develop promising but high-risk technologies.

   The company, a subsidiary of Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Boston, was
established two years ago to commercialize cellular and genetic therapies
developed by the Edison Biotechnology Center at Ohio University.

   Research at OU by developmental biologist Thomas E. Wagner led to the
patenting of a process by which embryonic stem cells from mice were cultured for
use as a universal donor cell, capable of being genetically tailored to fight
various diseases in the human body.

   Embryonic cells are used to avoid stimulating an immune reaction.

   The advanced technology grant is to develop donor cells for use as blood
vessel cells in vascular surgery; they might be used, for example, as a coating
on artificial grafts to prevent rejection and clotting, or to rebuild the inside
walls of blood vessels after balloon angioplasty, in which constricted blood
vessels are widened by inserting tiny balloons and inflating them, Snodgrass
said.

   Another application being explored, he said, is the use of such donor cells
to construct ''mini-organs'' which, when inserted inside the body, would produce
specific proteins needed by the body, such as insulin in diabetics.

   Snodgrass said the company now employs six management and administrative
employees in Columbus and 24 scientists and technicians in Athens.

   The federal grant will support the work of six additional researchers as well
as consulting scientists at Ohio University and three other universities, he
said.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1994


                             544 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          November 16, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 6

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: BRAIN CELL RESEARCH Study holds promise for Alzheimer's

BYLINE: By Bill Hendrick STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   'A huge advance': Scientists say techniques tested in monkeys have opened the
door for gene therapy on the human mind.

   Miami Beach - Using monkeys to test the effectiveness of injecting
genetically engineered cells into brains, scientists said Tuesday that they may
soon be able to employ similar methods to treat such deadly human diseases as
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.

   Dr. Matthew During of Yale University and four colleagues announced
"promising" results in primate experiments in delivering healing agents to
brains at the annual conference of the Society for Neuroscience.

   The new methods include transplantation of skin cells genetically altered
from the animals' own cells, implantation of genetically engineered cells from a
foreign species, and the administration of viruses.

   The research focuses mostly on Alzheimer's disease, which afflicts 4 million
Americans and kills 100,000 a year, and Parkinson's disease, which affects
800,000 people in the United States, with 40,000 new cases diagnosed annually.

   During said that no one knows what causes Alzheimer's but that recent
discoveries pinpoint genes that may cause the destruction of a specific group of
cells in the forebrain.

   Studies reveal that a substance called human nerve growth factor, a naturally
occurring protein, has beneficial effects on brain cells. As a result,
researchers have been injecting the growth factor into monkeys and getting
promising results, During said.

   So far they haven't figured out how to pump the protein into human brains,
said Dr. Mark Tuszynski of the University of California at San Diego. In
monkeys, however, scientists managed to reverse deterioration in up to 92
percent of diseased brain cells.

   Dr. Dwaine Emerich of the research firm CytoTherapeutics said that
researchers have also genetically altered hamster cells to produce growth
hormones. When injected into the brains of monkeys that were the human
equivalent of 78 to 87 years old, the cells prevented cell death of the kind
associated with Alzheimer's, researchers said.

   "What we have found is a technique where we can safely and effectively
introduce genes into the brain," During said. "This has opened up the promise of
gene therapy on the mind. This field has accelerated to the point where,
hopefully, by the end of the century, neurological diseases will be treatable
with gene therapy."

   In the past, similar research has been done on slices of dead human brain,
but not on live monkeys.

   Similar procedures in rats have produced positive results in reversing
symptoms that in humans would be comparable to those suffered by victims of
Parkinson's disease, During said.

   "Within five years, if all this pans out, people with Parkinson's will be
helped," During said. "Alzheimer's is a much more difficult disease. But this is
very significant, because what we are doing seems to be completely safe and
nontoxic, and that is a huge advance."

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1994


                             545 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          November 16, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH WATCH; Section C; Page 3

LENGTH: 233 words

HEADLINE: Health Watch Researchers use genes to repair heart damage

BYLINE: By Charles Seabrook STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Dallas - Gene therapy is still in its infancy, but researchers say they're
already set to take it in a new direction: using modified genes to repair
damaged hearts and even "immunize" persons against heart disease.

   The researchers, who are presenting 40 studies on gene therapy at this week's
meeting of the American Heart Association, acknowledged that their research is
still mostly in the test tube or animal testing stage.

   The promise of gene therapy, in which modified genes are implanted into the
body's cells to manufacture a variety of proteins, has been focused on inherited
maladies such as cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.

   "But ultimately, gene therapy's most exciting promise is to treat the major
causes of death, such as heart disease," said Dr. Sanders Williams, a geneticist
at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.

   In studies presented at the AHA meeting this week:

   The National Institutes of Health said genes implanted into heart cells may
induce growth of new blood vessels and provide a new therapy for getting
oxygenated blood to the heart.

   Stanford University researchers said certain other genes implanted in the
heart may halt the cascade of events that causes arteries to clog.

   University of Southern California School of Medicine scientists have been
able to induce new heart muscle cells to grow in areas scarred by heart disease.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1994


                             546 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  November 16, 1994, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 3A, NEWSWATCH... ON THE NATION

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy applied to heart disease

SOURCE: From Wire Reports

BODY:


   Scientists working on the frontiers of gene therapy have come up with a
possible strategy for repairing the damage of heart attacks by transforming
useless scar tissue into healthy muscle.

   The approach -- outlined yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association in Dallas -- is still untested, but it is one of a dozen or more
ways in development to cure heart trouble by regulating the body's genes. Some
of these strategies are moving rapidly from lab animals to people. Experts
predict some of them will be tried on heart patients within a year or two.

   "There has been tremendous progress in this approach in just two years. The
roadblocks that stand in the way have been identified," said Dr. R. Sanders
Williams of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

Missed signal

   The National Transportation Safety Board concluded that a Burlington Northern
freight train ran head-on into another train at Kelso, Wash., a year ago because
some crew members missed a caution signal in the fog, the Washington Post
reported today.

   The NTSB also said the crash could have been avoided if a fail-safe rail
signal system had been in place, the paper said. Such a system essentially takes
control of the train if engineers disobey signals or run too fast. The collision
on Nov. 11, 1993, killed all five crew members.

Helmets help

   Deaths and nonfatal injuries have dropped since the 1992 mandatory helmet law
for motorcyclists was enacted in California, according to a University of
California, Los Angeles study.

   Initial results from the UCLA School of Public Health were released last
year, but the complete findings were included in today's issue of the Journal of
the American Medical Association.

Marijuana found

   Marijuana was found in a bag belonging to a free-lance employee of the
Democratic National Committee working on a presidential trip this month, police
said. But, contrary to reports, the bag was never aboard Air Force One, the
White House said yesterday.

   A federal agent's dog found the shoulder bag near a door at North Hennepin
Community College in Brooklyn Park, Minn., where Mr. Clinton was campaigning for
local candidates. The White House said Will Dupree of Denver was a volunteer or
part-time employee with the DNC, brought in to help stage the presidential
visit. White House Press Secretary Dee Dee Myers said he was never aboard Air
Force One, despite reports on the conservative talk show circuit.

Rubin hit by car

   Former Chicago Seven anti-war activist Jerry Rubin was reported in critical
condition at UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles yesterday after he was hit by a
car while jaywalking, Los Angeles police said.

   Officers said the Yippie-turned-businessman was crossing Wilshire Boulevard
at mid-block about 8:30 p.m. Monday when he was struck by a car heading west on
Wilshire. Mr. Rubin, 56, was taken by ambulance to the medical center, where he
underwent several hours of surgery.

Sheik has pneumonia

   Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, who is accused of leading terrorists in a plot to
bomb New York landmarks, has pneumonia, a judge in New York said yesterday. The
56-year-old sheik already suffers from blindness, diabetes and heart trouble.

   U.S. District Judge Michael Mukasey mentioned the sheik's illness when he
delayed a pretrial hearing. Jury selection in the trial is set for Nov. 28.

Truck hearing stands

   In what promises to be a public relations disaster for General Motors Corp.,
the Transportation Department has decided to proceed with a public hearing on
whether to recall millions of pickup trucks.

   Families of crash victims and survivors of fiery accidents are expected to
testify at the Dec. 6 session on the safety of GM's 1973-87 C-K pickups. Critics
say they are prone to explode in side-impact collisions because the fuel tanks
are mounted outside the frames. GM had asked that the hearing be canceled so it
could proceed straight to court.

Luxury burial

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ASSOCIATED PRESS, The remains of Betty Young and the 1989
Cadillac Coupe de Ville she loved are lowered into her grave at a cemetery in
Foster, R.I. The car's seats were removed to accommodate Mrs. Young's matching
honey-colored coffin.

TYPE: CATCH LINE

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1994


                             547 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 16, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: SEEKING PEACEFUL SOLUTIONS;
STORY IN CAPTION

BODY:

    Yeineisha Chandler (left) and Melissa Delvalle wait yesterday afternoon at
St. Mary of the Angels Church for the start of a Walk for Peace through the
Egleston and Jackson square neighborhods. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/PAT GREENHOUSE

    A cancer researcher who brought a measure of scientific respectability to a
small Iowa university, founded by the guru of the Transcendental Meditation
movement, is returning nearly $ 614,000 in federal grants to protest the "grave
dangers" of genetic research.

   John Fagan, a molecular biologist at the Maharishi International Unversity
who once worked at the National Cancer Institute, said he is also withdrawing
applications that could have brought another $ 1.2 million in grants to the
university, which was founded by the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.

   His association with what many consider a fringe institution made Fagan's
action less startling than it might have been. But it was still remarkable for a
researcher who had succeeded in one of the most productive and intensely
competitive scientific disciplines. He said he was hoping to call attention to
doubts he has long harbored about his field.

   "There's been a great overpromotion of gene therapy techniques," said Fagan
in a telephone interview yesterday, "and this technology is going to put us in
the same place that nuclear power did - we got burned not realizing the
potential for side effects."

   Fagan, 46, said he will focus on treating cancer and other diseases through a
traditional Indian healing system known as Ayurveda. Already, he said, he has
found promising "interim results" in experiments in which he gave a dietary
substance, which he declined to identify, to rats with breast tumors. He said
six out of eight cancers disappeared.

   At a time when most scientists are competing desperately for scarce research
funds, Fagan's action is unusual and possibly unique, said officials at the NIH,
which awarded the grants.

   "I know of people who've returned money because their work was completed
sooner than they expected, but not for something like this," said Jerome Green,
director of research grants.

   The university is best known for its connection to the Maharishi, who brought
transcendental meditation to Western popular culture through the Beatles in the
1960s and '70s. The campus, which has 650 students, has graduate programs in
traditional fields like management, psychology and science, but also offers
programs in Human Consciousness and Creative Intelligence.

   The school, founded in 1971, had little presence in molecular biology until
Fagan arrived in 1984 after seven years at the National Cancer Institute. He
used gene-splicing and other genetic tools in probing the cytochrome P450
system, a group of enzymes in the liver that help destroy toxic drugs and
harmful byproducts of metabolism.

   Within two years, Fagan, who has a PhD from Cornell, landed the first of NIH
grants totaling $ 2.5 million for the 27-member research group he built - a
great coup for the Iowa university.

   "It was a great breakthrough," said Robert Keith Wallace, executive vice
president, in an interview. "We had to have a lot of visits and a lot of reviews
- it wasn't easy for them to trust us as a research university. We have other
professors who've gotten federal grants, but he's been the key."

   Fagan said he had long had concerns about the potential misuse of genetic
technology, which led him to "take stock" of his work over the past year or two.

   "My work was heading toward the discovery of genes that cause people to
become susceptible to cancer," he said. "But that knowledge can't be used to
cure someone. The only way it could be used would be in germ-line gene therapy"
- meaning replacing mutant genes with healthy ones that would be inherited by
the individual's children "to protect the next generation."

   Such measures, said Fagan, raise "the problems of eugenics and the risk of
side effects and new genetic diseases." He also warned that genetic technology
could be used by "terrorists or petty tyrants" to create weapons for "biotech
terrorism."

   Nelson Wivel, who heads NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee that
regulates gene therapy, said the committee does not consider proposals for
germ-line gene therapy experiments. While he did not rule out reexamining that
policy in the future, he said the technical hurdles are so formidable "that it
would be a long, long time before anyone would even consider" adding genes to
human reproductive cells.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOBy Richard Saltus Globe Staff

Biologist returns US grants to protest genetic research

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1994


                             548 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

            November 16, 1994, WEDNESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Offers Method To Repair Heart

BYLINE: By Daniel Q. Haney

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

   Scientists working on the frontiers of gene therapy have come up with a
possible strategy for repairing the damage of heart attacks by transforming
useless scar tissue into healthy muscle.

   The approach -- outlined Tuesday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association -- is still untested, but it is one of more than a dozen ways
researchers are considering to cure heart trouble by regulating the body's
genes.

   Some of these strategies are moving rapidly from lab animals to people.
Experts predict some of them will be tried on heart patients within a year or
two.

   "There has been tremendous progress in this approach in just two years. The
roadblocks that stand in the way have been identified," said Dr. R. Sanders
Williams of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

   One of the strategies was outlined by Dr. Laurence H. Kedes of the University
of Southern California. About six years ago, scientists discovered a gene called
Myo D that can turn almost any cell in the body into a muscle cell.

   Working with dogs and rats, Kedes transferred this gene into the scar tissue
formed after a heart attack.  He found that the gene indeed transformed some of
this tissue into muscle cells.

   Whether these cells will actually work like normal heart muscle remains to be
seen, however. The cells made so far are skeletal muscle, not heart muscle, and
Kedes is unsure whether it will conduct electricity and beat like the muscle it
is meant to replace.

   Until these hurdles can be worked out, Kedes said, "this is far removed from
potential human application."

   The form of gene therapy that is probably closest to human use is intended to
overcome one of the greatest shortcomings of cardiology -- the failure of
angioplasty.

   More than 300,000 Americans undergo this procedure annually, which involves
inflating a tiny balloon to squeeze open clogged heart arteries. However, the
arteries close shut again within a few months in about 40 percent of patients.

   One reason is the body's tendency to produce new muscle cells in the spot
damaged by the balloon. The new strategy uses genes to temporarily program these
muscle cells not to divide.

GRAPHIC: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1994


                             549 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
                              Journal of Commerce

                          November 16, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: COMMODITIES, Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 300 words

HEADLINE: RHONE-POULENC PARTNERSHIP TO STUDY GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: Knight-Ridder Newspapers

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:


   Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. this week announced an ambitious new biotechnology
partnership that will focus on gene and cell therapies, starting with cancer
treatments.

    As part of the business, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer has formed a division, RPR
Gencell, based at its Collegeville research headquarters. RPR Gencell will
collaborate with 14 biotech companies and research organizations in the United
tates and France to create a "biotechnology network," the company said.

   Rhone-Poulenc Rorer officials said that by the end of this year, the company
will have invested $ 300 million and 150 of its researchers in the venture. It
expects to spend an additional $ 100 million a year in 1995 and ''foreseeable
years," said Thierry Soursac, general manager of RPR Gencell.

   Mr. Soursac said the partnership would combine the drug-development and
commercialization expertise of a large pharmaceutical company with the
innovation of smaller biotech companies, which generally have one key
technology.

   "They are parts suppliers, and we ask them to build an automobile that
drives," he said in a news conference. "Some of them have reached that capacity,
but very few."

   RPR Gencell's initial focus will be oncology (the branch of medicine dealing
with tumors), followed by cardiovascular disease and nervous-system disorders
such as Alzheimer's disease.

   Among the 14 partners, there are six potential therapies now in human
testing, with two more expected to start soon, officials said.

   The partnership includes three companies that already have collaborative
ventures with Rhone-Poulenc Rorer: Applied Immune Sciences Inc., Santa Clara,
Calif.; Introgen Therapeutics Inc., Houston; and Darwin Molecular Corp.,
Seattle. William Gates, Microsoft Inc. chief, is among Darwin's lead investors.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1996


                             550 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                   November 16, 1994 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 794 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC REPAIR FOR HEART DAMAGE STUDIED SCIENTISTS ARE SEEKING A
SOLUTION IN GENE THERAPY. THEY HOPE TO USE IT TO CONVERT SCAR TISSUE TO MUSCLE.

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

   Scientists working on the frontiers of gene therapy have come up with a
possible strategy for repairing the damage of heart attacks by transforming
useless scar tissue into healthy muscle.

   The approach - outlined yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association - is still untested, but it is one of a dozen or more ways in
development to cure heart trouble by regulating the body's genes.

   Some of those strategies are moving rapidly from lab animals to people.
Experts predict some will be tried on heart patients within a year or two.

   "There has been tremendous progress in this approach in just two years. The
roadblocks that stand in the way have been identified," said R. Sanders Williams
of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

   More than 40 reports on gene therapy are being presented at this week's heart
meeting.

   One of the more creative strategies was outlined by Laurence H. Kedes of the
University of Southern California.

   About six years ago, scientists discovered a gene called Myo D that can turn
almost any cell in the body into a muscle cell. Working with dogs and rats,
Kedes transferred that gene into scar tissue that forms when a heart attack
kills heart muscle. He found that the gene indeed transformed some of the
damaged tissue into muscle cells.

   Whether the cells will actually work like normal heart muscle remains to be
seen, however. The cells made so far are skeletal muscle, not heart muscle, and
Kedes is unsure whether it will conduct electricity and beat like the muscle it
is meant to replace.

   The form of gene therapy that is probably closest to human use is intended to
overcome one of the greatest shortcomings of cardiology - the failure of
angioplasty.

   More than 300,000 Americans undergo the procedure annually, which involves
inflating a tiny balloon to squeeze open clogged heart arteries. However, the
arteries close shut again within a few months in about 40 percent of patients.

   One reason is the body's tendency to produce new muscle cells in the spot
damaged by the balloon. The new strategy, which doctors say could undergo human
testing within a year, involves temporarily programming those muscle cells not
to divide.

   In other research announced at the heart association meeting yesterday:

   TREATMENT GUIDELINES. The standard national guidelines for heart disease
treatment are so full of conflicting advice that many patients are probably
being denied lifesaving care, researchers at the University of Maryland said.

   The situation is particularly serious now, because pressure to reduce medical
costs is forcing more and more doctors to adhere to the guidelines or risk not
being reimbursed by insurance companies, the researchers said.

   Their study compared two widely used sets of guidelines, one developed by
Rand, a think tank in Santa Monica, Calif., and the other by cardiologists
from the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology.

   Besides providing conflicting advice on nearly half of all patients,
neither of the two sets of guidelines has been tested to see whether its
recommendations provide better care and save lives, said one of the study's
authors, Andrew Ziskind, a cardiologist at the University of Maryland medical
center in Baltimore.

   BYPASS SURGERY. Instead of slicing open the chest of a coronary artery bypass
patient, heart surgeons may soon be able to do their work by inserting
instruments and a microscope through small holes in the chest, Stanford
University researchers said.

   The cardiologists said they had performed such minimally invasive operations
on 10 dogs.

   Minimally invasive surgery, or laparoscopy, began gaining wide acceptance in
the late 1980s. The technique involves inserting instruments, life-support
systems and viewing devices into the body through key-hole incisions.

   Compared to traditional open surgery, laparoscopy can result in less post-
operative pain for patients, shorter recovery time and sometimes lower costs,
physicians said.

   CPR COSTS. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation can revive hospitalized patients
whose hearts have stopped beating, but the procedure can lead to sky-high
medical bills and is often ultimately futile, researchers from Johns Hopkins in
Baltimore said.

   The researchers said hospitals might save money and effort by not performing
CPR on certain patients who will not likely survive afterward.

   The Johns Hopkins study found that of 501 CPR patients treated at the
hospital over 4 1/2 years, blood flow was restored in 47 percent after the
procedure.

   "However, fewer than 10 percent survived to be discharged from the hospital.
Barely 5 percent survived more than two years following their discharge," the
study reported.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             551 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  November 16, 1994, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A13

LENGTH: 407 words

HEADLINE: Genetics may repair heart damage;
Scientists study use of genes to convert scar tissue into healthy muscle after
heart attacks

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, The Associated Press

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:


   Scientists working on the frontiers of gene therapy have come up with a
possible strategy for repairing the damage of heart attacks by transforming
useless scar tissue into healthy muscle.

   The approach -- outlined yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association -- is still untested, but it is one of a dozen or more ways in
development to cure heart trouble by regulating the body's genes.

   Some of these strategies are moving rapidly from lab animals to people.
Experts predict some of them will be tried on heart patients within a year or
two.

   ''There has been tremendous progress in this approach in just two years. The
roadblocks that stand in the way have been identified,'' said Dr. R. Sanders
Williams of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

   More than 40 reports on gene therapy are being presented at this week's heart
meeting.

   One of the more creative strategies was outlined by Dr. Laurence H. Kedes of
the University of Southern California. About six years ago, scientists
discovered a gene called Myo D that can turn almost any cell in the body into a
muscle cell.

   Working with dogs and rats, Kedes transferred this gene into the scar tissue
that forms when a heart attack kills heart muscle. He found that the gene indeed
transformed some of this tissue into muscle cells.

   Whether these cells will actually work like normal heart muscle remains to be
seen, however. The cells made so far are skeletal muscle, not heart muscle, and
Kedes is unsure whether it will conduct electricity and beat like the muscle it
is meant to replace.

   Until these hurdles can be worked out, Kedes said, ''this is far removed from
potential human application.''

   The form of gene therapy that is probably closest to human use is intended to
overcome one of the greatest shortcomings of cardiology -- the failure of
angioplasty.

   More than 300,000 Americans undergo this procedure annually, which involves
inflating a tiny balloon to squeeze open clogged heart arteries. However, the
arteries close shut again within a few months in about 40 percent of patients.

   One reason is the body's tendency to produce new muscle cells in the spot
damaged by the balloon. Doctors have identified a gene that can turn off muscle
cell growth. One strategy is to insert this gene into cold viruses. The viruses
would carry the gene into muscle cells during the angioplasty and keep them from
dividing.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1994


                             552 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    November 16, 1994 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PROMISING IN HEART DAMAGE REPAIRS

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

   Scientists working on the frontiers of gene therapy have come up with a
possible strategy for repairing the damage of heart attacks by transforming
useless scar tissue into healthy muscle.

   The approach - outlined yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association - is still untested, but it is one of a dozen or more ways in
development to cure heart trouble by regulating the body's genes.

   Some of these strategies are moving rapidly from lab animals to people.
Experts predict some of them will be tried on heart patients within a year or
two.

   More than 40 reports on gene therapy are being presented at this week's heart
meeting.

   One of the more creative strategies was outlined by Dr. Laurence H. Kedes of
the University of Southern California. About six years ago, scientists
discovered a gene called Myo D that can turn almost any cell in the body into a
muscle cell.

   Working with dogs and rats, Kedes transferred this gene into the scar tissue
that forms when a heart attack kills heart muscle. He found that the gene indeed
transformed some of this tissue into muscle cells.

   Whether these cells will actually work like normal heart muscle remains to be
seen, however. The cells made so far are skeletal muscle, not heart muscle, and
Kedes is unsure whether it will conduct electricity and beat like the muscle it
is meant to replace.

   Until these hurdles can be worked out, Kedes said, "this is far removed from
potential human application."

   The form of gene therapy that is probably closest to human use is intended to
overcome one of the greatest shortcomings of cardiology - the failure of
angioplasty.

   More than 300,000 Americans undergo this procedure annually, which involves
inflating a tiny balloon to squeeze open clogged heart arteries. However, the
arteries close shut again within a few months in about 40 percent of patients.

   One reason is the body's tendency to produce new muscle cells in the spot
damaged by the balloon. The new strategy, which doctors say could be tested in
humans within a year, involves temporarily programming these muscle cells not to
divide.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1994


                             553 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  November 16, 1994, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: Designer genes to fight heart ills / High-tech therapies target
diseases

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

    Scientists are aggressively exploring ways to treat blocked arteries, bad
cholesterol and a host of heart problems with designer genes, experts reported
Tuesday.

   "We've really moved into a new era of gene therapy," says Dr. Jeffrey Leiden,
University of Chicago School of Medicine.

   Rapid progress in animal studies has advanced gene therapy from the simple
idea of replacing a missing gene to designing genes to intervene in a host of
complex diseases.

   Among new approaches presented here at the American Heart Association
meeting:

   -- "Bio-bypass surgery" in which genes are implanted on the heart to induce
new blood vessels to grow around blocked arteries, reported by Dr. Ron Crystal,
New York Hospital/ Cornell Medical Center.

   -- Implanting genes in arteries treated with balloon angioplasty to prevent
the artery from reclosing. In about 40% of angioplasty cases, artery wall cells
injured during the procedure respond by growing out of control like a tumor.
Animal studies show the unregulated cell growth can be interrupted; the approach
may one day even be applied to cancer.

   -- Implanting a gene that makes red blood cells into muscle cells, then using
the cells as red blood cell factories. The approach is designed for people with
severe anemia, such as those with kidney failure.

   -- Implanting genes directly on the heart area damaged by heart attack to
grow new muscle, reported by Lawrence Kedes, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles.

   Sending genes to the liver to treat cholesterol disorders, reported by Dr.
James Wilson, University of Pennsylvania. In animal studies, scientists can
design just about any cholesterol level they want.

   Human studies on these therapies are expected within two years.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1994


                             554 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  November 16, 1994, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 183 words

HEADLINE: Brain implant could battle Parkinson's

BYLINE: Doug Levy

DATELINE: MIAMI BEACH

BODY:

    Implanting "little drug factories" in people's brains could be the way to
treat Parkinson's disease in the years ahead.

   Scientists who have tested several ways to use gene therapy report dramatic
results in monkeys. "They basically went back to normal," says Kris Bankiewicz
of Somatix Therapy Corp., Alameda, Calif., attending a meeting here of the
Society for Neuroscience.

   Bankiewicz used the monkeys' own skin cells, which were modified to produce
the chemical dopamine and implanted surgically into the animals' brains. The
motor impairment that accompanies Parkinson's disease occurs because the
patients' brains don't produce sufficient dopamine.

   The current treatment for Parkinson's disease is the drug levodopa. Though it
changes into the necessary dopamine in the body, its side effects limit its
effectiveness.

   Matthew During of Yale is trying a different approach. His team uses a
harmless virus to transport a dopamine-producing gene into the nervous system.
In rats, Parkinson's-like behavior was reduced 40%; results in monkeys so far
are "extremely promising."

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1994


                             555 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             November 15, 1994, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: sk; THE CHALKBOARD; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 2648 words

HEADLINE: Blacks Show a Steady Gain In Acquiring Ph.D. Degrees

BYLINE: Leah Marcus

BODY:


   Good news from the National Research Council about growing numbers of
African-American scholars: 1,106 U.S. blacks earned Ph.D. degrees last year, 155
more than the year before, enough to suggest that a 4 percent dip in 1992 was a
blip, not a reversal, in the slow but steady growth of minority accomplishment
in graduate education.

   "I use the NRC data a lot," said Karen Williams, assistant dean at the
University of Illinois at Chicago Graduate College and coordinator of UIC
minority graduate student retention.

   But when a student shows signs of giving up, Williams said, she's likely to
use some troubling NRC numbers along with this year's good news.

   Ph.D.s awarded to black scholars may be on the rise, but last year's total
constitutes only slightly more than 4 percent of 26,386 awarded to all U.S.
citizens, and an even smaller percentage of the record grand total of 39,754
U.S. Ph.D.s awarded in 1993, including some 13,500 to non-citizens.

   Besides offering warm-hearted support and cool-headed advice, Williams
confronts wavering minority scholars with the burden of the numbers.

   "I kind of lay a guilt trip on them," she said.

   That combined strategy worked with 31-year-old Jerry Granderson, who had left
the UIC campus, early in his doctoral studies.

   "He is extremely bright and talented," Williams said of Granderson, who had
won a state-funded tuition waiver and stipend in exchange for his promise to
teach in Illinois after completing his education.

   "I asked, if he did not pursue his degree, who would replace him?  His
potential contribution would be lost."

   Granderson, now 2 1/2 years into a doctoral program in political science,
recalls the moment clearly.

   "Karen Williams was highly involved in motivating me to get back," he
recalled.

   "She told me, 'You are an asset, you are very rare. Society cannot allow
minority students to fall to the wayside.  Get going.'

   "Graduate students, particularly minority graduate students," he said, "need
that type of guidance, mentorship and support.

   "I had come up against a brick wall," Granderson recalled.  "I had the
impression that the professors were not expecting as much from me."

   When a teacher seems to be sending that message, he said, "You are not going
to select that professor as a mentor."

   Williams offered Granderson another perspective.

   "Sometimes there is a reluctance to challenge minority students," she said,
"for fear of not coming across as a 'good old liberal.'

   "If I said everything was wonderful here," she added, "that wouldn't totally
be true.  But Jerry had some misconceptions about the way the faculty was
supposed to treat him."

   Somewhat ruefully, Granderson observed recently that, in higher education,
"instructors are not professional teachers; they are professional researchers."

   Graduate students, he said, must take the initiative in connecting with
faculty.

   "Identify a mentor," he urged.  "Find them and claim them.  You've got to get
up and do some work yourself. It does not have to be someone of your own race --

 I want to make that perfectly clear."

   Today, Granderson, a U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency legal technician as well as
a graduate student, fields a range of roles.

   "I am working full-time, a student full-time, a husband full-time, a father
full-time.

   "Therefore," he said, "I have no time."

   But, Granderson said, he does have "a vision."

   "I want to be involved in higher education and I want to be one of those
mentors for students. . . . If I don't do it, then the problem perpetuates."

   He may have already begun.

   Granderson recently noticed two students "leafing through" a booklet in the
UIC library, comparing universities' minority acceptance statistics.

   "I walked over to them," Granderson recalled, "and told them that it's not
necessarily how many black students they accept, but the number they graduate.
Are they 'user friendly?' Is that school friendly to minority students?"

   For Deborah Um'rani, that kind of "friendliness" has shaped her career in the
UIC Ph.D. program in English.

   "The reason I am in school is the people who have encouraged me," said
Um'rani, 41, who returned to the campus in 1986 to resume the undergraduate work
she had interrupted in 1970.

   "They have been African-American professors and staff here at the university.
They have been the ones who said, 'Hey, you can do this.  I know an intelligent
student when I see one.' "

   Um'rani credited Williams for helping to maintain HOPE, a UIC graduate
students' organization. "HOPE stands for Helping 'Other' People Excel," Um'rani
explained.

   "And graduate," she added.

   Listening to other people share their war stories, and the fact that they
survived, she said, "you find it was because they had someone there who was
supportive."

   At UIC, that support is no accident, suggested Jan Rocek, vice chancellor for
research. "There is a very strong institutional commitment to minority
students," he said.

   To any prospective graduate student who has chosen a field and now seeks a
school, Rocek said, "I would emphasize . . . that this is a research institution
with an excellent faculty and state-of-the-art facilities, an exposure that not
every institution can offer."

   To minority students, Rocek said, "one reason I could tell you to come here
is because we have a great success recruiting, enrolling and graduating minority
students.  You would not be alone.  You would not be isolated."

   A "constant increase" in African-American, Asian American and Hispanic
American enrollments at UIC, has been accompanied by "a slight decrease" in
Caucasians, Rocek said, and "a considerable decrease" in foreign enrollments.

   "There is no question that some of the foreign students are very, very good."
Rocek said. But, he noted, "there has been a lot of pressure against foreign
enrollments," including "higher requirements in terms of language proficiency."

   Among 14 major Midwestern universities with which UIC works to promote
minority participation, UIC ranked first in 1992-93 in percentages of U.S.
minority graduate students (22 percent) and in percentages of African-American
graduate students (9.8 percent).

   UIC ranked first among the 14 in percentages of Ph.D. degrees awarded last
year to U.S. minorities (16.7 percent), and fourth in percentages of those
awarded to African Americans (5.1 percent).

   UIC ranked second in percentages of total master's degrees awarded to U.S.
minority students (17 percent) and third in percentages of master's degrees
awarded to African Americans (5.7 percent).

   Success rates, however, are not the only important numbers for prospective
students.

   More than half of African-American college students come from families
earning less than $ 20,000 a year.  The decision about where, or whether, to go
to graduate school is often dollar-driven.

   "More people are coming here because we are such a bargain," said Kenneth Roy
Johnson, dean of graduate studies at Chicago State University, where minority
students are the majority.

   "Other institutions have increased in expense.  As they raise tuition, people
opt for here."

   CSU graduate enrollments were up 23 percent from 2,272 last year to 2,808
this fall.

   "Most of our population are working adults," Johnson said, "Only about 100
are full-time students."

   Although CSU tuition is relatively low ($ 350 per course), the university
offers very little financial aid, Johnson said.  "No fellowships, only loans.
That is not really financial aid."

   Besides its 15 master's degree programs, eight in education and seven in arts
and sciences, CSU offers graduate courses to at-large students, including many
Chicago teachers.

   "We don't give a doctoral degree here," noted Johnson, a CSU alumnus and
former University of California-Berkeley socio-linguistics professor.  But
Johnson's campus is linked with Northwestern University, where six CSU faculty
may soon have five-year tuition-plus-stipend doctoral fellowships, in exchange
for their commitment to return to a minority-serving institution.

   "It's up on my computer screen right now," Leila Edwards, associate dean of
Northwestern's graduate school, said last month.

   The U.S. Education Department had announced only days before the faculty
development program in which Johnson and Edwards expect CSU faculty to
participate.

   "Applications are due in one month. . . . They have to start in January."

   To speed things up, Edwards said, "We're trying to piggyback on the
consortium we already have in place."

   Northwestern, CSU, Northeastern Illinois University, Oakton Community College
and Lake Forest College are "the consortium," a cluster of colleges Edwards
called "a microcosm of colleges nationwide."

   Northwestern doctoral students in history, sociology, physics, mathematics
and chemistry are "out in these institutions," Edwards said, "shadowing a
professor and working with a faculty mentor . . . finding out what it means to
be a faculty person in that institution.

   "Next semester, each of the students will be responsible for a class, guided
by a mentor.

   "Most of our graduate students will not teach in schools like Northwestern,"
Edwards acknowledged.  "Most will be teaching in schools that are very, very
different.

   "Today's minority will be tomorrow's majority. . . . student age range has
elongated. . . . Methods for delivering service will change . . . interactive
TV, teaching via computers."

   Among student participants in the cluster program, she said, "those who are
headed to faculties will be much better trained."

   Charged in 1983 with building up NU minority graduate programs and supported
by Northwestern's 1989 institutional commitment to attract, retain and graduate
minority students, Edwards said she is this year seeing significant results.

   Minority enrollments are up, she said, from 20 students, 2.8 percent of NU
graduate students in 1989, to 53 students, some 7.3 percent, this fall.

   "We have a large bulge coming up in December, 1994, and June and December of
1995," she said, "up from six or eight, to as many as 20 minority Ph.D.s."

   Edwards said she is "gratified" by increased faculty interest in the
three-year Patricia Roberts Harris fellowships for women and minorities, a
federal program that supports the first, second and fifth year of each
recipient's studies.  Participating universities fund years three and four.

   "In the past, we have always gone in requesting fellowships for four
departments at the most," Edwards said.  "This year, the response came from 16
departments.

   "We are just truly gratified."

   Fellowship dollars can make the difference in drawing and holding the
students Edwards seeks for Northwestern.

   Attracted by the chance to work with NU electrical engineering professor
Janet Rutledge, "an African American doing research in the area I find
interesting," Nathaniel Whitmal recalled recently that the university's two-year
offer of tuition and stipend, plus an equipment budget, was "a funding package I
really couldn't refuse."

   Whitmal, who is "looking at methods for removing noise from noisy speech
signals," said results could be used to improve digital hearing aids.

   A three-year Illinois Minority Graduate Incentive Program fellowship supports
Leonard Anderson, a second-year student in molecular biology and genetics.

   "The thing that is interesting to me now," Anderson said, "is gene therapy .
. . especially therapy processes for breast cancer."

   Fifth-year sociology doctoral student Elijah Ward began at NU with a one-year
fellowship from the Committee on Institutional Cooperation, the 14-member
Midwest university consortium. A three-year National Science Foundation
fellowship followed.  Ward, who plans a dissertation on hospice clients and
staff, now is supported by an NU teaching assistantship.

   But, Anderson, Whitmal and Ward agreed that, apart from funding, prospective
graduate students should seek other kinds of essential support as well.

   "Learn as much about the program you are considering as possible," Ward
urged. "Talk to graduate students in the department you are considering.

   "Minority students have a potential of feeling more marginalized and
isolated," he said.  "There is less representation in many programs and more of
a likelihood that there will be not a minority on the graduate faculty." "For
me, as well as other graduate students, it is very important to feel encouraged
by faculty, whether they are minority faculty or not."

   Ward said he chose NU over another university where "there was a kind of
coldness . . . even though there was a very scintillating intellectual climate.
And, it was taking graduates a long time to get through."

   In 1979, Ward had left the Ivy League university where he was enrolled on
scholarship. "It was part adolescent rebellion and frustration at the racism I
saw there," he said.  "I felt isolated.

   "I always, inside, wanted to finish school."

   Nearly 10 years later, Ward returned to UIC, "specifically with the plan of
doing very well so that I could get into a good graduate school.

   "I felt I had something to do in this life, and I still do."

   Whitmal's academic career has been more direct.

   Inspired by a Ph.D.-holding high school physics teacher at Morgan Park
Academy, Whitmal went on to graduate from Massachusetts Institute of Technology
in electrical engineering, to work for Bose Corp., which was founded by one of
his MIT professors and, while working, to earn a master's degree in engineering
management.

   Now 30, married and once again a student, Whitmal concluded, "The most
important thing to do

   is to . . . find someone who will look out for you as you make the transition
from undergraduate work or business."

   Whitmal sought out "somebody really interested in having me in their group, .
. . who would help me think two steps ahead so things would come out the way I
wanted it to.

   "I called up some of the schools and talked to some of the deans, the dean of
students or the dean of minority affairs, and asked what the atmosphere was
like, the population, the resources for minority students."

   Talking to "key people," he said, "can give you a sense of what it would be
like to be there.

   "Someone who is a minority student at a majority institution would hear those
words and know what I am saying."

   Campus visits are important, he said.

   "Most of the people who came here (and) who are happy here made the decision
after visiting the campus and talking to professors."

   Anderson agreed. "I interviewed at 10 different schools," he said.

   Once on campus, Anderson said, the task is to stay motivated.

   Like Whitmal, Anderson got hooked on science in his teens.

   His grandmother, a medical transcriber, had helped Anderson find a job filing
records at Lakeside Veterans Administration Hospital, "to keep me from hanging
out in the neighborhood," he recalled.

   "I started hanging out with people in the lab."

   For Anderson, high school science was "boring." Working with the hospital's
electronic microscope was not.

   After three years in Germany as a military medical specialist, Anderson
returned to the Daley Community College honors program and to Southern Illinois
University, where he earned double degrees in microbiology and chemistry.

   "I knew that I couldn't stop there," he said.  "I wanted more out of
science."

   Whitmal had some advice for others who also want more.

   "There are a lot of people out there who are working, comfortable in their
jobs, but would like to go to school," he said.

   "It would be good for them to know that programs are out there, that people
want them to come so they can make contributions."

   Whitmal and his wife had been reluctant to leave their good jobs, "to be
broke students again," he said.

   "Now that I am here I can see it is possible.  There is ample opportunity and
support to make the thing happen."

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1994


                             556 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 15, 1994, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 7; Column 2; Op-Ed Desk

LENGTH: 600 words

HEADLINE: A DEATH SENTENCE TOO SMALL TO NOTE;
MEDICINE: A FEW HUNDRED AMERICAN CHILDREN ARE AFFLICTED WITH A FATAL SYNDROME
THAT LACKS A RESEARCH CONSTITUENCY.

BYLINE: By PAUL O'BRIEN, Paul O'Brien, a lawyer and single parent, lives in West
Covina with his sons, Petey and Casey.

BODY:

   I know a 5-year-old boy. His name is Petey. He is my son. He is also known as
a "Sanfilippo's child."

   Several hundred children in the United States are brothers and sisters
through Dr. Juan Sanfilippo, discoverer of this rare genetic disorder. While the
affliction takes numerous forms, the ultimate prognosis is unbending: a
vegetative state and death before the age of 20, usually from aspiration
pneumonia.

   A Sanfilippo's child's infancy is unremarkable, with normal mental growth
recorded through roughly the second year. Thereafter, mental retardation becomes
detectable. The brain damage progresses.

   Typically, at age 10 or so, Sanfilippo's children must leave their family
homes, never to return.

   Currently, no treatment is available, not even to abate any of the symptoms.
Due to giant strides made recently in genetic research, however, an actual cure
hangs tantalizingly before Sanfilippo's parents -- "in the not too distant
future."

   "Not too distant" for whom?

   That Sanfilippo's syndrome is so rare is the curse. It isn't cost-effective
for enough teams of doctors and chemists to devote their careers to the cause.
We can only be thankful for those who do. It takes guts these days to research
apolitical diseases.

   Petey was diagnosed with Sanfilippo's syndrome in the summer of his fifth
year of life. Little did anyone know that he was perhaps approaching "middle
age" for a Sanfilippo's child. He was handsome and sweet-tempered, very loving
toward his family. But his speech wasn't clear, his walk wasn't stable and he
seemed to be acquiring fewer and fewer skills, so testing was done. And, given
the tragic results, the tests were repeated. The tests did not lie.

   "Petey," as it happens, is the very name I went by for my first 11 years.
"Paul" sounded just too mature for a child to my parents' ears. So the initials
P.T. (for Paul Thomas) were found to suit the bill.

   It has been 25 years since I have carried the moniker, but when I see my
son's face, I behold that "distant mirror" that gives us parents our
immortality. When I peer into his eyes, I see the sweetest heart, the gentlest
soul, the most enthusiastic and innocent human being I have ever known. And yet
I must steel myself for giving him up, for he is Sanfilippo's child, too.

   The doctors report that finding a therapy is inevitable -- if funding
continues. But, as if to shake parents from an optimistic dream, they somberly
advise that it "will not come in time for your child."

   Sanfilippo parents are asked to do the right thing: to be active in
fund-raising, to support the medical effort, even though it is not likely our
children can be saved. It is a battle, we're told, that we must fight for
others. Like an 18-year-old who is asked to take up arms for his countrymen, for
the sons and daughters of others because he will never have a son or daughter,
we must do our duty.

   And yet we secretly harbor a hope. If only enough money is raised, if only
the right break in genetic therapy comes, if only our children stay healthy and
do not reach the point of no return. These "ifs" are what keep some of us going.

   There are heroes and heroines in the national parents organization. We the
wistful are not the brave. We the hopers are not the champions. The true greats
are the parents who have lost a son or daughter, and in many cases multiple
children, to Sanfilippo and yet remain steadfast and devoted to the cause.

   I don't want to be a hero. For selfish and selfless reasons alike, I want
only to have Petey back. Sanfilippo has claimed him for long enough. He belongs
with Daddy.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Petey and his father.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1994


                             557 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Companies

Sybase agreed to acquire Powersoft in a $940 million stock swap. The deal would
create the world's seventh-largest software company and give Sybase control of
the leading maker of development tools for client-server computing. [Page D1.]


   Enron plans to build a solar power plant in Nevada. While promises heard in
the 1970's about the potential of solar power have since faded, the cost of
generating it has declined. Enron says it can offer commercially competitive
solar power. [D1.]
Chrysler's largest investor, Kirk Kerkorian, demanded the auto maker take steps
to increase its stock price. The shares surged after his call. [D1.]
Peace came to the bitter bankruptcy of Integrated Resources largely as a result
of one tenacious money manager. [D1.]
Ford Motor is in talks with U.S. Electricar, seeking an agreement on electric
car conversions on unspecified models. [D2.]
The S.E.C. is investigating whether Gibson Greetings violated securities laws in
its derivatives investments. [D5.]
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer plans a new division, RPR Gencell, that will concentrate on
the field of gene therapy. [D5.]
An investor group led by Bain Capital acquired subsidiaries of Weider Health and
Fitness in a $373 million deal. [D5.]
Boots of Britain will sell its pharmaceuticals business to BASF of Germany for
£850 million, or $1.36 billion. [D5.]
Goldman, Sachs is laying off investment bankers, according to executives inside
and outside the firm. [D6.]
Bruce P. McNall, president of the Los Angeles Kings hockey team, was charged by
Federal prosecutors with defrauding banks to obtain millions of dollars in
loans. [D8.]

International

A free-trade pledge is expected to be endorsed by the 18 nations of the
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum. The agreement would represent a victory
for the United States, which had pressed for a timetable on the lowering of
trade barriers. [A1.]
The agendas of the world's central bankers have narrowed in recent years. They
have largely abandoned efforts to act in unison or fix currency-exchange rates,
and are instead focused on trying to convince capital markets that they are
tough on inflation. [D1.]

The Economy

The Federal Reserve is expected to raise interest rates today, despite the
likelihood of strong public criticism. [D24.]

Markets

The S.E.C. has begun an inquiry on Nasdaq, aimed at determining whether market
makers quoted prices to buy and sell shares and then backed away from actually
doing deals at these prices. [D6.]
Blue-chips stocks showed a strong gain, helped by the rising dollar and gains in
bonds. The Dow industrials rose 28.26 points. [D12.]
Treasury prices advanced. [D24.]
The dollar rallied against the mark, helped by a selloff in marks after a
Swedish vote in favor of the European Union. [D25.]
Copper prices climbed to four-year highs on signs of continuing strong demand.
Crude oil and coffee prices fell. [D25.]

Today's Columns

D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles was dropped from the Budweiser account, ending one
of the longest relationships in advertising. The brand, which has seen sluggish
growth in recent years, will go to DDB Needham Worldwide. Stuart Elliott:
Advertising. [D1.]
Higher prices for TV affiliates have been a boon for A. H. Belo. The new luster
of its television stations has come at a good time for Belo, which has been
diversifying away from The Dallas Morning News into broadcasting. Market Place.
[D12.]

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1994


                             558 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
Rhone Unit Focuses on Gene Drugs

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. said yesterday that it had started a new division
that would concentrate on the discovery, development and commercialization of
drugs based on gene and cell therapies.

   The new unit, called RPR Gencell, has already agreed to collaborate with 14
other companies and academic institutions in research and development.

    The entry of Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, a Collegetown, Pa., subsidiary of the
French chemical giant Rhone-Poulenc, follows several other high-profile
investments by large pharmaceuticals companies in the field of gene therapy.

   Loosely defined, gene therapy aims to find the genetic causes of disease and
to intervene with highly specific drugs that either stimulate or suppress the
relevant genes. Some approaches work in the body, while others require removing
cells for treatment and then returning them to the body.

   Most of the previous investments in this field have involved large, narrowly
focused deals, like SmithKline Beecham's $125 million agreement with Human
Genome Sciences Inc., or Hoffman-LaRoche's $70 million deal with Millennium
Pharmaceuticals Inc. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer itself has an agreement worth up to
$113 million with Applied Immune Sciences Inc. of Santa Clara, Calif. Typically,
these investments are made in increments phased in as certain technical goals
are met.

   In contrast, RPR Gencell intends to invest an aggregate of about $300 million
in cell and gene therapy, but that number includes the Applied Immune deal. Most
of the initial investments it is making are much smaller, none more than $5
million.

   RPR Gencell said it would focus on drugs for cancer, cardiovascular disease,
and the central nervous system.

   Thierry Soursac, president of Rhone-Poulenc Rorer's biotechnology division,
said that rather than acquiring technologies or companies, the idea was to
create a consortium of commercial concerns and academic institutions that could
provide a free exchange of ideas.

   "The biotechnology companies all want money, but that's not all you need,"
Dr. Soursac said. "You need to interact with other companies that have other
pieces of the puzzle.  The goal is to get products into the clinic as quickly as
possible -- and faster than any of these companies could independently."

   RPR Gencell has formed multiple partnerships in each of the fields it
considers crucial to the commercialization of gene therapy. These include: gene
sequencing, which is the spelling out of the human body's genes and
identification of abnormal genes implied in disease; vectors, which is the use
of viruses for implanting a therapeutic gene into cells, and liposomes, which
are fat globules that could be used to transport genes to specific cells.

   "For each deal, we have one project, and get the first right of refusal for
that project, and the right to negotiate on other things," Dr. Soursac said.

   Paul Boni, an analyst with Mehta & Isaly, a health care investment research
firm based in New York, said such a portfolio approach to gene therapy was
likely to increase the potential for successful returns.

   "Drug discovery is inspirational; you can't plan on it," he said. "The idea
here is to take the greatest number of shots at it for the least amount of
money. They're not putting up the full cost of developing new technology, but
they do get access. "

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "Joining Forces in Gene Therapy" shows how viruses are used in
gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1994


                             559 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    November 13, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1094 words

HEADLINE: SOCIETY UNREADY FOR REVOLUTION TO BE UNLEASHED BY GENOME MAP

BYLINE: By JESSICA MATHEWS, Washington Post

BODY:

    The human genome is about to become the most incendiary scientific frontier
since Charles Darwin's heretical insights burst upon Victorian England.

   The mapping of the genome -- a federally funded crash effort launched in the
mid-'80s to identify every human gene -- is beginning to unleash a torrent of
information for which this society is almost completely unprepared. The
challenges it will pose to personal values, religious beliefs and public policy
will make the current to-do over genetics, race and intelligence seem mild.

   Much of this genetic information will be perilous. It will tell us whether we
are likely to die young of an untreatable disease. It may tell us our personal
endowments of traits that make up what we now grossly call intelligence, perhaps
sparking calls for educational tracking from an early age. It will reveal
predispositions to various forms of mental illness. It will tell us what the
future holds for a prospective spouse and hundreds of characteristics of an
unborn child. Pregnancy could become a hideous lottery of deciding whether to
hang on to a particular set of genes or hope that a subsequent fetus might be an
improvement. One recent study found that 11 percent of couples would abort a
fetus carrying a gene for obesity.

   The information will come without the knowledge to understand its
consequences for us individually or collectively, and without the means -- new
institutions, laws, regulations and a large corps of genetic counselors -- to
use it wisely or even safely.

   With much of the research being carried out in for-profit laboratories, there
is little time to think through a measured response. Each new bit of genetic
information will be rushed -- is already being rushed -- into the commercial
medical marketplace. Within weeks of the discovery of the colon cancer gene, 10
companies had bought the rights to develop a screening test for it.

   In just this last year, genes have been identified that confer varying
degrees of predisposition to breast, uterine, ovarian and colon cancer, to
osteoporosis and to male homosexuality. The first apparently successful
permanent gene therapy was announced. A Boston doctor began offering
fee-for-service testing of the gene for Huntington's disease, an incurable,
fatal illness. The National Academy of Sciences reported that healthy people are
losing jobs and insurance because of a high-risk condition they or their as-yet
unborn children may have.

   The same study warned that genetic tests will have to achieve near zero error
rates because the cost of false positives will be so horrendous: lifelong
anxiety, emotional damage and individuals who may needlessly choose not to marry
or have children. An accurate result would do the same to an individual warned
of an 80 percent risk who happens to be one of the lucky 20 percent. Even a
wholly accurate prediction of a condition for which nothing can be done would be
a curse. Yet members of high-risk families will find it hard to resist the
temptation to be released from a lifetime of worry.

   Genetic medicine will be layered on top of existing health care, adding
greatly to its cost. The cost of screening all prospective parents for defects
causing cystic fibrosis, for example, is estimated to be $ 2.2 million per
avoided CF birth. The cost will come down, but hundreds of such tests will soon
be available. As with most medical screening there will be great pressure to
test everyone, not just high-risk groups.

   Screening tests also open up the possibility of using in vitro fertilization
to ensure that a parent does not pass along a dangerous gene (or does bequeath a
highly desirable one). At a minimum cost of $ 10,000, this option is only likely
to be available to those who can afford to pay for it.  After some years of
this, the gene pools of the rich and the poor would begin to diverge, with
improved genomes at the top and what Robert Wright in the New Republic calls a
"genetic underclass" developing at the bottom.

   Genes are not destiny. Most traits of temperament, intelligence, mental or
emotional stability, and even predisposition to disease, are probably not due to
a single gene but to many, making inheritance highly complex. These
characteristics are also unlikely to derive from either nature or nurture but to
be the result of each acting upon the other. The familiar metaphor of the genome
as a fixed blueprint is misleading: Our genetic inheritance is more a set of
changeable potentialities that act on the environment and are acted upon by it.
Nonetheless, a nation of diverging gene pools would be immeasurably more divided
along the already troubled fault lines of class and race than it is today.

   The medical, legal, ethical and social implications of the genetic
information revolution have not been ignored. Some of the Human Genome Project
funds were set aside for studies that are producing a stream of scholarly
papers. Various advisory and study commissions exist, and more are being
proposed.

   None of this is enough. If last year's health care debate proved anything, it
is that a conversation among experts, even the development of a consensus among
experts, is not sufficient on issues like these. The public as a whole needs to
grapple with them. If such a broad public conversation on the genetic revolution
does not begin very soon, the mapping of the human genome -- a towering
achievement -- could quickly become a scientific Pyrrhic victory.

   Jessica Mathews is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1994


                             560 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  November 13, 1994, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. F1

LENGTH: 914 words

HEADLINE: Too much too soon

BYLINE: Jessica Mathews

BODY:


   The human genome is about to become the most incendiary scientific frontier
since Charles Darwin's heretical insights burst upon Victorian England.

   The mapping of the genome -- a federally funded crash effort launched in the
mid-'80s to identify every human gene -- is beginning to unleash a torrent of
information for which this society is almost completely unprepared. The
challenges it will pose to personal values, religious beliefs and public policy
will make the current to-do over genetics, race and intelligence seem mild.

   Much of this genetic information will be perilous. It will tell us whether we
are likely to die young of an untreatable disease. It may tell us our personal
endowments of traits that make up what we now grossly call intelligence, perhaps
sparking calls for educational tracking from an early age. It will reveal
predispositions to various forms of mental illness. It will tell us what the
future holds for a prospective spouse and hundreds of characteristics of an
unborn child. Pregnancy could become a hideous lottery of deciding whether to
hang on to a particular set of genes or hope that a subsequent fetus might be an
improvement. One recent study found that 11 percent of couples would abort a
fetus carrying a gene for obesity.

   The information will come without the knowledge to understand its
consequences for us individually or collectively, and without the means -- new
institutions, laws, regulations and a large corps of genetic counselors -- to
use it wisely or even safely.

   With much of the research being carried out in for-profit laboratories, there
is little time to think through a measured response. Each new bit of genetic
information will be rushed -- is already being rushed -- into the commercial
medical marketplace. Within weeks of the discovery of the colon cancer gene, 10
companies had bought the rights to develop a screening test for it.

   In just this last year, genes have been identified that confer varying
degrees of predisposition to breast, uterine, ovarian and colon cancer, to
osteoporosis and to male homosexuality. The first apparently successful
permanent gene therapy was announced. A Boston doctor began offering
fee-for-service testing of the gene for Huntington's disease, an incurable,
fatal illness. The National Academy of Sciences reported that healthy people are
losing jobs and insurance because of a high-risk condition they or their as-yet
unborn children may have.

   The same study warned that genetic tests will have to achieve near zero error
rates because the cost of false positives will be so horrendous: lifelong
anxiety, emotional damage and individuals who may needlessly choose not to marry
or have children. An accurate result would do the same to an individual warned
of an 80 percent risk who happens to be one of the lucky 20 percent. Even a
wholly accurate prediction of a condition for which nothing can be done would be
a curse. Yet members of high-risk families will find it hard to resist the
temptation to be released from a lifetime of worry.

   Genetic medicine will be layered on top of existing health care, adding
greatly to its cost. The cost of screening all prospective parents for defects
causing cystic fibrosis, for example, is estimated to be $ 2.2 million per
avoided CF birth. The cost will come down, but hundreds of such tests will soon
be available. As with most medical screening there will be great pressure to
test everyone, not just high-risk groups.

   Screening tests also open up the possibility of using in vitro fertilization
to ensure that a parent does not pass along a dangerous gene (or does bequeath a
highly desirable one). At a minimum cost of $ 10,000, this option is only likely
to be available to those who can afford to pay for it. After some years of this,
the gene pools of the rich and the poor would begin to diverge, with improved
genomes at the top and what Robert Wright in The New Republic calls a ''genetic
underclass'' developing at the bottom.

Genes are not destiny. Most traits of temperament, intelligence, mental or
emotional stability, and even predisposition to disease, are probably not due to
a single gene but to many, making inheritance highly complex. These
characteristics are also unlikely to derive from either nature or nurture but to
be the result of each acting upon the other.

   The familiar metaphor of the genome as a fixed blueprint is misleading: Our
genetic inheritance is more a set of changeable potentialities that act on the
environment and are acted upon by it. Nonetheless, a nation of diverging gene
pools would be immeasurably more divided along the already troubled fault lines
of class and race than it is today.

   The medical, legal, ethical and social implications of the genetic
information revolution have not been ignored. Some of the Human Genome Project
funds were set aside for studies that are producing a stream of scholarly
papers. Various advisory and study commissions exist, and more are being
proposed.

   None of this is enough. If last year's health care debate proved anything, it
is that a conversation among experts, even the development of a consensus among
experts, is not sufficient on issues like these. The public as a whole needs to
grapple with them. If such a broad public conversation on the genetic revolution
does not begin very soon, the mapping of the human genome -- a towering
achievement -- could quickly become a scientific Pyrrhic victory.

NOTES:
Jessica Mathews is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. She
wrote this for The Washington Post.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING, DRAWING: By Daniel Marsula/Post-Gazette

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995


                             561 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 13, 1994 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: New work in cancer-fighting genes reported

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   People naturally have genes that suppress cancer, and they are at work all
the time. Now doctors are developing strategies for transfusing cancer patients
with these so-called cancer suppressor genes. The benefit would be two-sided.
The transplanted human genes hold promise for inhibiting the growth of cancer
cells and for increasing tumor cells' sensitivity to conventional chemotherapy
and radiation, doctors at a gene therapy conference here said yesterday. Dr.
William F. Benedict, of Baylor University, is testing a form of the
retinoblastoma gene in animals, where it has seemed to suppress tumor growth.
Benedict was among more than 300 scientists attending the third annual
International Conference on Gene Therapy of Cancer sponsored by the San Diego
Regional Cancer Center and Sharp HealthCare. The conference, held in Coronado,
ended yesterday. Ruth Gjerset, of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center, has
shown in lab experiments that tumor suppressor genes also provide protection
against human brain tumor cells.

   She has put a cancer suppressor gene called p53 into the tumor cells and
injected the cells into mice. The injected cells do not form tumors in the mice,
she found.

   Moreover, in experiments in lab dishes, the genetically boosted tumor cells
become more sensitive to both chemotherapy and radiation therapy. "These studies
indicate gene therapy with tumor suppressor genes may have multiple benefits,"
said Dr. Robert Sobol, of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center and an organizer
of the conference. The p53 gene makes tumor cells more sensitive to drug and
radiation therapy because of another role it plays in the body.

   The gene helps foster the regulated death of cells; once chemotherapy damages
a cell's DNA, making it tough for a cell to survive, the p53 gene helps bring
about the death of the cell, Sobol said. Scientists also discussed the
possibility of arming blood cells with a gene that makes a sort of biological
pump that dumps toxins from cells. Giving cancer patients this gene could allow
doctors to give higher doses of chemotherapy, which typically damages or
destroys vital blood cells. The healthier blood cells would decrease the
patient's risk of infection and bleeding associated with cell damage by
chemotherapy. Cells already have such a biological pump for toxins, but creating
more pumps would increase their efficiency.

   In this strategy, the toxins from chemotherapy treatments would be pumped out
faster.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             562 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        November 13, 1994 Sunday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS HUNT CAUSE, CURE AS AT-RISK POPULATION SOARS

BYLINE: By DAVID MEEKS, Staff writer

BODY:

   Scientists know how a brain atrophies when stricken by Alzheimer's disease,
but they don't know how to treat or cure it.  The first hurdle is to learn what
causes the plaques and tangles that strangle the brain.

   The quality of life for millions of elderly people hangs in the balance.
With old age being the main risk factor for getting the disease, and the over-85
set the fastest growing segment of the American population, Alzheimer's is
potentially a huge public health concern.

   Research on causes has begun to focus on genetic factors and possible
breakdowns in the immune system.  But Dr. Ken Sakauye, a psychiatrist at Touro
Infirmary, echoed the view of an increasing number of doctors -- that
Alzheimer's may have multiple causes.  "Perhaps it's a syndrome, with a lot of
routes to the same common end."

   At Duke University, researchers are studying a genetic link that could lead
to gene therapy or a drug to head off the formation of brain tangles.
Meanwhile, others are trying to figure out how to limit the main protein
contained in plaques and prevent them from forming.

   Solving the mysteries of what causes Alzheimer's is not likely to help those
who have the disease now.  For them, there is a second level of research:
developing drugs to suppress symptoms and perhaps matain memory longer.

   Both Ochsner Medical Foundation and Tulane University Medical Center have
participated in national clinical trials to test experimental drugs designed to
indirectly raise the level of a brain chemical crucial to normal memory.
Tacrine, better known by its brand name, Cognex, is the first drug approved by
the Federal Drug Administration for Alzheimer's patients.

   Dr. Benjamin Seltzer, a neurologist, heads the Alzheimer's disease center at
Tulane and managed the hospital's Cognex testing program.  He said approval of
the drug is a positive step, but not a savior.  Users also must have regular
blood tests because Cognex increases enzyme levels in the liver.

   "It is not going to help everyone.  It is really intended only for patients
who are mildly to moderately affected," he said.  "It may slow the clinical
manifestations of the disease, help you keep up with it for a while, but at some
point it's going to catch up with you."

   Tulane currently is testing two new drugs hoped to be more potent than Cognex
with less side effects, and Seltzer said the hospital has plans to test a third.

   Because the drugs cannot reverse memory loss, only slow its worsening,
earlydiagnosis enhances their effectiveness.  Presently, doctors rely on
psychological evaluations to diagnose "probable Alzheimer's." Autopsy provides
the only foolproof snapshot of the ravaged brain.

   But a new Harvard study showed an eye drop called tropicamide causes the
pupils in the eyes of Alzheimer's patients to dilate about four times more
readily than those of patients without the brain disease.  The study also
suggested the eye drop may detect the disease before any behavioral symptoms are
present - potentially a major breakthrough because it would give doctors a jump
on treating it with drugs to slow its march.

   Other research focuses on treating psychological disorders that sometimes
accompany Alzheimer's.  About one-third of Alzheimer's patients have a major
clinical depression, and one-fifth experience psychosis, Sakauye said.  Drugs
can often lessen such problems.

   Researchers are closer to a solution, Sakauye said.  "It is not nearly the
mystery it was even 10 years ago.  It's true we don't have answere, but it's not
a mystery anymore."

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1996


                             563 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          November 12, 1994, Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Section E; Page 1

LENGTH: 1075 words

HEADLINE: Age of discovery for Alzheimer's

BYLINE: By Ann Hardie STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   As president, Ronald Reagan oversaw the country's first real push to take on
Alzheimer's disease, which in a short time has yielded ample scientific
discovery and excitement.

   As an 83-year-old with Alzheimer's, Reagan is painfully aware of how much is
yet to be learned about the insidious brain disease that usually renders its
victims helpless years before it kills them.

   "I now begin the journey that will lead me into the sunset of my life,"
Reagan said in a letter last week disclosing that he has Alzheimer's. "I only
wish there was some way I could spare Nancy from this painful experience."

   That isn't likely. The more that is learned about Alzheimer's, the more
awesome its scope appears to be.

   Like cancer, Alzheimer's has different forms, researchers now believe.
Already, they have pinpointed three distinct chromosomes that seem to play a
role in the disease's onset.

   Unfortunately, all forms of Alzheimer's ultimately lead to a common path of
destruction - loss of memory, insight, judgment and physical coordination.

   Alzheimer's already has taken a significant human toll, but in years to come
it will be even more pronounced as the baby boomers enter old age.

   The number of Americans afflicted with the disease could jump from 4 million
today to 14 million by 2030. An estimated 84,000 Georgians are believed to have
Alzheimer's today.

   The disease costs the country about $ 100 billion a year in medical expenses,
lost wages and other indirect costs, according to the National Alzheimer's
Association. That figure is sure to rise.

   "We have no choice but to solve this problem or the numbers are going to
swallow us," said Dr. Zaven Khachaturian, director of Alzheimer's research for
the government's National Institute on Aging.

   Researchers, victims and their families say Reagan's heart-wrenching
disclosure likely will increase the attention and research dollars given to
Alzheimer's, which kills 100,000 Americans a year.

   "I don't wish him the disease, but I was glad for a major figure to come
public," said Nancy Brooks of Sandy Springs, who cared for her mother who died
with Alzheimer's. Now Brooks is caring for her husband John, who has the
disease.

   Research gains/genetics

   Alois Alzheimer discovered the disease that bears his name around the turn of
the century. While performing an autopsy on a woman in her mid-50s, the German
physician noticed plaques that pocked the brain.

   Researchers say the plaques - gradual accumulations of a substance called
amyloid beta-protein found among the nerve cells - kill critical brain cells in
the victims of Alzheimer's.

   The disease got little attention for the next 70 years. Then in 1976, two
scientists found the brains of Alzheimer's victims were deficient in a
neurotransmitter associated with memory and cognition. Nerve cells use
neurotransmitters to send signals to one another.

   Since then, research has progressed at a frantic pace, boosted by federal
government funding, which rose from $ 12.9 million in 1980 to $ 311 million this
year. During the Reagan years, Alzheimer's funding grew from $ 16.7 million in
fiscal year 1981 to nearly $ 130 million in fiscal year 1989.

   Some of the most important breakthroughs in Alzheimer's research have been in
genetics.

   Researchers have pinpointed a gene on chromosome 21 that they believe causes
the disease in a small number of people in their 40s and 50s. They still are
looking for a second gene, on chromosome 14, that may cause a hereditary form of
Alzheimer's that comes on in late middle age.

   But today, most of the excitement surrounds findings reported by Duke
University researchers last year who identified a risk factor for Alzheimer's on
chromosome 19.

   Researchers say people born with a gene called apoE4, on chromosome 19, are
five times more likely to develop Alzheimer's than those without the gene. Those
with two copies of the apoE4 gene have a 90 percent chance of getting
Alzheimer's.

   The research, duplicated in more than 20 laboratories worldwide, "has
practically turned the scientific community on its head," Khachaturian said,
noting it could one day lead to gene therapy techniques.

   The research is critical because it is the first to identify a risk factor
for people who develop Alzheimer's in old age.

   One in 10 Americans 65 years and over are believed to have the disease; half
of those 85 years and older have it.

   Researchers say it is too soon for genetic counseling to identify those
individuals with Alzheimer's genes. But if and when that time comes, many
question the wisdom of genetic testing in the absence of an effective treatment.

   They fear that those with a risk of contracting Alzheimer's could be denied
jobs and insurance coverage.

   "It's going to open a whole can of worms," said Dr. Allan Levey, an
Alzheimer's researcher at the Emory University School of Medicine. "Obviously,
it is going to be more important in the future to come up with therapies to stop
the progression of the disease."

   Scientists are scrambling to come up with drugs to delay the onset of
Alzheimer's.

   Tacrine, approved by the Food and Drug Administration last year, remains the
only drug on the market in this country to treat Alzheimer's. It appears to slow
the disease's progression in some people, but high doses can lead to liver
damage.

   Some people who take it also have side effects, such as nausea, vomiting and
diarrhea.

   Nancy Brooks, 64, believes Tacrine helped her 73-year-old husband John
perform his daily routine. "We felt like it bought us about a year," she said.
In the past month, his condition has begun to deteriorate again. He needs help
dressing. He can't sign his name, drive or handle money.

   Mr. Brooks, a retired civil engineer, can't use his sophisticated woodworking
shop because he can't remember how to use the tools or put things together.

   Researchers say they are closing in on other drugs with fewer side effects.
"Compounds like anti-inflammatories and estrogen - these are some of the ones
that have shown some initial sparks of hope," Khachaturian said.

   In the meantime, as researchers plug along, so do the victims of Alzheimer's
and their families.

   "When there is a breakthrough, there is a lot of attention to that," said
Harriet Cohen, director of the National Alzheimer's Association Atlanta chapter.
"The problem is that while all of the research is really exciting, families are
dealing on a day to day basis with the disease."

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1994


                             564 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    November 11, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 13C, EARNINGS

LENGTH: 144 words

BODY:


   Genetic

   Therapy Inc. ... ... ... ... Ticker ... ... ... Yesterday's

   Gaithersburg ... ... ... ... Symbol ... ... ... Cls. ... Chg.

   ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .GTII . ... ... ... 8 1/4.. ... - 1/8

   Period ended

   9/30 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3rd qtr. . ... ... Year ago ... Chg.

   Revenue ... ... ... ... ... ... $ 3,540 ... ... ... $ 1,481 ... +139.0%

   Net Income . ... ... ... ... ... $ (2,055) . ... ... $ (2,252) ... --

   Primary EPS ... ... ... ... ... $ (0.16) .. ... ... $ (0.20) ... .. --

   ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 mos. ... ... ... Year ago ... Chg.

   Revenue ... ... ... ... ... ... $ 14,385 .. ... ... $ 4,364 . ... +229.6%

   Net Income ... ... ... ... ... $ (2,324) . ... ... $ (6,172) ... --

   Primary EPS ... ... ... ... ... $ (0.18) .. ... ... $ (0.57) . ... --

   Figures in thousands (except per share data.)

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1994


                             565 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     November 11, 1994 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 13B

LENGTH: 919 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC MAP TO BE DRAWN

BYLINE: By JESSICA MATHEWS

BODY:

   The human genome is about to become the most incendiary scientific frontier
since Charles Darwin's heretical insights burst upon Victorian England.

   The mapping of the genome - a federally funded crash effort launched in the
mid-'80s to identify every human gene - is beginning to unleash a torrent of
information for which this society is almost completely unprepared. The
challenges it will pose to personal values, religious beliefs and public policy
will make the current to-do over genetics, race and intelligence seem mild.

   Much of this genetic information will be perilous. It will tell us whether we
are likely to die young of an untreatable disease. It may tell us our personal
endowments of traits that make up what we now grossly call intelligence, perhaps
sparking calls for educational tracking from an early age. It will reveal
predispositions to various forms of mental illness. It will tell us what the
future holds for a prospective spouse and hundreds of characteristics of an
unborn child.

   Pregnancy could become a hideous lottery of deciding whether to hang on to a
particular set of genes or hope that a subsequent fetus might be an improvement.
One recent study found that 11 percent of couples would abort a fetus carrying a
gene for obesity.

   The information will come without the knowledge to understand its
consequences for us individually or collectively, and without the means - new
institutions, laws, regulations and a large corps of genetic counselors - to use
it wisely or even safely.

   With much of the research being carried out in for-profit laboratories, there
is little time to think through a measured response. Each new bit of genetic
information will be rushed - is already being rushed - into the commercial
medical marketplace. Within weeks of the discovery of the colon cancer gene, 10
companies had bought the rights to develop a screening test for it.

   In just this last year, genes have been identified that confer varying
degrees of predisposition to breast, uterine, ovarian and colon cancer, to
osteoporosis and to male homosexuality. The first apparently successful
permanent gene therapy was announced. A Boston doctor began offering
fee-for-service testing of the gene for Huntington's disease, an incurable,
fatal illness. The National Academy of Sciences reported that healthy people are
losing jobs and insurance because of a high-risk condition they or their as-yet
unborn children may have.

   The same study warned that genetic tests will have to achieve near-zero error
rates because the cost of false positives will be so horrendous: lifelong
anxiety, emotional damage and individuals who may needlessly choose not to marry
or have children.

   An accurate result would do the same to an individual warned of an 80 percent
risk who happens to be one of the lucky 20 percent. Even a wholly accurate
prediction of a condition for which nothing can be done would be a curse. Yet
members of high-risk families will find it hard to resist the temptation to be
released from a lifetime of worry.

   Genetic medicine will be layered on top of existing health care, adding
greatly to its cost. The cost of screening all prospective parents for defects
causing cystic fibrosis, for example, is estimated to be $2.2 million per
avoided CF birth. The cost will come down, but hundreds of such tests will soon
be available. As with most medical screening there will be great pressure to
test everyone, not just high-risk groups.

   Screening tests also open up the possibility of using in vitro fertilization
to ensure that a parent does not pass along a dangerous gene (or does bequeath a
highly desirable one). At a minimum cost of $10,000, this option is likely to be
available only to those who can afford to pay for it.  After some years of this,
the gene pools of the rich and the poor would begin to diverge, with improved
genomes at the top and what Robert Wright in the New Republic calls a "genetic
underclass" developing at the bottom.

   Genes are not destiny. Most traits of temperament, intelligence, mental or
emotional stability, and even predisposition to disease, are probably not due to
a single gene but to many, making inheritance highly complex. These
characteristics are also unlikely to derive from either nature or nurture but to
be the result of each acting upon the other.

   The familiar metaphor of the genome as a fixed blueprint is misleading: Our
genetic inheritance is more a set of changeable potentialities that act on the
environment and are acted upon by it. Nonetheless, a nation of diverging gene
pools would be immeasurably more divided along the already troubled fault lines
of class and race than it is today. The medical, legal, ethical and social
implications of the genetic information revolution have not been ignored. Some
of the Human Genome Project funds were set aside for studies that are producing
a stream of scholarly papers. Various advisory and study commissions exist, and
more are being proposed.

   None of this is enough. If last year's health-care debate proved anything, it
is that a conversation among experts, even the development of a consensus among
experts, is not sufficient on issues like these. The public as a whole needs to
grapple with them. If such a broad public conversation on the genetic revolution
does not begin very soon, the mapping of the human genome - a towering
achievement - could quickly become a scientific Pyrrhic victory.

COLUMN: FORUM/ESSAY & COMMENT

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994


                             566 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  November 10, 1994, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: D; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 996 words

HEADLINE: Cancer survivors give scientists a research tool

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS; Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- ""Make the next six months the best of your
life,'' the doctor told Jerilyn Ross.

   It was August, 1979.  Ross, 33, had just learned the grim
news: Cancer cells from a malignant melanoma surgically removed
seven months earlier had migrated to a lymph node under her arm.

   Her doctors were pessimistic.  Melanoma, a skin cancer that often
starts as a black mole, does not respond to drugs or radiation, and
can be deadly once it spreads.

   More than 15 years later -- and about to celebrate her 48th
birthday -- Ross is cancer-free.

   In 1974, Natalie Spingarn, 52, was diagnosed with breast
cancer.  By 1977, it had metastasized to her spine.  By 1979, it was
in her bones.  In 1982, she developed cancer in the other breast.

   ""You have one year -- maybe two,'' her doctor told her in 1982.

   Twelve years later -- and 20 years after her initial
diagnosis -- she is still going strong.

   An estimated 8 million Americans have survived cancer, and at
least 50 percent of those who develop the disease will be cured.  To
be sure, most of these are people in whom the cancer is detected
early.  Stories of spontaneous remission are extremely rare, and
cases of long-term survival after metastasis also are much less
common.

   Nevertheless, they exist.

   The question is why?  Why do some people beat the odds while
other with similar medical profiles succumb?  In recent years,
scientists have begun paying greater attention to the question,
believing that the answers could provide valuable insights into the
body's response to cancer -- and to cancer therapies -- and help
lead to new approaches to fighting the disease.

   ""There are some very interesting clues that come out of
chance observations in medicine, particularly from these long-term
survivors who have beaten the odds,'' said Dr. Harmon Eyre, an
oncologist who is chief medical officer for the American Cancer
Society.  ""They should never be overlooked. ''

   Scientists now are examining closely all of these questions
in trying to design new strategies against a disease that is the
second-leading cause of death among Americans -- after heart
disease -- but probably the one dreaded the most.

   The field ""is exploding,'' said Dr. Steven A.Rosenberg, a
National Cancer Institute researcher who has devoted virtually his
entire career to seeking ways to use and strengthen the body's own
defenses against cancer.  ""I think it's become one of the most
exciting areas in cancer research. ''

   In some of these success stories, the reason for a good
outcome could be as basic as the skill of the medical team -- the
surgeon who operates, the chemotherapist who calculates the doses
of drugs and administers them, or the radiologist who delivers the
radiation.  It could also depend on the destination sites of
metastasized cells -- if they spread to the bones, for example, an
individual can live for many years with cancer; if they end up in
vital organs, however, death can be swift.

   But some of the answers also may be found in the complexities
of the body's genetic makeup or its immune system -- that is, how
the body's defenses respond to the presence of alien cells.  Or in
how the body tolerates chemotherapy; doses can be made strong
enough to kill tumors if the patient can withstand the onslaught of
a drug's often-toxic side effects.

   Lately, a growing emphasis has been placed on trying to hone in
on the various ways in which the body naturally responds to cancer,
and in seeking ways to strengthen those responses.  Most researchers
believe that the body almost always tries to mount some kind of a
response, but the battle often typically favors the cancer.

   Late last month Dr.Michael O'Reilly and Dr. Judah Volkman,
researchers at Children's Hospital in Boston, announced they had
identified a natural hormone-like factor in animals that appears to
check the growth of secondary tumors formed by metastasizing cells,
often the tumors that ultimately cause death.  They have also found
preliminary evidence that this chemical exists in humans.

   The substance, called angiostatin, apparently is a natural
drug produced by large primary growing tumors, such as those in the
breast and colon, that circulates in the bloodstream.  The hormone,
apparently one of the body's defenses against a tumor spreading,
appears to slow down the growth of blood vessels to the secondary
tumors.

   Cancer experts hope that the newly discovered substance -- if
it can be produced through biotechnology -- could be used to help
the body's chances in this battle.

   Rosenberg's early experimental treatments capitalizing on the
body's immune responses to growing cancers involved doses of
Interleukin-2, a chemical produced by the immune system that now
can be mass-produced through genetic engineering, or the use of
lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells, another type of immune
system cell, in conjunction with IL-2.

   Last spring, he and his colleagues at the NCI reported that
they had identified a gene in normal cells that produces a protein
capable of stimulating the body to defend against melanoma.

   This immune response -- also discovered by Rosenberg in 1988
-- involves certain immune cells found in tumors, known as
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, or TIL, that can attack and destroy
tumor cells.

   He said he believes that the gene, known as MART-1, or the
protein itself, could serve as the basis of a melanoma vaccine.

   Such a vaccine could be given to people who already have the
disease, as a therapy, or, eventually, even to those identified to
be at risk as a preventive.

   In yet another approach, researchers are studying genes in
cancer cells to try to pinpoint how and where a cancer will spread.

   Determining the mechanism possibly could yield a way to
predict the future route of the cancer or even -- perhaps through
emerging gene therapy techniques -- to manipulate the spread to
make it less deadly.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1994


                             567 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  November 10, 1994, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A10

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: House chairs get Pa. stamp

BYLINE: Pat Griffith, Post-Gazette Washington Bureau

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Five Pennsylvania congressmen are poised to become chairmen of full House
committees in the new Republican-led Congress, and Sen. Arlen Specter will take
over the reins of the Senate Intelligence Committee.

   The new assignments will put Pennsylvania in the political forefront in the
104th Congress with more than twice as many House committee chairmanships as any
other state and an inside track on all appropriations bills and legislation
dealing with education, transportation and science. The incoming GOP House
chairmen and probable assignments are:

   -- Rep. Joseph McDade, 63, of Scranton, chairman of the House Appropriations
Committee. McDade, first elected in 1962, is under indictment on racketeering
and bribery charges in connection with defense contracts he is believed to have
helped secure. But unlike the Democrats, House Republicans do not have a rule
automatically barring an indicted member from a committee chairmanship.

   -- Rep. William Clinger, 65, of Warren, chairman of the Government Operations
Committee, which ferrets out waste and inefficiencies in government agencies and
reviews operating procedures.

   -- Rep. Bud Shuster, 62, of Bedford, chairman of the Public Works and
Transportation Committee, which has jurisdiction over highways, waterways,
public buildings and facilities, mass transit and the airline industry.

   -- William Goodling, 66, of York, chairman of the Education and Labor
Committee, which deals with education, labor-management issues, Social Security,
welfare and health care.

   -- Rep. Robert Walker, 51, of Lancaster County, chairman of the Science,
Space and Technology Committee, with jurisdiction over science and environmental
issues and NASA.

   The House GOP majority meets Dec. 5, after a lame-duck session of the
outgoing Congress on the world trade agreement known as GATT, to organize
committees for the new Congress. But new chairmen won't take over until the
104th Congress convenes in January.

   As McDade rises to the top of Appropriations committee, the panel's most
powerful subcommittee chairman, Rep. John Murtha, D-Johnstown, drops a notch to
be ranking minority member on the defense subcommittee, a spot long held by
McDade. McDade said yesterday he intends to be ''cut spending more than we have
so far'' with the exception of the defense budget. But he also said Pennsylvania
has ''an enormous number of needs, and we'll try to make sure they get a good
hearing in Washington.''

   Goodling said he intended to review federal programs and regulations
affecting education and the workplace with an eye to shifting control to local
school districts, employers and workers.

   In the Senate, Specter's first order of business in the Intelligence panel,
he said yesterday, will be hearings on the nuclear arms accord with North Korea.
He disagrees with the White House position that the accord is not equivalent to
a treaty, which requires Senate approval.

   Specter is also in line to chair the Senate Appropriations subcommittee,
which deals with education, health and human services and labor. He hopes to
direct increased funding to medical research, particularly in gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1994


                             568 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                   November 9, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 214 words

HEADLINE: PERSONAL VACCINE TESTED IN FIGHT AGAINST CANCER

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

    British cancer researchers announced Tuesday they were starting tests on a
possible tailor-made cancer vaccine, using the patient's DNA programmed to
stimulate the body into protecting itself.

   A vaccine against cancer is one of the most eagerly sought goals of medical
science, and trials are under way in Europe and the United States on several
possible vaccines.

   But scientists at the Cancer Research Campaign said theirs was the first to
use DNA, which is the basic genetic building block of all life, to create a
personalized vaccine.

   "This is an important trial of a new method for the treatment of lymphoma
(cancer affecting the lymphatic system)," Dr. Robert Hawkins, a researcher with
the Cancer Research Campaign, said in a statement. "It is also a form of gene
therapy which promises to be an exciting new area for the development of new
therapies for cancer in general."

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1994


                             569 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     November 8, 1994 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 423 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS HOPE TO TRY GENE THERAPY AS CURE FOR RARE GAUCHER DISEASE

BYLINE: Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Doctors at an international Gaucher disease conference in Philadelphia
yesterday announced that they are hoping soon to attempt gene therapy on
patients.

   Gaucher disease is a rare genetic disorder, affecting about 15,000 people in
the United States and about 40 people in the Philadelphia area. Patients suffer
from an enlarged liver or spleen, anemia, fatigue, and orthopedic complications.

   "In my case, thank God, I'm able to function," said Stamos Ganiaris, 66, a
patient at the conference from Wilmington. He crossed his fingers for good luck,
and said: "You have good days and bad days . . . (but) you have a crisis, an
injury, and the bone does not heal."

   Until now, the disease has been controlled by infusing patients with an
enzyme that they are deficient in. The enzyme halts and reverses the disease's
debilitating symptoms, but is expensive and needs to be taken for a lifetime.

   At the Center City conference, doctors said they had successfully introduced
healthy genes into mice and had succeeded in getting the mice to produce the
enzyme in large quantities on their own.

   "The real question is: Can we efficiently do it (in humans)?" said John A.
Barranger, professor of human genetics at the University of Pittsburgh and a
leading Gaucher disease researcher. "Can we express the gene so it will make
enough of the enzyme for long enough, to make a clinical difference?"

   Barranger said he was hopeful the Food and Drug Administration would give
scientists permission to launch the first human trials of the gene-therapy
process in a matter of weeks. Five Gaucher disease patients have been identified
for the trial already, he said, including one from New Jersey and one from
Western Pennsylvania.

   The patients will receive up to four infusions of the gene that produces the
enzyme. It will be introduced into their bone marrow. Barranger said scientists
would know by the end of a year if the result was as dramatic as the animal
trials had indicated it might be: a cure for the disease.

   "It's very disabling, sometimes more severe," Ganiaris said of his disease,
as he listened to Barranger talk about the current advances in treating the
disease. "There's a lot of fatigue.

   "I am planning a hip replacement, but my knees are showing signs of
weaknesses now," he said.

   The disease is most prevalent among Eastern European Jews, with about one in
10 people in that group carrying the gene, and about one in 400 affected by the
disease. It is about 100 times less frequent in other ethnic groups.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             570 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    November 7, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 1733 words

HEADLINE: The Gene Therapy Gamble;
2 Md. Research Firms Bet Big in a Field Where Risks, Rewards Can Be Huge

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Winter's pest, the common cold, may have a good side after all. Cold germs
and other viruses could play a critical role in combating AIDs, cystic fibrosis
and many cancers.

   Scientists on the cutting edge of biotechnology are converting viruses into
molecular mail trucks that deliver healthy genes to cells to replace faulty or
missing genes. If successful, these genetically engineered drugs initially are
expected to offer breakthrough treatments for many acquired or inherited
sickness. Ultimately, they may offer cures.

   Two Washington area companies, GenVec Inc. of Rockville and Genetic Therapy
Inc. of Gaithersburg, are among the leaders in a field of about two dozen
companies that are betting millions of dollars on gene therapy, as the
technology is called.

   With funding from major drug companies and from investors who specialize in
start-up firms, and through joint research ventures with the National Institutes
of Health and other nonprofit health organizations, these two companies hope to
win a slice of a market that by some estimates could reach $ 2 billion in five
years.

   Brain cancer treatment alone could generate revenue of $ 300 million a year,
said Jeffrey R. Swarz, biotech analyst at the investment banking firm CS First
Boston.

   "These firms have the potential to generate billions of dollars in revenues
over the next 10 years and substantial profits for investors," he told the House
Committee on Science, Space and Technology at a hearing in September.

   But the risks of basic science and the marketplace intersect at these
companies, and they face a long, problem-riddled road with uncertain payoffs. In
fact, getting investors to appreciate the risk along with the promise of gene
therapy is nearly as tricky for biotech executives as the science they are
pioneering.

   "It's a very fine line to walk," said Genetic Therapy Vice President Stephen
G. Marcus, a cancer doctor by training who is in charge of the company's
clinical and regulatory affairs.

   The Biotechnology Industry Organization, the industry's lobby group, put it
this way at a recent congressional hearing: "Human genetics is in the midst of a
dramatic advancement. ... [but] we still have a long way to go before we can
claim success for gene therapy."

   A subset of biotechnology, gene therapy is the insertion of DNA, or
deoxyribonucleic acid, into cells to replace damaged or missing DNA. DNA is the
chemical building block of genes, which instruct a living organism's tissue on
everything from how to become a heart to how to fight cancer.

   Biotechnology is the manipulation of a cell's genetic material to get the
cell to produce a desired substance. Traditional biotech has used these altered
cells as mini-manufacturing plants outside the body. The altered cells churn out
vast quantities of substances, such as human insulin, that doctors then collect
and inject into patients whose own cells fail to produce that substance.

   Gene therapy in effect creates the mini-factories in the body.

   First scientists copy healthy genes -- that's the easy part. Then, viruses
that have been genetically altered so that they are harmless transport the genes
to specific cells and insert them. This is the hard part.

   Target cells sometimes are collected from a patient, given a new gene and
then reinjected. But that risks contaminating the cells outside the body.

   Another method is to inject the new gene and its delivery system into the
site of the faulty cells. Farther down the road, scientists hope to be able to
inject a gene therapy drug into the bloodstream, just like a flu shot, and have
the delivery virus find its way to the right spot.

   Viruses are logical delivery candidates because they are natural saboteurs.
Essentially bundles of DNA, viruses work by tricking cells into ingesting them.
Once inside a cell, a virus deposits its DNA, or set of instructions, which then
changes what the cell makes.

   Gene therapists alter viral DNA so the germ can't reproduce itself. And they
add to its DNA the gene they want delivered. But they preserve the virus's
ability to infiltrate a cell -- the very trait that makes these germs speedy
microscopic messengers.

   But even if scientists can get a new gene to the right spot, they must ensure
that the virus inserting the DNA doesn't dislodge existing, healthy genes. And
the human body has proved very adept at destroying inserted DNA, so it's hard to
make new genes permanent residents.

   What's more, even if a virus gets to the right address and performs
correctly, the treatment could be threatened by the patient's immune system. A
virus may get through once, but a body's defense against foreign invasion will
remember it and mobilize to obliterate it the second time it appears.

   So scientists at companies like GenVec and Genetic Therapy are working on
"stealth" delivery systems that change face with each treatment.

   Scientists also find it hard to ensure that genes turn on and off at desired
intervals so that just enough of a desired substance is made. Too little or too
much could make a patient even sicker.

   These are some of the big hurdles that GenVec and Genetic Therapy are working
to overcome and that could prove insurmountable, at least in the near term.

   Genetic Therapy was started in 1986, largely with funding from the venture
capital firm of HealthCare Investment Corp., to try to develop products from
groundbreaking research at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) by W. French
Anderson.

   Anderson, one of the lead doctors on the first human gene therapy experiment
in 1990, has an exclusive collaborative agreement with the company that
continued when he moved from Washington in late 1992 to establish a research
laboratory at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles.

   The company now is conducting gene therapy trials on humans suffering from
cystic fibrosis and brain cancer, and plans to begin human testing soon of a
gene therapy for a metabolic disorder called Gaucher Disease, whose victims can
suffer organ damage because they lack an enzyme to break down fats.

   A new gene delivered to lung cells causes them to produce a protein that
cystic fibrosis patients lack and that prevents the lung cavity from filling up
with a thick fluid. A gene inserted in tumor cells of patients with brain cancer
shows promise of making the tumor more susceptible to chemotherapy, which would
allow for lowering the dosage and reducing side effects.

   The company had no trouble going public in July 1991, when it raised $ 13.5
million, and it has had three public offerings since, though its stock, like the
rest of the publicly traded biotech industry, has taken a beating.

   It has an agreement with Human Genome Sciences Inc. of Rockville, also
created by HealthCare Investment, to describe and catalogue the human genetic
code. Simply put, HGS finds the genes, and Genetic Therapy finds a way to
delivery them.

   And it has received $ 6.5 million from drug giant Sandoz Pharma Ltd., which
also has agreed in exchange for marketing rights to fund half the cost of
Genetic Therapy's brain tumor project.

   M. James Barrett, chairman and chief executive of Genetic Therapy, waves off
with generalities any attempt to pinpoint a date when the company might get a
product out the door, saying such predictions are bound to lead to
disappointment on Wall Street. At best, company officials say, it's one or two
years off. In the meantime, the company has about $ 70 million in cash, enough
to keep it going for several years, chief financial officer said Marc R.
Schneebaum said.

   GenVec was created in January 1993 after an executive from biotech behemoth
Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco and a venture capitalist started talking
about gene therapy over a beer during a biotech conference, said Thomas W.
D'Alonzo, GenVec's president and chief executive.

   The two convinced Ronald G. Crystal, a doctor who at the time had spent 18
years at NIH leading research on lung disease, to found GenVec and become its
chief scientific adviser.

   Crystal, who left NIH last year to become professor of medicine and chief of
the division of pulmonary and critical care medicine at the New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, was instrumental in helping Genentech develop
its genetically engineered cystic fibrosis drug, which came to market earlier
this year.

   GenVec's initial seed money was about $ 9 million. Genentech won't disclose
how much of that it provided, though it has said it has promised GenVec up to $
17 million over several years.

   In exchange, Genentech gets marketing rights to any cystic fibrosis product
GenVec develops. Genentech believes gene therapy could be the next-generation
therapy for CF patients.

   GenVec has been ready to go public for months, but the slump in biotech
stocks has prevented it from doing so, D'Alonzo said. He said he hopes the
public offering can take place within 24 months. In the meantime the company
will get a $ 15 million cash infusion by January from the original investors,
plus some new ones.

   GenVec has a cystic fibrosis drug in clinical trials, and it also is
targeting brain tumors, breast cancer and other cancers. Its research also has
potential application for the treatment of AIDS and other diseases caused by
viruses.

   GenVec doesn't have an exclusive arrangement with one company or research
group that is identifying genes, but instead is using genes that are in the
public domain -- that is, they have been identified but are not patented by
anyone -- or is working with various research and academic institutions that
are, like HGS, trying to decipher the human gene code.

   In addition to managing the expectations of investors, executives at these
and other genetic therapy companies must keep in mind changes in the health care
arena, where buyers are insisting that drugs have a proven economic benefit as
well as a therapeutic value.

   They also must address ethical concerns about mankind's ability to alter the
hereditary basis of our existence. The companies emphasize, for example, that
they are not changing genes in cells that pass on hereditary information to
children.

   And at the end of the day these executives face the same reality that has
often humbled large drug companies: Scientists may spend 10 years and millions
of dollars developing a drug only to see it fail at the last minute in clinical
trials.  ?


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, RESEARCH ASSISTANT SHENG CHANG IN THE LAB AT GENVEC IN
ROCKVILLE. GENVEC HAS A CYSTIC FIBROSIS DRUG IN CLINICAL TRIALS AND ALSO IS
TARGETING CANCERS. JOHN ANDERSON; PHOTO, MICHAEL WILLIAMSON; ILLUSTRATION, TWP;
CHART; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1994


                             571 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    November 6, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; PAGE C7

LENGTH: 923 words

HEADLINE: Ready for the Genome?

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Jessica Mathews

BODY:

   The human genome is about to become the most incendiary scientific frontier
since Charles Darwin's heretical insights burst upon Victorian England.

   The mapping of the genome -- a federally funded crash effort launched in the
mid-'80s to identify every human gene -- is beginning to unleash a torrent of
information for which this society is almost completely unprepared. The
challenges it will pose to personal values, religious beliefs and public policy
will make the current to-do over genetics, race and intelligence seem mild.

   Much of this genetic information will be perilous. It will tell us whether we
are likely to die young of an untreatable disease. It may tell us our personal
endowments of traits that make up what we now grossly call intelligence, perhaps
sparking calls for educational tracking from an early age. It will reveal
predispositions to various forms of mental illness. It will tell us what the
future holds for a prospective spouse and hundreds of characteristics of an
unborn child. Pregnancy could become a hideous lottery of deciding whether to
hang on to a particular set of genes or hope that a subsequent fetus might be an
improvement. One recent study found that 11 percent of couples would abort a
fetus carrying a gene for obesity.

   The information will come without the knowledge to understand its
consequences for us individually or collectively, and without the means -- new
institutions, laws, regulations and a large corps of genetic counselors -- to
use it wisely or even safely.

   With much of the research being carried out in for-profit laboratories, there
is little time to think through a measured response. Each new bit of genetic
information will be rushed -- is already being rushed -- into the commercial
medical marketplace. Within weeks of the discovery of the colon cancer gene, 10
companies had bought the rights to develop a screening test for it.

   In just this last year, genes have been identified that confer varying
degrees of predisposition to breast, uterine, ovarian and colon cancer, to
osteoporosis and to male homosexuality. The first apparently successful
permanent gene therapy was announced. A Boston doctor began offering
fee-for-service testing of the gene for Huntington's disease, an incurable,
fatal illness. The National Academy of Sciences reported that healthy people are
losing jobs and insurance because of a high-risk condition they or their as-yet
unborn children may have.

   The same study warned that genetic tests will have to achieve near zero error
rates because the cost of false positives will be so horrendous: lifelong
anxiety, emotional damage and individuals who may needlessly choose not to marry
or have children. An accurate result would do the same to an individual warned
of an 80 percent risk who happens to be one of the lucky 20 percent. Even a
wholly accurate prediction of a condition for which nothing can be done would be
a curse. Yet members of high-risk families will find it hard to resist the
temptation to be released from a lifetime of worry.

   Genetic medicine will be layered on top of existing health care, adding
greatly to its cost. The cost of screening all prospective parents for defects
causing cystic fibrosis, for example, is estimated to be $ 2.2 million per
avoided CF birth. The cost will come down, but hundreds of such tests will soon
be available. As with most medical screening there will be great pressure to
test everyone, not just high-risk groups.

   Screening tests also open up the possibility of using in vitro fertilization
to ensure that a parent does not pass along a dangerous gene (or does bequeath a
highly desirable one). At a minimum cost of $ 10,000, this option is only likely
to be available to those who can afford to pay for it. After some years of this,
the gene pools of the rich and the poor would begin to diverge, with improved
genomes at the top and what Robert Wright in the New Republic calls a "genetic
underclass" developing at the bottom.

   Genes are not destiny. Most traits of temperament, intelligence, mental or
emotional stability, and even predisposition to disease, are probably not due to
a single gene but to many, making inheritance highly complex. These
characteristics are also unlikely to derive from either nature or nurture but to
be the result of each acting upon the other. The familiar metaphor of the genome
as a fixed blueprint is misleading: Our genetic inheritance is more a set of
changeable potentialities that act on the environment and are acted upon by it.
Nonetheless, a nation of diverging gene pools would be immeasurably more divided
along the already troubled fault lines of class and race than it is today.

   The medical, legal, ethical and social implications of the genetic
information revolution have not been ignored. Some of the Human Genome Project
funds were set aside for studies that are producing a stream of scholarly
papers. Various advisory and study commissions exist, and more are being
proposed.

   None of this is enough. If last year's health care debate proved anything, it
is that a conversation among experts, even the development of a consensus among
experts, is not sufficient on issues like these. The public as a whole needs to
grapple with them. If such a broad public conversation on the genetic revolution
does not begin very soon, the mapping of the human genome -- a towering
achievement -- could quickly become a scientific Pyrrhic victory.


   The writer is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.


LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1994


                             572 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           November 5, 1994, Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Section E; Page 8

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Technique devised to alter monkeys genetically

BODY:

   ASSOCIATED PRESS

   Madison, Wis. - Researchers have isolated cells from monkey embryos that can
be used to regenerate tissue and create genetically altered monkeys with
disorders that mimic human diseases.

   The discovery is an important step toward human gene therapy in which any
kind of tissue, such as blood or bone cells, would be grown in the laboratory to
replace diseased tissue, said Barbara Knowles, a geneticist at the Jackson
Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine.

   Knowles called the technique a "genetic Band-Aid."

   However, it could raise a thicket of ethical questions because it involves
genetic manipulations that can be passed on from one generation to the next.
Some animal rights groups object to genetic manipulation of animals, while
others question who should make decisions about genetically altering human
beings.

   Authorities said human gene therapy is not likely be attempted for years.
Similar work has been done in mice for a decade.

   James Thomson and John Hearn of the University of Wisconsin primate center
isolated embryonic stem cells from rhesus monkeys and marmosets. The critical
feature of the cells is that they are the parent cells of the many tissues in
the body, and they can be induced to grow into any kind of tissue, Hearn said in
an interview this week.

   The government-supported center has applied for a patent on the isolating
technique.

   Researchers must closely study the characteristics of the cells before they
can attempt to alter them genetically to produce monkeys with AIDS, multiple
sclerosis, Lou Gehrig's disease and other mutations, Hearn said.

   The first "transgenic" monkeys are two to four years away, said Richard
Dukelow of the National Institutes of Health, who directs the government's
network of primate centers.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1994


                             573 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    November 4, 1994, Friday, CARROL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 21A

LENGTH: 219 words

HEADLINE: Step taken toward lab-grown tissue

SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY:


   MADISON, Wis. -- Scientists working with monkeys have taken a crucial step
toward a new kind of gene therapy in which tissue such as bone and blood could
one day be grown in the laboratory and used to cure diseases in humans.

   The researchers isolated for the first time embryonic monkey cells known as
stem cells.

   In two to four years, the cells could lead to the creation of genetically
altered monkeys with illnesses that mimic human diseases such as AIDS and
multiple sclerosis. That could advance the study of those diseases.

   In the longer term, scientists might be able to isolate stem cells in humans
and grow those cells in the laboratory as replacements for diseased tissue.
Similar work has been done in mice for a decade.

   However, such uses could raise difficult ethical questions from animal rights
groups that object to genetic manipulation of animals and from those who
question who should make decisions about genetically altering human beings.

   James Thomson and John Hearn of the University of Wisconsin primate center
isolated stem cells from rhesus monkeys and marmosets. The center has applied
for a patent on the technique.

   The critical feature of the cells is that they are parent cells of all tissue
in the body and can be induced to grow into different kinds of tissue.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1994


                             574 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    November 4, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 436 words

HEADLINE: Genetically altered monkeys can mimic human diseases, researchers find

SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY:


   MADISON, Wis. -- Researchers have isolated cells from monkey embryos that can
be used to regenerate tissue and create genetically altered monkeys with
disorders that mimic human diseases.

   The discovery is an important step toward human gene therapy in which any
kind of tissue, such as blood or bone cells, would be grown in the laboratory to
replace diseased tissue, said Barbara Knowles, a geneticist at the Jackson
Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine.

   However, the technique could raise ethical questions because it involves
genetic manipulations that can be passed on from one generation to the next.
Some animal rights groups object to genetic manipulation of animals, while
others question who should make decisions about genetically altering human
beings.

   Authorities said human gene therapy is not likely to be attempted for years.
Similar work has been done in mice for a decade.

   James Thomson and John Hearn, of the University of Wisconsin primate center,
isolated embryonic stem cells from rhesus monkeys and marmosets. The critical
feature of the cells is that they are the parent cells of the many tissues in
the body, and they can be induced to grow into any kind of tissue, Dr. Hearn
said yesterday.

   The government-supported center has applied for a patent on the isolating
technique.

   Researchers must closely study the characteristics of the cells before they
can attempt to genetically alter them to produce monkeys with AIDS, multiple
sclerosis, Lou Gehrig's disease and other mutations, Dr. Hearn said.

   The first "transgenic" monkeys are two to four years away, said Richard
Dukelow of the National Institutes of Health, who directs the government's
network of primate centers.

   "The possibility of transgenic work in primates would be tremendous," said
Jeffrey Roberts, assistant director of the primate center at the University of
California, Davis.

   One use could be in the study of animals' immune system responses, which is
important in the development of vaccines.

   Rudolf Jaenisch of the Whitehead Institute and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology said that some human diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, can be
produced in mice. But because the physiology of mice is so different, the mice
don't come down with the same symptoms as humans.

   With monkeys, "you would have a model which is very close to the human," he
said.

   A National Institutes of Health panel formed to consider the ethics of human
gene therapy said recently that experiments with human stem cells should be
permitted. The panel deemed some other areas of human genetic research
unethical.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1994


                             575 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     November 4, 1994 Friday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 040

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFCASE

BODY:

   GENZYME: Genzyme Corp. yesterday announced agreement with the University of
Pittsburgh for joint research aimed at finding gene therapy for Gaucher disease.
Cambridge-based Genzyme markets the only two therapies effective against Gaucher
disease, treatments that must be repeated every other week. Gene therapy holds
the promise of a longer-lasting correction of the defect that causes the
disease.

   TASC CONTRACT: TASC (The Analytic Sciences Corporation) of Reading has won a
five-year, $ 20 million contract from the Air Force Development Test Center at
Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., to support advanced weapons testing. TASC has
supported this joint U.S. Army, U.S. Air Force program, known as Project CHICKEN
LITTLE, continuously since 1984. Under the project, new U.S. and allied
submunitions and missile seekers are captively carried on test aircraft. TASC is
a wholly-owned subsidiary of Primark Corp.

   LICENSE SUSPENDED: A Marlboro pharmaceutical company will reopen today
following a two-week shutdown imposed by the state. Insta-Care Pharmacy Services
closed Oct. 21 after the Mass. Board of Registration in Pharmacy ordered a
one-year suspension of its license. Only two weeks of the suspension, however,
were actually imposed. The state board found the company violated numerous
federal and state pharmacy laws, including dispensing narcotics without signed
prescriptions from physicians. Insta-Care services nursing home patients in
Mass. and Conn. The firm also gave up its right to renew the license of its
wholesale operation, Central Wholesale, also of Marlboro.

   COPLEY UPDATE: Copley Pharmaceutical, Inc. of Canton yesterday updated
investors on its third quarter ending October 31, 1994. The company said it will
take a non-recurring pre-tax charge of approximately $ 2 million for expenses
associated with its recalled albuterol sulfate 0.5 percent solution, primarily
for higher-than-expected returns of this product. The company's pre-charge
earnings are not expected to exceed the 28 cents per share, due to a less
favorable product mix than in prior quarters, industry-wide pricing pressures,
and delays in launching certain new products for which Copley has received ANDA
approval.

   RAYTHEON DEAL: Raytheon Engineers & Constructors said yesterday its Asia
Badger Inc. subsidiary has been awarded a $ 30 million contract to provide
project and construction management services for The Aromatics (Thailand)
Company, Limited's new aromatics and reformer project at the Map Ta Phut
industrial estate in Thailand.

   SITE SELECTED: Bose Corp. of Framingham has chosen Columbia, S.C., as the
site for a new production and distribution plant to service the Southeast. The $
20 million facility will employ around 200 once it opens in 1996. The audio
products manufacturer currently has production facilities in Westboro,
Hillsdale, Mich., and Yuma, Ariz.

   HELLO, KMART: The Braintree planning board has OK'd a proposal to build a K
mart shopping center on Route 3 at the site of the former Grossman's
headquarters, which was put up for sale last year. The developers plan to invest
$ 40 million to buy the 34-acre site. The new shopping center, which may also
include a supermarket, will be called "The Plaza at Braintree" and would create
about 400 jobs.

LOAD-DATE: November 05, 1994


                             576 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            November 4, 1994 Friday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 542 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFCASE

BODY:

   GENZYME: Genzyme Corp. yesterday announced agreement with the University of
Pittsburgh for joint research aimed at finding gene therapy for Gaucher disease.
Cambridge-based Genzyme markets the only two therapies effective against Gaucher
disease, treatments that must be repeated every other week. Gene therapy holds
the promise of a longer-lasting correction of the defect that causes the
disease.

   TASC CONTRACT: TASC (The Analytic Sciences Corporation) of Reading has won a
five-year, $20 million contract from the Air Force Development Test Center at
Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., to support advanced weapons testing. TASC has
supported this joint U.S. Army, U.S. Air Force program, known as Project CHICKEN
LITTLE, continuously since 1984. Under the project, new U.S. and allied
submunitions and missile seekers are captively carried on test aircraft. TASC is
a wholly-owned subsidiary of Primark Corp.

   LICENSE SUSPENDED: A Marlboro pharmaceutical company will reopen today
following a two-week shutdown imposed by the state. Insta-Care Pharmacy Services
closed Oct. 21 after the Mass. Board of Registration in Pharmacy ordered a
one-year suspension of its license. Only two weeks of the suspension, however,
were actually imposed. The state board found the company violated numerous
federal and state pharmacy laws, including dispensing narcotics without signed
prescriptions from physicians. Insta-Care services nursing home patients in
Mass. and Conn. The firm also gave up its right to renew the license of its
wholesale operation, Central Wholesale, also of Marlboro.

   COPLEY UPDATE: Copley Pharmaceutical, Inc. of Canton yesterday updated
investors on its third quarter ending October 31, 1994. The company said it will
take a non-recurring pre-tax charge of approximately $2 million for expenses
associated with its recalled albuterol sulfate 0.5 percent solution, primarily
for higher-than-expected returns of this product. The company's pre-charge
earnings are not expected to exceed the 28 cents per share, due to a less
favorable product mix than in prior quarters, industry-wide pricing pressures,
and delays in launching certain new products for which Copley has received ANDA
approval.

   RAYTHEON DEAL: Raytheon Engineers & Constructors said yesterday its Asia
Badger Inc. subsidiary has been awarded a $30 million contract to provide
project and construction management services for The Aromatics (Thailand)
Company, Limited's new aromatics and reformer project at the Map Ta Phut
industrial estate in Thailand.

   SITE SELECTED: Bose Corp. of Framingham has chosen Columbia, S.C., as the
site for a new production and distribution plant to service the Southeast. The
$20 million facility will employ around 200 once it opens in 1996. The audio
products manufacturer currently has production facilities in Westboro,
Hillsdale, Mich., and Yuma, Ariz.

   HELLO, KMART: The Braintree planning board has OK'd a proposal to build a K
mart shopping center on Route 3 at the site of the former Grossman's
headquarters, which was put up for sale last year. The developers plan to invest
$40 million to buy the 34-acre site. The new shopping center, which may also
include a supermarket, will be called "The Plaza at Braintree" and would create
about 400 jobs.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             577 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              November 4, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Study Aims To Duplicate Diseases In Monkeys

BYLINE: By Paul Raeburn

DATELINE: MADISON, Wis.

BODY:

   Scientists working with monkeys have taken a crucial step toward a new kind
of gene therapy in which tissue such as bone and blood could be grown in the
laboratory and used to cure human diseases.

   The researchers isolated for the first time embryonic monkey cells known as
stem cells.

   In two to four years, the cells could lead to the creation of genetically
altered monkeys with illnesses that mimic human diseases such as AIDS and
multiple sclerosis. That could advance the study of those diseases.

   Scientists may be able to isolate stem cells in humans and grow those cells
as replacements for diseased tissue. Similar work has been done in mice for a
decade.

   Barbara Knowles, a geneticist at the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine,
called such a therapy a "genetic Band-Aid."

   However, such uses could raise difficult ethical questions from animal rights
groups that object to genetic manipulation of animals, and from those who
question who should make decisions about genetically altering human beings.

   James Thomson and John Hearn of the University of Wisconsin primate center
isolated stem cells from rhesus monkeys and marmosets, Hearn said.

   The critical feature of the cells is that they are parent cells of all tissue
in the body and can be induced to grow into different kinds of tissue, Hearn
said.

   Researchers must closely study the characteristics of the cells before they
can attempt to genetically alter them to produce monkeys with AIDS, MS, Lou
Gehrig's disease and other mutations, he said.

   The production of the first so-called transgenic monkeys is at least two to
four years away, said Richard Dukelow of the National Institutes of Health, who
directs the government primate centers.

   One use could be the study of the animals' immune system responses, which is
important in the development of vaccines.

   Some human diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, can be produced in mice, but
because the physiology of mice is so different, the mice don't come down with
the same symptoms as humans.

   "Now you would have a model which is very close to the human," Rudolf
Jaenisch, of the Whitehead Institute and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, said.

GRAPHIC: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1994


                             578 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    November 4, 1994, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 471 words

HEADLINE: Monkey research a big step toward gene therapy

BYLINE: Paul Raeburn, The Associated Press

DATELINE: MADISON, Wis.

BODY:


   Scientists working with monkeys have taken a crucial step toward a new kind
of gene therapy in which tissue such as bone and blood could one day be grown in
the laboratory and used to cure diseases in humans.

   The researchers isolated for the first time embryonic monkey cells known as
stem cells.

   In two to four years, the cells could lead to the creation of genetically
altered monkeys with illnesses that mimic human diseases such as AIDS and
multiple sclerosis. That could advance the study of those diseases.

   In the longer term, scientists may be able to isolate stem cells in humans
and grow those cells in the laboratory as replacements for diseased tissue.
Similar work has been done in mice for a decade.

   Barbara Knowles, a geneticist at the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine,
called such a therapy a ''genetic Band-aid.''

   However, such uses could raise difficult ethical questions from animal rights
groups that object to genetic manipulation of animals, and from those who
question who should make decisions about genetically altering humans.

   James Thomson and John Hearn of the University of Wisconsin primate center
isolated stem cells from rhesus monkeys and marmosets, Hearn said yesterday. The
government-supported center has applied for a patent on the isolating technique.

   The critical feature of the cells is that they are parent cells of all tissue
in the body and can be induced to grow into different kinds of tissue, Hearn
said.

   Researchers must closely study the characteristics of the cells before they
can attempt to genetically alter them to produce monkeys with AIDS, MS, Lou
Gehrig's disease and other mutations, he said.

   The production of the first so-called transgenic monkeys is at least two to
four years away, said Richard Dukelow of the National Institutes of Health, who
directs the government primate centers.

   ''The possibility of transgenic work in primates would be tremendous,'' said
Jeffrey Roberts, assistant director of the primate center at the University of
California at Davis.

   One use could be the study of the animals' immune system responses, which is
important in the development of vaccines.

   Some human diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, can be produced in mice, but
because the physiology of mice is so different, the mice don't come down with
the same symptoms as humans.

   Experiments with monkeys could remedy that difficulty, said Rudolf Jaenisch
of the Whitehead Institute and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   ''Now you would have a model which is very close to the human,'' he said.

   A National Institutes of Health panel formed to consider the ethics of human
gene therapy said recently that experiments with human stem cells should be
permitted. The panel deemed some other areas of human genetic research
unethical.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1994


                             579 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      November 4, 1994 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH ON MONKEYS ADVANCES GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By PAUL RAEBURN; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: MADISON, WIS.

BODY:

   Scientists working with monkeys have taken a crucial step toward a new kind
of gene therapy in which tissue such as bone and blood could one day be grown in
the laboratory and used to cure diseases in humans.

   The researchers isolated for the first time embryonic monkey cells known as
stem cells.

   In two to four years, the cells could lead to the creation of genetically
altered monkeys with illnesses that mimic human diseases such as AIDS and
multiple sclerosis. That could advance the study of those diseases.

   In the longer term, scientists may be able to isolate stem cells in humans
and grow those cells in the laboratory as replacements for diseased tissue.

   Similar work has been done in mice for a decade.

   Barbara Knowles, a geneticist at the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine,
called such a therapy a "genetic Band-Aid."

   However, such uses could raise difficult ethical questions from animal rights
groups that object to genetic manipulation of animals, and from those who
question who should make decisions about genetically altering human beings.

   James Thomson and John Hearn of the University of Wisconsin primate center
isolated stem cells from rhesus monkeys and marmosets, Hearn said yesterday.

   The government-supported center has applied for a patent on the isolating
technique.

   The critical feature of the cells is that they are parent cells of all tissue
in the body and can be induced to grow into different kinds of tissue, Hearn
said.

   Researchers must closely study the characteristics of the cells before they
can attempt to genetically alter them to produce monkeys with AIDS, MS, Lou
Gehrig's disease and other mutations, he said.

   The production of the first so-called transgenic monkeys is at least two to
four years away, said Richard Dukelow of the National Institutes of Health, who
directs the government primate centers.

   "The possibility of transgenic work in primates would be tremendous," said
Jeffrey Roberts, assistant director of the primate center at the University of
California at Davis.

   One use could be the study of the animals' immune system responses, which is
important in the development of vaccines.

   Some human diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, can be produced in mice, but
because the physiology of mice is so different, the mice don't come down with
the same symptoms as humans.

   Experiments with monkeys could remedy that difficulty, said Rudolf Jaenisch
of the Whitehead Institute and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   "Now you would have a model which is very close to the human," he said.

   A National Institutes of Health panel formed to consider the ethics of human
gene therapy said recently that experiments with human stem cells should be
permitted.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1994


                             580 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         November 4, 1994 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 472 words

HEADLINE: NEW CELL THERAPY MAY LEAD TO 'GENETIC BAND-AIDS'

BYLINE: By PAUL RAEBURN AP science editor

DATELINE: MADISON, WIS.

BODY:

   Scientists working with monkeys have taken a crucial step toward a new kind
of gene therapy in which tissue such as bone and blood could one day be grown in
the laboratory and used to cure diseases in humans.

   The researchers isolated for the first time embryonic monkey cells known as
stem cells.

   In two to four years, the cells could lead to the creation of genetically
altered monkeys with illnesses that mimic human diseases such as AIDS and
multiple sclerosis. That could advance the study of those diseases.

   In the longer term, scientists may be able to isolate stem cells in humans
and grow those cells in the laboratory as replacements for diseased tissue.
Similar work has been done in mice for a decade.

   Barbara Knowles, a geneticist at the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine,
said such a therapy is a "genetic Band-aid."

   However, such uses could raise difficult ethical questions from animal rights
groups that object to genetic manipulation of animals, and from those who
question who should make decisions about genetically altering human beings.

   James Thomson and John Hearn of the University of Wisconsin primate center
isolated stem cells from rhesus monkeys and marmosets, Hearn said Thursday.  The
government-supported center has applied for a patent on the isolating technique.

   The critical feature of the cells is that they are parent cells of all tissue
in the body and can be induced to grow into different kinds of tissue, Hearn
said.

   Researchers must closely study the characteristics of the cells before they
can attempt to genetically alter them to produce monkeys with AIDS, MS, Lou
Gehrig's disease and other mutations, he said.

   The production of the first so-called transgenic monkeys is at least two to
four years away, said Richard Dukelow of the National Institutes of Health, who
directs the government primate centers.

   "The possibility of transgenic work in primates would be tremendous," said
Jeffrey Roberts, assistant director of the primate center at the University of
California at Davis.

   One use could be the study of the animals' immune system responses, which is
important in development of vaccines.

   Some human diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, can be produced in mice, but
because the physiology of mice is so different, the mice don't come down with
the same symptoms as humans.

   Experiments with monkeys could remedy that difficulty, said Rudolf Jaenisch
of the Whitehead Institute and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   "Now you would have a model which is very close to the human," he said.

   A National Institutes of Health panel formed to consider the ethics of human
gene therapy said recently that experiments with human stem cells should be
permitted. The panel deemed some other areas of human genetic research
unethical.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1994


                             581 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    November 1, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z4; LETTERS

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Fragile X: A Faulty Gene

   My son was diagnosed with Fragile X syndrome in 1991. This leading inherited
cause of mental retardation is caused by a faulty gene on the X chromosome and
has the potential to be treated by gene therapy. Yet it was conspicuously
missing from the table of most prevalent genetic disorders accompanying "Gene
Therapy at the Crossroads" [Cover, October 18].

   Nearly one of every thousand individuals in the world is affected by Fragile
X, making it one of the most prevalent genetic diseases worldwide, found in all
races and ethnic groups.

   Living with a complex, common yet relatively unknown disease like Fragile X
creates additional stress for families. Getting a diagnosis is difficult because
it is often overlooked or misdiagnosed; the multidisciplinary approach to
teaching necessary to reach children with Fragile X is not well known; and
understanding about unusual behaviors by children that "look normal" is lacking
because information is not well distributed.

   Kathleen M. May

   Fairfax Station


   Credit for Vitamin B Discoveries

   Complete coverage of "Vitamins: 13 Key Substances" [Medical History, October
18] would have included a mention of my grandfather, Paul Gyorgy, who discovered
what the article terms "the remaining B vitamins" -- B2, B6 and B12.

   My grandfather worked with Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, the discoverer of Vitamin C,
in Budapest before his emigration to the United States in the mid-1930s to
assume a teaching and research post at Case Western Reserve University in
Cleveland.

   He received a number of awards, including a Presidential Medal of Science
given posthumously by President Gerald Ford in recognition of his pioneering
research and years of work in nutrition and pediatrics.

   Beth Gyorgy

   Arlington


   Exercise Before Hip Surgery

    I was impressed with "Hip and Happy" [Health News, Sept. 20]. In 1973, at
the age of 64, I received a prosthesis in my left hip. Although I have led an
active life, recent X-rays indicate that it is in satisfactory condition.

   In 1993, orthopedic reconstructive surgery was performed on my right hip. As
one would expect, changes and improvements have occurred, and, in this instance,
as in the 1973 installation, pain is gone and mobility has been restored.


   Despite my age in 1973, I still lifted weights, wrestled and participated in
touch football and basketball, so my leg strength made recovery relatively easy.
But at age 84 in 1993, my right leg muscles had not been used as much and
recovery was difficult.

   Although exercises prescribed by my physician help tremendously now, I feel
that I would have helped myself toward faster and less painful recovery if I had
also exercised before the operation.

   Robert M. Cox

   West Palm Beach , Fla.


   Letters intended for publication must be signed and include the writer's home
address and home and business telephone numbers. Letters may be edited. Although
we are unable to acknowledge all letters, we appreciate the time and value the
viewpoints of those who write. Send letters to Health Section, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071 (FAX: 202-334-6471).


   Correction

   "Con Artists Target the Elderly" in last week's Health section described
steps consumers may take if they have been defrauded or sold shoddy merchandise.
It incorrectly stated that mail-order customers may return items within three
days for a refund. The three-day requirement applies only to items sold
door-to-door. Mail-order returns are a matter of store policy.


LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1994


                             582 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 31, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F27; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 1312 words

HEADLINE: Paine Got Kidder, but Bidders Bagged the Brokers

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   When a brokerage firm gets in trouble, the brokers' phones begin to ring. And
who do you think is calling? Well, it's not the customers. It's the managers of
rival investment firms, who want to know if the brokers are interested in
changing jobs.

   The calls usually go first to the brokers who have the biggest books of
business, the wealthiest clients and the most money under management. The
standard approach is to offer the brokers a bonus package to make the move.

   The bonus is usually based on the amount of business the broker brings in
each year. Often the bonus is paid upfront in a lump sum and called a
"forgivable loan," meaning that one-third of the "loan" is forgiven each year
for three years.

   If a brokerage firm is having problems with investors or regulators and is
the object of daily rounds of adverse publicity, it is not hard to persuade
brokers to jump ship -- and they often do. Over the years, Washington has seen
many broker raids.

   It was no surprise, therefore, to learn that the decision by General Electric
Co. to sell its troubled brokerage unit, Kidder, Peabody & Co., to PaineWebber
Group Inc. has set off a massive drive by other firms to recruit Kidder's big
producers.

   It is happening across the country, as well as in the nation's capital. In
fact, the folks at PaineWebber are so upset about it that they filed suit last
week against two major brokerage firms, Dean Witter, Discover & Co. and
Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.

   PaineWebber accused the firms of undermining their deal with Kidder by hiring
away their best brokers and demanded they stop the raids.

   The lawsuit did not mention Merrill Lynch & Co. or other firms that
reportedly have hired Kidder brokers. But PaineWebber did issue a warning.

   "We believe the conduct of Dean Witter and DLJ in this matter has been
reprehensible. We are prepared to take swift and immediate action if we
determine any other broker dealer is engaging in similar raiding activities," a
PaineWebber spokesman told the Associated Press.

   Here in Washington, Kidder brokers have been leaving for some time, and the
downtown office was reported to have dwindled from about 21 brokers to about 10.
In one special bit of irony, it was reported that several Kidder brokers were
recruited by PaineWebber not long before PaineWebber agreed to buy Kidder.

   At the moment, it looks like the biggest local Kidder catch goes to Alex.
Brown & Sons Inc., the Baltimore-based brokerage and money management firm. The
firm has snared Stephen E. Brady, 38, who was described as Kidder's top broker
in the Washington region.

   What made Brady a top producer, it was said, was that he generated $ 800,000
in gross commissions in the last year. It's not known how much of that went to
Kidder and how much Brady kept -- each firm has its own formula -- but a 35
percent to 40 percent share for a top broker is not unusual.

   Brady's new desk is located in Alex. Brown's Washington office at 1440 New
York Ave. NW, which is managed by Thomas U. Dudley II. Brady's arrival gives the
Alex. Brown office a total of about 30 brokers. Brady, who spent 10 years at
Kidder, previously worked at Merrill Lynch.

   Departing from Kidder several months ago was Randolph G. Peyton Sr., who had
been the manager of a Dean Witter office on Pennsylvania Avenue for three years
and then moved to Kidder, where he spent a year. He recently moved back to Dean
Witter at the firm's 1300 I St. NW office before the PaineWebber-Kidder deal was
struck.

   "I decided to leave because I could see the handwriting on the wall," said
Peyton, a veteran Washington broker. Then he issued this sage advice to his
fellow brokers: "The key to whatever you do is: Never burn any bridges behind
you."

   Do you know where your stocks are? If you're fascinated by the stocks of
smaller companies, you now have a new way to track the performance of the small
company group. It's called the Standard & Poor's SmallCap 600 Index, and it
began tracking small company stocks last week.

   The new S&P index will be in good company. S&P also runs the closely watched
S&P 500 index and the S&P MidCap 400 index.

   A company's market capitalization, or market cap, is determined by
multiplying its stock price by the number of shares outstanding. If a company
has 20 million shares and they trade for $ 5 each, the company's market cap is $
100 million.

   The total market cap of the S&P 500 companies is $ 3.4 trillion. The total
for the S&P MidCap 400 is $ 469 billion. For the S&P SmallCap 600, it is a
measly $ 181 billion.

   Other interesting comparisons:

   S&P 500 -- Median stock price $ 35, average price-earnings ratio 18.4,
dividend yield 2.8 percent.

   S&P MidCap 400 -- Median stock price $ 32.25, P/E 20.8, dividend yield 2
percent.

   S&P SmallCap 600 -- Median price $ 18, P/E 38.3, dividend yield 1.1 percent.

   The new SmallCap 600 includes 13 companies from Virginia, 10 from Maryland
and one from the District. Here is the list:

   Virginia -- America Online Inc., American Management Systems Inc., Brenco
Inc., Hilb, Rogal & Hamilton Co., International Family Entertainment Inc.,
Orbital Sciences Corp., O'Sullivan Corp., Owens & Minor Inc., Primark Corp.,
Richfood Holdings Inc., Smithfield Foods Inc., Tredegar Industries Inc., Tultex
Corp.

   Maryland -- Alex. Brown Inc., Baltimore Bancorp, Genetic Therapy Inc.,
Hechinger Co., Integrated Health Services Inc., Legg Mason Inc., MedImmune Inc.,
North American Vaccine Inc., Ryland Group Inc., UNC Inc.

   District -- Riggs National Corp.

   What will it mean to these companies to be listed in the new S&P SmallCap 600
index? A bit of prestige, perhaps. And some additional trading, if investment
companies create index funds to duplicate the performance of the SmallCap index.
There are now 40 mutual funds that mirror the S&P 500 index.

   While there are 265 mutual funds that invest in small cap stocks, investment
companies may or may not want to create small cap index funds. The small caps
are much more volatile than the big caps -- although they tend to even out over
time.

   S&P's research folks compared how a S&P SmallCap 600 index might have
performed between 1984 and 1994, when compared with the S&P 500.

   For the 10 years, the S&P 500 gained 182.8 percent while the S&P SmallCap 600
would have gained 103.3 percent. For the most recent five years, the S&P 500
gained 68 percent, and the SmallCap 600 would have gained 70.3 percent.

   There's been a changing of the guard at Scott & Stringfellow Inc. in
Richmond. Research Director Jeffrey D. Levin has departed to start his own firm,
and Guy W. "Chip" Ford has taken over as head of research. Ford has been an
analyst with the firm for 13 years.

   Levin, meanwhile, has teamed up Francis A. Pineno, a former president of
Scott & Stringfellow, to start a money management firm called Pineno & Levin
Asset Management. It too is based in Richmond.

   Levin said that he and Pineno planned to manage investments for both
individuals and small company pension plans. They will concentrate on equities,
although they may manage some money in bonds, Levin said.

   Ford, a graduate of Duke University, got his master's degree in business
administration from the University of North Carolina. He began his career with
the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse & Co. and later worked for the
Investment Corp. of Virginia, which was acquired by Scott & Stringfellow.

   Scott & Stringfellow is a regional brokerage and financial services company
with offices in Virginia, North Carolina and West Virginia.

   Patrick G. Hartley has joined Legg Mason Inc. in Baltimore as a vice
president for institutional fixed-income sales. Hartley, who previously worked
at MCI Communications Corp. for 16 months, has spent many years as an investment
banker. Hartley said he hopes to meld his bond work with his recent experience
in telecommunications.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1994


                             583 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     October 30, 1994 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1544 words

HEADLINE: SEARCHING FAMILY TREE FOR MEDICAL PROBLEMS GENETIC STUDIES MAKE PAST
MORE RELEVANT TO YOUR FUTURE HEALTH.

BYLINE: Susan FitzGerald, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It used to be that tracing your family tree meant finding out where your
ancestors hailed from, what year they set foot in America, and which place they
first called home.

   Now that search for identity and roots is being done for a different reason:
to see if you can control your own medical future by learning what ailed your
relatives in the past.

   Whether you get heart disease or diabetes or cancer, whether you live a long
life or die an untimely death, is dependent at least in part on the genes you
inherit.

   Before, genealogy was "just concentrating on who came over on the Mayflower.
. . . Well, forget the Mayflower," said Josephine Wagner, a cancer genetics
counselor at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia.

   More important, she said, is: "What does your family's medical history say
about you?"

   The interest in understanding your own genetic stock is being fueled by a
medical revolution in which one disease-causing gene after another is being
identified, tests are being developed for a long list of inherited disorders,
and scientists talk of when, not if, some diseases will be cured.

   Anita A. Lustenberger, a certified genealogist and genetics counselor at
Columbia University in New York, said that, until recently, people figured there
wasn't much point in knowing what medical problems lurked in their past. Taking
medical histories was a task reserved for the family doctor.

   "What's the use of knowing your ancestors died of cancer if there isn't much
you can do about it?" Lustenberger said.

   But now, knowing that your grandmother and aunt died of breast cancer may not
only make you more diligent about getting mammograms, but it might also lead you
someday to be tested for the defective gene that causes the hereditary form of
breast cancer. Likewise, knowing that dangerously high cholesterol and heart
disease run in the family may make you aware now for the need to watch your diet
and weight. In the future, you could be a candidate for gene therapy to fix an
inherited form of high cholesterol.

   "If people care about themselves and their children, about their health and
welfare and ultimate survival . . . they will find out their pedigree," said Dr.
Aubrey Milunsky, director of the Center for Human Genetics at Boston University
School of Medicine.

   Wagner said that something as simple as finding out "there is a strong family
history of diabetes, lets you know you should watch your diet."

   "If you know in your family history that there are several individuals who
have brittle bones, you know not to go into football," she said.

   Lustenberger said that, until recently, even trained genealogists weren't all
that interested in what medical problems their ancestors had and how they died.

   Now, the National Genealogical Society - convinced that every family should
have a "health historian" - is launching a new educational effort. Carolyn Nell,
the society's president, said the society was developing a blueprint to help
people go about drawing up a family health history. In June, the society devoted
its quarterly publication to the topic, noting that "in fascinating ways the
lines between hard science and social history are blurring."

   "I expect that with the study of genetics and family histories, genealogy
will become a household word," Nell said. "Genealogy is so much more than just
the linking of one generation to the next. . . . We are what they were."

   Nell would like to see that every family has documented a thorough health
history that can be turned over to the family doctor and used both to promote
well-being and to prevent disease. "This is going to help us," she said.

   But digging up the information can be difficult. Family lore about what
killed Grandpa or Great Aunt Rose may not be accurate, and some families simply
don't like to admit that relatives suffered from mental illness or alcoholism.

   "Grandpa may have fallen and hit his head and died in an accident,"
Lustenberger said. "The fact that he was drunk is never mentioned."

   Moreover, she said, past generations often weren't comfortable talking about
the fact that someone had cancer or that a child died in infancy. A range of
gynecological problems, including ovarian cancer, often were politely referred
to as a "female problem."

   Even the death certificates in family lockboxes can be deceiving. "Cardiac
arrest" or "heart failure" may be listed as the cause of death - not surprising,
since everyone's heart stops at death - but something else, such as lung cancer,
may have been the real cause.

   Death certificates from years ago might just list "old age," Lustenberger
said. And as a courtesy to the family, coroners sometimes would not specify
"suicide" on the certificate.

   For those who are adopted and have no idea who their birth family is, the
task can be daunting. Wagner said that when genetic counselors are trying to get
the history of someone who is adopted, they will attempt to work through the
adoption agency to get the necessary information.

   Despite the potential obstacles, talking with relatives and sorting through
family papers is the way to begin a health history, Lustenberger said. How much
information a person is able to gather will depend on how cooperative relatives
are and how close-knit a family is. Ideally, the history should include
information on the person's mother and father, brothers and sisters; as well as
grandparents, aunts, uncles, and first cousins, and great- grandparents and
great aunts and uncles when possible. Even the illnesses of your own children
are important to know for your own health.

   In addition to gathering medical information, it is also good to pin down a
family's ethnic and religious background, since certain diseases are prevalent
among people of a certain heritage, Lustenberger said. For instance, Tay-Sachs
disease, an inherited brain disorder, is most common among Ashkenazic Jews, who
come from central and northern Europe. Thalassemia, a group of blood disorders,
is common among people whose ancestry is tied to the Mediterranean region.
Ethnic background is not always apparent because families may have Anglicized
their names or switched religious affiliations.

   Mary Stockman-Smith, of Nazareth, Pa., used the occasion of a family reunion
in summer 1993 to dig up as many details as she could about her medical past,
including the breast cancer that ran through at least three generations on her
mother's side.

   Stockman-Smith, 35, had turned to the Family Risk Assessment Program at Fox
Chase in hopes of gauging her own chances of getting breast cancer because her
mother, sister and three cousins all have the disease.

   With the help of genetics counselor Wagner, she was able to sort out the
facts from stories that circulated among her relatives.

   Wagner was able to locate old hospital records showing that even though
Stockman-Smith's family always thought her grandmother had cancer of the gall
bladder, the problem actually had begun with the discovery of lumps under her
arm. Wagner also managed to retrieve a sample of tumor tissue stored since 1950
at a Boston hospital, which showed that Stockman-Smith's grandfather had died
because of a tumor in the lining of his heart. The family had thought lymphoma
killed him.

   Stockman-Smith, the mother of two small children, says she now feels she can
plan better for her future.

   "It makes you feel more at ease, that you aren't spreading misinformation,"
she said.

   Susan Koch, a genetics counselor at Temple University Hospital, said having a
good grasp of your medical history is particularly useful during pregnancy
because it helps in deciding whether the fetus should be tested for such
inherited diseases as cystic fibrosis, sickle-cell anemia, or Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

   But Milunsky, the Boston geneticist, said that, sadly, in day-to-day medical
practice, too many doctors place too little emphasis on family health histories,
in part because they don't take the time to get the information
from their patients.

   James Plumb, a family physician at Thomas Jefferson University, says it takes
an hour for him to take a patient's family history, something he
relishes doing because invariably fascinating stories unfold.

   "Tell me about your parents: What did they do, what medical problems do your
remember, what surgeries did they have, how did they die?" he'll ask. And then
he asks he'll ask the same questions in regards to regarding grandparents and
other close relatives.

   "People don't live in a vacuum," Plumb said. "They have a history, a social
history, a family history, a medical history. To have a full understanding of a
patient's needs and ideas, you need to understand where they come from."

   TRACING YOUR HISTORY

   Talk to relatives. Check government records: Death certificates; medical
examiner reports; census data; military service and pension records. Check
private records: Cemetery records; diaries and private papers; funeral-home
records; hospital, insurance and medical records; obituaries.

   Some problems to watch for: Arthritis, blindness, cancer, diabetes, epilepsy,
hemophilia, sickle-cell anemia, heart attack, stroke, mental retardation,
stillbirth, miscarriage, birth defects, Alzheimer's disease.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;

PHOTO (2)
1. Mary Stockman-Smith, standing in her living room with family photos, got
help from the Family Risk Assessment Program at Fox Chase in trying to figure
out her chances of getting breast cancer. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, GERALD
S. WILLIAMS)
2. Mary Stockman-Smith, with daughter Tara, son Garrett (on sofa) and nephew
Marty Turner, says she's more at ease knowing her genetic past. (The
Philadelphia Inquirer, GERALD S. WILLIAMS)

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             584 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                    October 30, 1994, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 3423 words

SERIES: SERIES -- MARYLAND'S BUSINESS CLIMATE. This is the first in a three-part
series on the status of Maryland's economy and the difficulties the state faces
in attracting business.

HEADLINE: State, businesses lack common plan

BYLINE: John E. Woodruff, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   After the inauguration parties end on Jan. 18, the next governor will
discover how hard it will be to give Maryland the coordination and reputation
needed to revive an economy that has been battered in the last six years and
badly lags behind the nation in economic recovery.

   That formidable reality emerges from 47 interviews over three months with
executives both in and outside Maryland, economists, state officials, economic
development authorities and others.

   Maryland has many elements working in its favor -- an excellent location, an
educated work force and a superb transport system.

   And the port of Baltimore, transformed by the Schaefer administration, stands
out as a central asset, permitting companies to move merchandise into and out of
the East Coast with ease, and pumping vitality into every element of Maryland's
economic landscape.

   Gov. William Donald Schaefer is widely credited with upgrading the state's
highway system, reinvigorating Baltimore-Washington International Airport and
elevating a once-anemic state development agency to a central role.

   But the interviews reveal problems so deep that they undercut the state's
ability to exploit its assets.

   Among the most serious:

   * Governor Schaefer, though known as an enthusiastic business booster, is
widely regarded as intolerant of open discussion on issues he considers
"negative," blocking public debate of critical problems and fostering mistrust
between the administration and core elements of the business community.

   * Division and infighting within Maryland's business community prevent a
unified voice and complicate relations between the state government and the top
business leadership.

   * All attempts in recent years to establish a comprehensive, joint
government-business strategy for economic development have failed.

   * Business leaders inside and outside the state perceive Maryland's taxes as
being among the highest in the country.

   * The state compounded its tax reputation in 1992 by imposing a series of
nuisance levies and an income surtax to make up for revenues lost to the
recession.

   * A perception is widespread within and outside the state that Maryland's
regulatory bureaucracy is often heavy-handed and a drag on economic growth.

   The problems are only deepened by the strains in communication between
government and business leaders.

   And in some of the interviews, the tensions at the top of the state's power
structure broke the surface spontaneously.

   In a broad discussion of the state's economy, Governor Schaefer immediately
raised his voice at the first mention of criticism from the state's most
powerful banker, H. Furlong Baldwin, president of Mercantile Bankshares Corp.

   "Baldy is a damaging and very negative person. He talks about cutting taxes
and rides around in a stretch limousine. He talks the state down all the time,"
Governor Schaefer said.

   In a separate interview two weeks earlier, Mr. Baldwin vented his own
feelings about Governor Schaefer.

   'Hello, Baldy'

   "When the governor calls me, I know what's on his mind as soon as he says my
name. If it's 'H. Furlong Baldwin,' I know he's about to chew me out. If it's
'Hello, Baldy,' I know he needs something from me," he said.

   While the bluntness of their remarks speaks to the personalities of two of
Maryland's most influential and strong-willed men, it also illustrates a broader
gulf between the state's government and key segments of the business community.

   This division couldn't come at a worse time and has aggravated a troubled
economic climate.

   The national economy's restructuring -- especially the shift away from
manufacturing -- has clobbered Maryland's once-powerful industrial core, and the
sudden contraction of defense industries is compounding that challenge into one
of the most serious threats to the state's economy.

   As recently as 1989, Reagan-era defense contracts pumped billions of dollars
a year into Maryland. Even as erosion accelerated in Maryland's traditional
manufacturing base -- clothing, chemicals, steel and building supplies -- the
defense buildup more than made up the losses.

   The state averaged 3.5 percent annual job growth from 1983 through 1989,
adding as many as 87,000 jobs in 1984 and 86,000 in 1987, the two peak years of
the Maryland defense boom.

   Shrinking defense

   But since then, the end of the Cold War has brought radically shrinking
defense budgets, which have been an economic calamity for Maryland, the
country's fifth most defense-dependent state.

   Waves of defense cutbacks have meant that the recession hit Maryland harder
and longer than the rest of the country. Even today, the state lags behind the
rest of the United States in the economic recovery.

   Since 1990, Maryland has suffered a net loss of 61,000 jobs, and its job
growth was a minuscule 0.68 percent for the latest 12 months, ranking 46th among
the 50 states.

   "In the 1980s, when the defense boom made growth here virtually effortless,
Maryland had one of the country's most envied economies. That was only six years
ago, but in that short time, the state has plummeted from leader to laggard,"
said economist Charles W. McMillion, president of Washington-based MBG
Information Services.

   The governor and Mark L. Wasserman, secretary of the Department of Economic
and Employment Development (DEED), acknowledge some of the problems, but they
add that Maryland's accomplishments have often been ignored.

   The next governor will find the state's sprawling collection of bureaucracies
hard to control, Mr. Wasserman said. He worries whether "we may see a loss of
the coordination this governor has established" even within the state
administration, much less between the government and private sector.

   Governor Schaefer says the news media and some business executives, "see
what's wrong but never what's right with the state's economy."

   "You always compare Maryland with the whole country. You ought to compare us
with the Northeast. We're doing the best in the Northeast," he said.

   In fact, if Maryland were counted as a Northeastern state -- which most U.S.
government statistical services do not do -- it would have ranked No. 9 out of
the 11 in job growth for the past 12 months.

   Some business executives, especially in the biotechnology industry, which the
state has made the centerpiece of its development work, praise Maryland's
business climate.

   "There's a real metamessage in this state that transmits a very supportive
feeling toward our industry," said M. James Barrett, head of Montgomery
County-based Genetic Therapy Inc.

   But the consensus is that the state faces serious problems that must be
confronted.

   Success is unlikely without a long-term strategy that addresses all the
state's varied economic sectors and has strong and coordinated backing from all
key players -- the administration, the General Assembly, regulatory agencies,
the city and county governments and the business community -- those inter viewed
said.

   The failure to develop such a plan is of concern and places Maryland at a
disadvantage, especially in the intensifying competition with other states in
the mid-Atlantic region.

   Because it faces huge defense cutbacks in addition to the nationwide decline
of manufacturing, "Maryland's economy is going through a restructuring even
deeper than the national economy's," says Michael A. Conte, director of regional
economic studies at the University of Baltimore.

   "If we want to come out whole, we are going to need to use everything we have
and we are going to need to have everybody -- the administration, the
legislature, the business community and the counties and cities -- all working
together toward clearly understood goals that are very broadly agreed on. We
certainly don't have that today," Mr. Conte said.

   While Maryland has failed to put together a strategy, other states, such as
Virginia and North Carolina, have vaulted past Maryland as hotbeds of economic
growth, largely by getting state and local governments and the business
community to unite on policies to stimulate growth and jobs, according to
economists.

   Often, well-intended state government actions have just the opposite effects.

   On May 21, 1991, with the recession and defense cuts bleeding Maryland of
jobs by the tens of thousands, Governor Schaefer and officials of Frito-Lay Inc.
had a nugget of good news: The snack food giant would build a pretzel plant and
warehouse in Aberdeen employing up to 500 people.

   One year later, the state slapped a 5 percent tax on selected snacks --
including most of those made by Frito-Lay. That tax was one of several the state
imposed to make up for revenues lost to the recession.

   Today, it brings in an estimated $ 22 million a year -- a scant 1.25 percent
of Maryland's $ 1.75 billion in sales taxes.

   But to Frito-Lay, a PepsiCo subsidiary, the tax was a slap in the face, and
in retaliation, it has virtually written Maryland off its list for expansion as
long as the tax remains on the books.

   "The snack tax . . . puts Maryland at a distinct competitive disadvantage for
obtaining the capital investments Frito-Lay will make," said Steven S.
Reinemund, the firm's president.

   But there's more behind Maryland's reputation as a "tax happy" state than the
snack tax.

   The business community declared victory in 1991 when Dutch-owned Aegon U.S.A.
Inc., announced it would put the headquarters of its North American operations
in Baltimore after taking over Monumental insurance companies.

   The firm has 6,000 U.S. employees, only about 800 of whom are in Maryland,
but Donald J. Shepard, the new head of Aegon's American operations, was the only
one who moved to Maryland when the headquarters came here.

   The reason: taxes.

   Mr. Shepard cites land transfer taxes and fees specifically, and the overall
tax burden in general, which, he and other executives maintain, are among the
highest in the nation.

   "Truthfully, the corporate headquarters here consists of me. I don't ask
anyone else to move here," Mr. Shepard said.

   "The real estate transfer tax and recordation fees are a problem the state
absolutely must deal with -- they kill the state's reputation," said Mr. Conte,
of the University of Baltimore.

   Part of the state's recession-driven tax package was a surtax on incomes over
$ 100,000 -- a decision that not only enraged executives but helped foster the
image that Maryland is a "tax happy" state.

   "Every time Maryland's ox is in the ditch, Wham! Just slap on another new
tax," said Mr. Baldwin of Mercantile Bankshares.

   The 1994 Assembly repealed the surtax effective next year, but reputations
die hard and slow.

   Tax stability is at least as important to businesses as a state's actual tax
rates, according to economic development experts.

   And some Maryland officials now acknowledge that the state severely harmed
its reputation by suddenly piling on new taxes amid the recession.

   "In retrospect, doing what we did -- throwing wild cards into the tax mix --
does make everything more difficult. . . . The immediate tensions of an
unprecedented recession, one that kept hitting in new waves, made for
inefficient public policy-making," said DEED Secretary Wasserman.

   The U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations actually says
Maryland's tax burden isn't as bad as perceived. The commission ranks it 34th
from the heaviest out of 50 states, when taxes are calculated as a percentage of
personal income.

   But popular published rankings, such as in Money magazine, that use per
capita revenues, put Maryland's tax burden as high as eighth in the country.

   Accurate or not, such a reputation is difficult to overcome.

   "Once you let yourself get hung with a bad tax reputation, it can live on for
ages, no matter what you do," Mr. Baldwin said. "Baltimore used to have an
inventory tax that drove a big Exxon refinery, with hundreds of jobs, out of
town. It's been 40 years since the city got rid of that tax, but I still get
calls from people who are thinking of moving here and ask me, 'Are you folks
still doing that inventory tax nonsense?' "

   Bad news arrived at the Walkerville headquarters of BioWhittaker Inc. in June
1992.

   Two auditors from the tax division of the state comptroller's office
announced that the firm owed $ 216,000 in penalties and current and back taxes
on electricity used by air-treatment equipment in the "clean rooms," where it
makes medical cell cultures.

   For years, the company had handled the air treatment -- which the federal
Food and Drug Administration requires -- as a manufacturing process, which meant
that the electricity it used was tax-exempt. But now the auditors were informing
BioWhittaker that they considered the process taxable because it also benefited
employees who worked in the rooms.

   That type of sudden change has given Maryland a reputation as a state whose
regulatory system often works against businesses and sometimes even the policies
of other state departments, such as DEED.

   "If [Maryland] wants to prosper in the future, as it did in the past, it has
some things to work on, especially regulatory and permitting issues. Or it could
fall off the pace," said Dennis Donovan, of the Wadley-Donovan Group, a New
Jersey-based site consultancy. "Some northeastern states can be even worse, but
Maryland has a serious bureaucracy problem, especially compared with neighbors
to the south."

   When officials at DEED heard of the tax ruling against BioWhittaker, they
realized it was not just a tax nuisance for one company, but a threat to scores
of small biotechnology firms that are the core of the department's economic
development hopes.

   DEED pushed a bill through the Assembly last winter that specifically
exempted clean rooms from the electricity use tax. Today, officials use that
case as proof of how quickly Maryland responds to business concerns.

   But Noel Buterbaugh, chief financial officer of BioWhittaker, though pleased
with the results, remains unconvinced that regulators won't surprise him again.

   "Once it came to DEED's attention, they moved swiftly on that particular law.
But today we are still dealing with the same bureaucrats and the same
bureaucratic attitudes, and who knows what they'll find to try the next time the
state is strapped for revenue?" he said.

   Business executives, development experts and even some senior members of
Governor Schaefer's administration acknowledge that bureaucratic attitudes are a
serious impediment to Maryland's economic growth.

   The chamber view

   "After eight years under Governor Schaefer, who may well be the greatest
booster the state has ever had, what is remarkable is that Maryland regulators
still look upon a business as a problem to be solved, not as an opportunity to
be pursued," said Champe C. McCulloch, president of the state Chamber of
Commerce.

   Only as part of a comprehensive growth strategy can Maryland hope to deal
with its tax reputation and its bureaucracy problems, business executives,
economists and some officials say.

   But Maryland has repeatedly failed in the past five years to come up with
such a strategy on which the administration, Assembly, business community and
local governments can agree.

   The first attempt, coordinated by Mr. McMillion, then a research fellow at
the Johns Hopkins University's Public Policy Institute, was dead on arrival in
1990 of its three-volume report.

   Participants describe it as a case study in the Schaefer administration's
determination to snuff out any hint of criticism and block public debate of any
"negative" topic.

   "It all came to nothing," said Robert C. Embry Jr., president of the Abell
Foundation, one of Maryland's biggest charitable trusts and a key sponsor of the
1990 McMillion report.

   "The governor's office didn't like the study because it thought the findings
were too negative, especially in finding that the electronics industry, which
was the big push at the moment, was already declining because of defense
cutbacks," said Mr. Embry.

   The Schaefer administration's reflexive rejection of anything "negative" has
created a paradox. While the governor is widely viewed as having been a strong
supporter of economic growth, communication between the administration and
powerful segments of the business community is strained and sometimes
impossible, many business leaders say.

   "If you won't look directly at the problems and allow a public debate of
them, I don't know how you're going to solve them," Mr. Embry said.

   Yet only coordinated action by all elements of Maryland's power structure has
a realistic hope of coping with the challenges the state faces, economists and
business leaders say.

   Any strategy must deal with upgrading the state's tax reputation and
re-educating its bureaucrats, Mr. Wasserman said.

   But turning around a bureaucracy can be an immense job, according to people
who have tried it elsewhere.

   "You have to go slogging through it step by step, one agency and one office
at a time, getting each chunk of the bureaucracy to sit down in a room with the
people they regulate, and let the regulators see what kinds of problems they
cause for businesses and the businesses see exactly what they need to do to
speed up their permits," said Victor L. Hoskins, the new executive director of
the Greater Baltimore Committee's Technology Council, who did just that in Long
Beach, Calif.

   Maryland has assets that can help make its economy a powerhouse again, but
far greater coordination and planning are needed to exploit them, development
experts say.

   "You have to start with the location you have, and in that, Maryland has
important advantages -- the port of Baltimore, proximity to Washington, D.C.,
access to the Northeast, the infrastructure it has developed in the past eight
years," said Mr. Donovan, the site consultant.

   The combined power of the port, the state's highway system and the access to
population centers in the Northeast have been recently demonstrated by the
decisions of some companies to locate operations in the area.

   Among those are Time Warner's recently announced plan to put its 400-job East
Coast distribution center on Interstate 95 at White Marsh, and Woodward &
Lothrop's decision to put its 200-job consolidated distribution center in
Baltimore.

   But most people insist that the state is losing more than it's gaining
because of the failure to develop and implement a strategy for growth.

   Maryland's chief existing development strategy, the drive to make the state a
biotechnology center, seeks to exploit location by feeding on the presence of
huge government and Johns Hopkins University laboratories that give the state
one of the country's leading life-sciences talent pools.

   But the state has no comparable strategy to exploit key opportunities that
could provide more jobs sooner, development experts say.

   "Maryland . . . needs to be much more coordinated and aggressive in targeting
Northeastern companies that want a more affordable or desirable place for their
distribution, warehousing and processing centers," said J. M. Mullis, a
Texas-based site consultant who often works in the Mid-Atlantic area.

   The same applies to firms from outside the region that are looking for new
sites to serve the Northeast, he said.

   Take, for example, the state's biggest near-miss this year, Starbucks
Coffee's decision to locate its East Coast plant in York County, Pa., rather
than in Harford County.

   The sites Starbucks really liked were in neither of those places but in
Maryland's Cecil County.

   "In many ways the biggest, most flexible and best located sites we saw were
in Cecil County, Maryland, and we had to pass them up because the infrastructure
-- gas, sewer, water -- was not in sight," said Howard Wolner, vice president of
Starbucks.

   "I think Cecil County has the potential to be Maryland's next big takeoff,
much like Harford a decade ago, but the fact is the groundwork has not been done
there at this time," he said.

   To many analysts, Mr. Wolner's remarks illustrate an all-too-familiar facet
of the state's planning and coordination failures.

   "You constantly hear of cases where Maryland could have won if only the state
and the county had both been reading from the same page of the script. But
first, everybody has to agree on the script. Maryland suffers from its inability
to get one together," Mr. McMillion said.

   TOMORROW: How division in the business community hurts the state's business
climate.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 1, SUN FILE PHOTO, Economist Charles W. McMillion says defense
spending once made growth here easy.; PHOTO 2, SUN FILE PHOTO, Mark L.
Wasserman, DEED secretary, says Maryland's accomplishments have often been
ignored.; GRAPH, SUN STAFF GRAPHIC, HOW MARYLAND STACKS UP WITH ITS NEIGHBORS

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1994


                             585 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              October 28, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; THE TICKER; Pg. 53

LENGTH: 288 words

BODY:


   VIDEO OK FOR AMERITECH: Ameritech Corp. can provide video services in its
five-state territory, the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
Illinois ruled Thursday. The decision invalidated a 1984 law that barred
telephone companies from providing cable television services and traditional
video programming where they also provide local telephone service.

   SEARS TOWER LEASE: Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. signed a lease to relocate
500 employees to three floors of Sears Tower, from 200 W. Monroe.  The insurance
company is expected to move in March. With Fireman's lease for 109,000 square
feet, occupancy in Sears Tower grows to 75 percent of leasable office space.

   MOTOROLA DEAL: Motorola Inc. received Justice Department approval Thursday to
sell its Specialized Mobile Radio assets to Nextel Communications Inc. in
exchange for 62 million shares of Nextel's stock. Shares of Rutherford,
N.J.-based Nextel closed Thursday at $ 19.87 1/2 per share, making the deal
worth about $ 12.3 million. Nextel plans to build a wireless network throughout
the United States.

   R.R. DONNELLEY EARNINGS UP: R.R. Donnelley & Sons Co., the world's largest
commercial printer, reported third quarter net income of $ 80.1 million, or 52
cents a share, up 15.3 percent over the same period last year. Sales for the
Chicago-based company reached $ 1.243 billion, up 10.6 percent over the same
three-month period last year.

   GENE THERAPY MARKETING: A gene therapy company has formed an alliance with
drug company Rhone-Poulenc Rorer to make and market various gene therapy cancer
products. The gene company is backed by a $ 50 million capital investment fund
set up by EJ Financial Enterprises of Lake Forest and others.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1994


                             586 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
INTROGEN AND RHONE-POULENC IN GENE THERAPY PACT

BYLINE: Bloomberg Business News

BODY:

   Introgen Therapeutics Inc. signed an agreement yesterday with Rhone-Poulenc
Rorer Inc. to develop gene therapy cancer products. Introgen said the agreement
had a potential value to the company of up to $50 million. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer,
which is based in Collegeville, Pa., and is a subsidiary of the French chemical
and health products giant Rhone-Poulenc, will finance all the research and
development worldwide and will receive exclusive manufacturing and commercial
rights in Europe. Introgen, based in Austin, Tex., and Rhone-Poulenc Rorer will
have joint promotion rights in North America, and both companies will have the
right to develop and market products in Japan, Korea, India, China and
Australia.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1994


                             587 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    October 27, 1994, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 5; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 63 words

HEADLINE: PEOPLE

BODY:

   Palo Alto-based SyStemix Inc. said Linda Sonntag is resigning as president
and chief executive, effective in December. Her replacement has not yet been
named.

   Sonntag will remain a board member and serve as a consultant to the company.

   SyStemix is engaged in the development of cellular and gene therapy products
based on human hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1994


                             588 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    October 27, 1994, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 94 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFLY:  HEALTH

BYLINE: From Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   Biotechnology Firm Gets Investment: Canji Inc., a privately held San Diego
company, said it has reached a key research agreement with Schering-Plough
Corp., a Madison, N.J., pharmaceutical firm. Schering-Plough is to provide
financing to Canji, which is developing cancer treatments that use gene therapy
technology, in exchange for worldwide marketing rights to products that use
Canji's p53 treatment. Schering-Plough did not disclose its initial investment,
but it said the agreement could exceed $50 million if Canji reaches certain
research milestones.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1994


                             589 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 27, 1994 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: Canji takes on a partner to develop anti-tumor drug

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Canji Inc., a privately held San Diego biotechnology firm, has joined with
Schering-Plough Corp. to develop an anti-tumor drug in a partnership that could
be worth about $50 million to the local company. Canji will give Schering-Plough
exclusive rights to make and sell any treatment that results from the
development of Canji's tumor suppressing gene discoveries.

   The companies will initially target colorectal and liver cancers. Under the
agreement, Schering-Plough will make an initial cash investment in Canji along
with annual and performance-based payments. Based in Madison, N.J.,
Schering-Plough employs nearly 20,000 people and has annual sales exceeding $4
billion. Canji, founded in 1990 and located in Torrey Pines, employs 58 people
and has raised $14 million in venture capital.

   The development-stage company has no product revenues. Schering-Plough will
be responsible for all safety and clinical testing of drugs developed from the
p53 gene, which Canji believes can play a role reversing malignant states. The
companies hope to begin human testing of the drug by late 1995. "Backed by our
expertise and resources in oncology and biotechnology, this effort promised to
harness a new therapeutic technology to reverse or suppress an underlying cause
of cancer," said Robert Luciano, chief executive officer of Schering-Plough.
"This agreement insures our survival for 21 months, without uncertainty," said
Blake Ingle, Canji's chief executive officer. Ingle added that Schering-Plough's
funding of development work for the p53 gene therapy technology frees Canji's
resources for other tumor suppressing gene projects. The company has several
other tumor suppressing products in development. James McCamant, editor of the
Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley, noted that there have been more
alliances between large drug companies and smaller biotech start-ups in recent
years. "By doing these deals, the biotech companies finance their other
projects," said McCamant.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             590 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           October 26, 1994 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 200 words

HEADLINE: DISCUSSION OF GENE THERAPY TO OPEN FREE LECTURE SERIES

BODY:

   Wednesday, October 26, 1994 DISCUSSION OF GENE THERAPY TO OPEN FREE LECTURE
SERIES

   Dr. Markus Grompe, an associate professor of molecular and medical  genetics
at Oregon Health Sciences University, will explain new developments  in gene
therapy at 7:30 p.m. Thursday in the OHSU Library Auditorium.

   The lecture, ``Gene Therapy -- Today and Tomorrow,'' is the first in the
free 1994-95 Marquam Hill Lecture series.

   Grompe, also a physician at OHSU's Doernbecher Children's Hospital, will
discuss the creation of mouse models to understand human illness and develop
gene therapies. Mice have about 90 percent of their genes in common with  humans
and make good models for human diseases, he said.

   Grompe has received national recognition for developing a mouse model for a
relatively rare disease called tyrosinemia, which is similar to an inherited
liver cancer. The research is expected to reveal clues to the cause of liver
cancer in humans.

   In recent years molecular genetics has paved the way for engineering mouse
models for a number of human diseases including Alzheimer's disease, multiple
sclerosis , AIDS and a number of cardiovascular diseases.

   For information about the lecture call 494-7686.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             591 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 25, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 73 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
WHO'S WHAT WHERE

BODY:

    Lynne H. Brum, director, corporate communications, Vertex Pharmaceuticals,
Cambridge; Leonard M. Baum, senior vice president, Advanced Magnetics,
Cambridge; Michael Z. Gilman, vice president, research, ARIAD Pharmaceuticals,
Cambridge; David Foster, director, government relations, Paul Hastings, vice
president, Genzyme Corp., Cambridge; Richard F. Selden, president, chief
executive, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., Cambridge.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, BRUM

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1994


                             592 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            October 21, 1994, Friday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Section A; Page 12

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: IT HAS ALL THE EARMARKS OF AN EPIDEMIC Should we treat violence as an
infectious disease?

BYLINE: WILLIAM RASPBERRY

BODY:

   Washington - My first thought was to recall Abraham Maslow's aphorism: "If
the only tool you have is a hammer, all problems look like nails." Now I'm
beginning to wonder if Mark Rosenberg's notion isn't worth a second thought.

   Rosenberg's idea is that the way to combat criminal violence is to treat it
the way we treat infectious diseases: as a public health problem amenable to
research, therapy and prevention.

   Rosenberg is director of the National Center for Injury Prevention, a
division of the national Centers for Disease Control, and the infectious-disease
approach may be the only tool he has. To the extent that it conjures up the idea
of gene therapy or anti-violence vaccines, the model may be misleading. This
isn't:

   "We need to revolutionize the way we look at guns, like what we did with
cigarettes. It used to be that smoking was a glamour symbol. Now it is dirty,
deadly - and banned."

   This, of course, isn't medicine. It's a combination of education and social
ostracism, buttressed by legal sanction - the same combination that has helped
to increase the use of seat belts and reduce the incidence of drunk driving. If
that were the extent of it, the disease approach to violence might be less
interesting.

   One way to get at what Rosenberg and others are talking about is to consider
a particular form of violence: suicide. There's nothing at all surprising in the
notion that suicide is associated with clinical depression and other mental
distress as well as with such personality traits as aggression, impulsivity and
hopelessness.

   But these are precisely traits associated with homicide. Indeed, a number of
mental health professionals have come to think of suicide and homicide as
opposite sides of the same coin. A Chicago psychiatrist, Carl C. Bell, once put
it this way: "You look at suicidal and homicidal intent, and you see young
people who are upset and angry. They've just had an altercation with a friend.
They're mad at somebody, they're impulsive. Tempers flare, and somebody they
love ends up getting killed. The motivation behind homicide that is due to
interpersonal altercation is similar to the loss of control in suicide. We see
the same issues."

   And this difference: Homicide is the leading cause of death among young black
men, but white men are twice as likely as black men to commit suicide. Still,
there is an overwhelming link between violent death and guns, which is the
reason Rosenberg wants to change the public attitude toward - and limit access
to - firearms.

   The Center for Injury Prevention is already doing research on youthful access
to guns. The tougher question is how to curb the use of firearms - not in
suicide or homicides involving family or friends, but in "public" violence:
robberies, revenge assaults and fights among strangers.

   These are the categories likely to prove least amenable to anti- firearms
campaigns based on the campaigns that led to a decline in smoking and auto
accidents.

   Face it: Isn't it the young men of the inner cities who come to mind when the
subject is violence? And isn't this the same group that not only has refused to
buckle up but also has been targeted by the purveyors of cigarettes and alcohol?

   Having said all that, I do believe that the violence that is making us feel
so unsafe really does have the earmarks of an epidemic - starting among those
whose resistance is lowest and spreading outward and upward until we are all at
risk.

   I won't deny the continuing necessity for cops and courts and cages, but
their usefulness kicks in after the fact. I just wish I felt more hopeful that
Rosenberg and his colleagues might find the key to prevention.

   William Raspberry is syndicated by the Washington Post Writers Group. His
column appears occasionally.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994


                             593 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         October 21, 1994 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: IS VIOLENCE AN INFECTIOUS DISEASE?

BYLINE: By WILLIAM RASPBERRY

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   My first thought was to recall Abraham Maslow's aphorism: "If the only tool
you have is a hammer, all problems look like nails." Now I'm beginning to wonder
if Mark Rosenberg's notion isn't worth a second thought.

   Rosenberg's weird-sounding (at first) idea is that the way to combat criminal
violence is to treat it the way we treat infectious diseases: as a public health
problem amenable to causal research, therapy and prevention.

   Well, of course. Rosenberg is director of the National Center for Injury
Prevention, a division of the national Centers for Disease Control, and the
infectious-disease approach may be the only tool he has.

   To the extent that it conjures up the idea of gene therapy or anti-violence
vaccines, the disease model may be misleading. This isn't:

   "We need to revolutionize the way we look at guns, like what we did with
cigarettes. It used to be that smoking was a glamour symbol - cool, sexy, macho.
Now it is dirty, deadly - and banned."

   Rosenberg's thought is that if we could transform public attitudes toward
guns the way we have transformed public attitudes toward cigarettes, we'd go a
long way toward curbing our national epidemic of violence.

   This, of course, isn't medicine - though smoking, obviously, leads to medical
problems. It's a combination of education and social ostracism, buttressed by
legal sanction, the same combination that has helped to increase the use of seat
belts and reduce the incidence of drunk driving.

   And if that were the extent of it, the disease approach to violence might be
a lot less interesting.

   One way to get at what Rosenberg and others are talking about - beyond the
public-service announcement approach - is to consider a particular form of
violence: suicide.

   There's nothing at all surprising in the notion that suicide is associated
with clinical depression and other mental distress as well as with such
personality traits as aggression, impulsiveness and hopelessness.

   But these are precisely the mental and personality traits associated with
homicide. Indeed, a number of mental health professionals have come to think of
suicide and homicide as opposite sides of the same coin. A Chicago psychiatrist,
Carl C. Bell, once put it this way:

   "You look at suicidal and homicidal intent and you see young people who are
upset and angry. They've just had an altercation with a friend. They're mad at
somebody, they're impulsive. Tempers flare, and somebody they love ends up
getting killed. The motivation behind homicide that is due to interpersonal
altercation is similar to the loss of control in suicide. We see the same
issues."

   And this difference: Homicide is the leading cause of death among young black
men, but white men are twice as likely as black men to commit suicide.

   Still, there is an overwhelming link between violent death and guns, which is
the reason Rosenberg wants to change the public attitude toward - and limit
access to - firearms.

   The Center for Injury Prevention is already doing research on youthful access
to guns.

   The much tougher question is how to curb the use of firearms not in suicide
or homicides involving family or friends, but in "public" violence: robberies,
revenge assaults and fights among strangers.

   These are the categories likely to prove least amenable to anti-firearms
campaigns based on the campaigns that led to a decline in smoking and motor
vehicle accidents.

   Face it: Isn't it the young men of America's inner cities who come to mind
when the subject is violence? And isn't this the same group that not only has
refused to buckle up but also has been specially targeted by the purveyors of
cigarettes and cheap alcohol?

   Having said all that, I do believe that the violence that is making us feel
so unsafe really does have the earmarks of an epidemic, starting among those
whose resistance is lowest and spreading outward and upward until we are all at
risk.

   I won't deny the continuing necessity for cops and courts and cages, but
their usefulness kicks in after the fact. I just wish I felt more hopeful that
Rosenberg and his colleagues might find the key to prevention.

   William Raspberry is a syndicated columnist.

COLUMN: William Raspberry

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1994


                             594 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          October 19, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Section D; Page 10

LENGTH: 1315 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH: Breast Cancer Update Surviving with grace Combination of
conventional, new treatments ease a woman's ordeal

BYLINE: By Amanda Husted STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Janie Anderson has smoother skin, thicker hair, a new appreciation of family,
friends and co-workers, and membership in what once was a small club - breast
cancer survivors.

   In the year since a mammogram detected a suspicious area in her right breast,
she has undergone standard treatment that determined the cancer had spread to
lymph nodes under her arm, and experimental treatment that holds the promise of
longterm survival.

   It's a measure of advances in therapy over the past few years -
breast-conserving surgery, management of nausea, techniques in breast
reconstruction - that she can say today: "Overall, it has not been a horrible or
bad experience."

   Doctors have a better idea today of what treatments will be successful at
each stage of disease - from earliest detection, stage I, when five-year
survival is more than 95 percent, to stage IV, when cancer has spread beyond the
breast and five-year survival drops to 50 percent or less. Even at that stage,
patients have more reason to be optimistic.

   "Stage IV disease, up until recent times when we started getting these women
bone marrow transplants, was considered incurable. You were destined to die of
your disease," said Dr. Janice Galleshaw, a medical oncologist and the medical
director of The Breast Center at West Paces Medical Center.

   "Whether or not transplants are actually going to cure these women or just
postpone their inevitable relapse, we don't know yet, because they haven't been
done for very long. But we have a very large group of women now, probably 50
percent to 60 percent who haven't yet relapsed and they're three and four years
out."

   Treatment standard, in beginning

   Until her bone marrow transplant, Anderson's treatment followed what is
becoming standard for women who discover breast cancer in its early stages.

   In consultation with a team of specialists, including Galleshaw and surgeon
J. Ronald Stephens, she underwent a biopsy that determined her lump was
cancerous, then a lumpectomy to remove the lump, a margin of tissue around it,
and lymph nodes under her arm to check whether the cancer had spread.

   If the lymph nodes had been negative, she would have undergone radiation and
perhaps chemotherapy or hormone therapy, and been among the 95 percent of women
with very early stage breast cancer who are almost certainly cured.

   But 12 out of 15 of Anderson's lymph nodes were cancerous, and doctors told
her she needed a mastectomy - removal of the entire breast.

   Only a few years ago, the prospect of disfiguring surgery would have been
devastating to a young woman of 40. But with reconstructive surgery performed at
the same time, Anderson came out of the anesthesia on Dec. 20 looking almost the
same - but with a flatter stomach.

   "The beauty of that is, the woman who's already going through a lot doesn't
have to wake up to a flat chest wall," Galleshaw said. "That's so traumatic for
women. And in addition, many of them will turn around and have their hair
knocked out by chemotherapy, and we're kind of taking away things that are very
much a part of what we consider our femininity, all in one fell swoop."

   Anderson chose TRAM flap reconstruction, in which tissue taken from her
abdomen was used to fashion a new breast. "I ended up getting a tummy tuck in
the bargain," she said.

   Plastic surgeons also can use tissue from the back and other parts of the
body, or silicone gel or saline implants to mold new breasts, and reconstruction
can be done in conjunction with the mastectomy or in a separate surgery months
or even years later.

   Anderson returned to work in February at Southern Company Services, a
division of Southern Co. that installs and maintains its computer networks. For
the next three months, she endured chemotherapy, but - thanks to anti-nausea
drugs - without the retching she'd expected.

   Because cancer had spread to Anderson's lymph nodes, her doctors recommended
a bone marrow transplant to lessen chances her cancer would recur.

   In May, doctors harvested some of her bone marrow, gave her high doses of
cancer-killing drugs that also killed her bone marrow cells, then reinfused the
bone marrow. She was hospitalized for a month, then underwent five weeks of
radiation targeting her right breast and spent the next few months at her home
in Ball Ground, in Cherokee County, regaining her energy.

   "You lose every vestige of hair and a layer of skin," Anderson said. "My skin
is much better, all my fingernails fell off and are much nicer now. My hair is
coming back in thicker and curlier than before. There are some benefits."

   She returned to work this month, almost a year after the suspicious
mammogram, thankful for supportive co-workers.

   "People at work donated their vacation time to me," said Anderson, who had no
long-term disability insurance and little sick time accrued when she became ill.
"I had nine months off work at full pay - you just don't know what a comfort
that was. Everyone has been wonderful."

   Although Anderson's diagnosis and early treatment were typical of most breast
cancer patients, doctors later tailored additional therapy for her special
situation.

   And that's standard, as well.

   Methods vary with patient

   Factors that influence recommended treatments include whether the woman is
premenopausal or postmenopausal, the size of the tumor and the extent of
lymph-node involvement, the presence or absence of hormonal receptors in the
breast, and the type and activity of the breast cancer cells themselves, whether
they're slower growing or more aggressive, Galleshaw said.

   For patients whose cancer recurs after all combinations of approved
treatments, doctors are turning to a growing number of investigational drugs.
Among therapies are agents that stimulate a patient's immune system to fight
cancer cells - interleuken-2 and interferon - and drugs like taxol and and its
cousin, taxotere, that attack cancer cells.

   "Probably taxol is the single most effective agent against breast cancer
developed in the last few years," said Dr. Toncred Styblo, assistant professor
of surgery at Emory University. Taxotere may be more effective. But much better
drugs are on the horizon.

   "Within the next five to 10 years, we'll develop specific immune therapy to
target cancer cells," predicted Styblo, who is encouraged that scientists are
beginning to understand more about cancer cells themselves.

   Researchers are looking at receptors on the membranes of breast cancer cells,
why there are more of them than on normal cells, and what triggers them to grow,
said Dr. Noa Ben-Baruch, an oncologist at the Weizmann Institute of Science in
Israel who is the first international recipient of the Susan G. Komen Breast
Cancer Foundation research grant. Researchers also are looking at receptors
inside the cells that respond to estrogen and progesterone hormones.

   "We're trying to figure out what the relationship is between the receptors on
the membranes and those inside the cells," said Ben-Baruch. "As we learn more
about the cancer cells, we'll be able to attack specific properties of the
cancer cells that normal cells do not have."

   With the discovery of a defective gene linked to an inherited susceptibility
to breast cancer, another hopeful area of research is gene therapy. Within a
couple of years, scientists expect to have a test to identify carriers of the
gene, an estimated 5 percent of the 182,000 women diagnosed with breast cancer
each year.

   Someday, scientists may be able to correct that gene - and flawed genes
linked to other forms of cancer - before the disease develops.

   "I think [with] gene therapy we're looking at [new treatments] for breast
cancer and a lot of other cancers, as well. I don't think it's that far off,"
Galleshaw said. "I'm very optimistic. I think we're right on the brink of making
some tremendous changes in the approach to cancers in general."

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1994


                             595 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   October 19, 1994, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; PAGE A23

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: Sick People With Guns

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: William Raspberry

BODY:

   My first thought was to recall Abraham Maslow's aphorism: "If the only tool
you have is a hammer, all problems look like nails." Now I'm beginning to wonder
if Mark Rosenberg's notion isn't worth a second thought.

   Rosenberg's weird-sounding (at first) idea is that the way to combat criminal
violence is to treat it the way we treat infectious diseases: as a public health
problem amenable to causal research, therapy and prevention.

   Well, of course. Rosenberg is director of the National Center for Injury
Prevention, a division of the National Centers for Disease Control, and the
infectious-disease approach may be the only tool he has.

   As a matter of fact, to the extent that it conjures up the idea of gene
therapy or anti-violence vaccines, the disease model may be misleading. This
isn't:

   "We need to revolutionize the way we look at guns, like what we did with
cigarettes. It used to be that smoking was a glamour symbol -- cool, sexy,
macho. Now it is dirty, deadly -- and banned." Rosenberg's thought is that if we
could transform public attitudes toward guns the way we have transformed public
attitudes toward cigarettes, we'd go a long way toward curbing our national
epidemic of violence.

   This, of course, isn't medicine -- though smoking, obviously, leads to
medical problems. It's a combination of education and social ostracism,
buttressed by legal sanction -- the same combination that has helped to increase
the use of seat belts and reduce the incidence of drunk driving. And if that
were the extent of it, the disease approach to violence might be a lot less
interesting.

   One way to get at what Rosenberg and others are talking about -- beyond the
public-service announcement approach -- is to consider a particular form of
violence: suicide.

   There's nothing at all surprising in the notion that suicide is associated
with clinical depression and other mental distress as well as with such
personality traits as aggression, impulsivity and hopelessness.

   But these are precisely the mental and personality traits associated with
homicide. Indeed, a number of mental health professionals have come to think of
suicide and homicide as opposite sides of the same coin. A Chicago psychiatrist,
Carl C. Bell, once put it this way:

   "You look at suicidal and homicidal intent, and you see young people who are
upset and angry. They've just had an altercation with a friend. They're mad at
somebody, they're impulsive. Tempers flare, and somebody they love ends up
getting killed. The motivation behind homicide that is due to interpersonal
altercation is similar to the loss of control in suicide. We see the same
issues."

   And this difference: Homicide is the leading cause of death among young black
men, but white men are twice as likely as black men to commit suicide.

   Still, there is an overwhelming link between violent death and guns, which is
the reason Rosenberg wants to change the public attitude toward -- and limit
access to -- firearms.

   The Center for Injury Prevention is already doing research on youthful access
to guns. The much tougher question is how to curb the use of firearms -- not in
suicide or homicides involving family or friends, but in "public" violence:
robberies, revenge assaults and fights among strangers.

   These are the categories likely to prove least amenable to anti-firearms
campaigns based on the campaigns that led to a decline in smoking and motor
vehicle accidents.

   Face it: Isn't it the young men of America's inner cities who come to mind
when the subject is violence? And isn't this the same group that not only has
refused to buckle up but also has been specially targeted by the purveyors of
cigarettes and cheap alcohol?

   Having said all that, I do believe that the violence that is making us feel
so unsafe really does have the earmarks of an epidemic -- starting among those
whose resistance is lowest and spreading outward and upward until we are all at
risk.

   I won't deny the continuing necessity for cops and courts and cages, but
their usefulness kicks in after the fact. I just wish I felt more hopeful that
Rosenberg and his colleagues might find the key to prevention.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, JOHN OVERMYER

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1994


                             596 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    October 17, 1994, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 11C

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: BioCenter will break ground for new firms
INCUBATOR FOR BIOTECH JOBS

BYLINE: Timothy J. Mullaney, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   Saccharin, Bufferin and the AIDS drug AZT all stem at least partly from
research done in Maryland. But none of them is produced here.

   Today, state officials and private backers break ground on a project they
hope will change all that. Construction will begin on the BioCenter, a $ 21
million pilot manufacturing facility where fledgling, cash-strapped
biotechnology firms can share costly small-scale manufacturing facilities.

   Officials hope the center will help Maryland companies get the next Bufferin
or AZT to market without having to turn to out-of-state companies for the
millions it takes to bring a drug through years of clinical trials and U.S. Food
and Drug Administration review.

   "It's an important part of the strategy to keep biotechnology companies in
Maryland," said Mary Lou Baker, a spokeswoman for the state Department of
Economic and Employment Development. "This is one of the very important
components of the bricks and mortar of biotechnology."

   The facility will be built on land donated by Baltimore adjacent to Johns
Hopkins' Bayview research campus in East Baltimore. The city contributed the
land, the state kicked in $ 16 million, the U.S. Commerce Department gave a $
1.5 million grant, and the center's operator, Bio Science Contract Production
Corp., came up with $ 3 million in cash and expects to invest another $ 5
million.

   The state stepped in to make sure the project got built because the center
itself won't make enough money to attract private venture capital, Bio Science
President Jacques R. Rubin said. He said the company was approached by other
states about operating a similar center but chose to stay in Maryland, where it
used to own a smaller, similar facility.

   "Biotech companies can't borrow money anywhere, and you need a lot of capital
to build a plant," Mr. Rubin said. "The return people can make out of this plant
is not what you can make out of Martek or Univax. Univax could make $ 100
million."

   Martek Biosciences Corp. of Columbia and Univax Biologics Inc. of Rockville
are considered two of the most promising biotechnology companies in Maryland,
though each is still losing money as it continues to develop products that have
not yet reached the market.

   Mr. Rubin said his company will provide the space and technical expertise to
help researchers actually manufacture small amounts of the drugs they are
developing, in a facility that meets strict federal standards for quality
control. The center will be owned by a state-created nonprofit company, which
will oversee Bio Science's work at the center.

   The company will make its money from charging the biotechnology companies for
equipment and staff supplied by Bio Science. Mr. Rubin expects to employ 35 to
40 people initially when the BioCenter opens late next year and 65 after the
project gets established.

   The idea is that biotechnology companies will use the center to make just
enough of their product to get through clinical trials. After a drug is approved
for widespread sale, its makers will do their commercial manufacturing somewhere
bigger.

   "When you want to go into [clinical trials], you have to make serious
decisions about investing. Having this available delays that decision," said M.
James Barrett, chairman of Genetic Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg. DEED estimates
that a company would have to spend $ 3 million to $ 10 million to build its own
pilot plant, at a stage when most biotech companies are unprofitable.

   Mr. Barrett said the need for money can force entrepreneurs to sell much of
their companies, moving the ultimate product and jobs out of the state.

   DEED estimates that Maryland biotech companies could reach $ 3 billion to $ 5
billion in sales, creating up to 40,000 jobs by 2000, if the state merely keeps
its current share of the biotech market as the industry grows.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ALGERINA PERNA/SUN STAFF PHOTO, Jacques R. Rubin, president of
Bio Science Contract Production Corp., will help new biotech firms through the
regulatory maze.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1994


                             597 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              October 16, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 472 words

HEADLINE: DEATHS IN THE NEWS

BODY:


   Frank McGuire, 80, the college basketball coach who took two universities to
the NCAA championship during his 41-year career, died Tuesday in his West
Columbia, S.C., home after a long illness. Mr. McGuire took the University of
North Carolina to its first national basketball championship and was the
winningest coach in University of South Carolina history. In 1977 he was named
to the National Basketball Hall of Fame.

   Megan O'Connell, 30, who led anactive career as a model despite being
diagnosed with brain cancer, died last Sunday in her Barrington home. Miss
O'Connell, whose modeling had taken her abroad and into the morning network news
fashion segments, was scheduled to enter an experimental brain cancer gene
therapy program at Case Western Research University in Cleveland.

   Fred Lebow, 62, the founder of the New York Marathon, died last Sunday in his
New York City home of brain cancer. First diagnosed with cancer in 1990, Mr.
Lebow ran in the 1992 Marathon when the cancer was in remission and completed
the 26-mile course despite discouragement from his doctors. In 1970, Mr. Lebow
ran in 13 marathons, including the first New York Marathon.

   Walter P. Hoffelder, 93, a retired businessman and former state senator, died
Oct. 8 in the Glenbrook Hospital in Glenview. Born on Christmas Day, 1900, Sen.
Hoffelder had operated many successful businesses. He was active in Republican
politics, starting in 1947. He was elected state representative of the 17th
District in 1960. He was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1962.

   Chaim Raphael, 86, who wrote British crime novels under the name Jocelyn
Davey, diedMonday in a London Hospital.  Mr. Raphael began writing crime
mysteries in the mid-1950s, many with an intellectual lead character named
Ambrose Usher, a scholar who often freelanced as an agent for the foreign
office. Among his books were The Undoubted Deed, The Naked Villainy and Murder
in Paradise.

   James Hill, 75, a British film director whose movies included "Born Free" and
a remake of "Black Beauty," died last Sunday in London. The cause of his death
was not detailed. Mr. Hills was best-known film was "Born Free," which starred
Virginia McKenna and Bill Travers.

   Iris Adrian, 81, who portrayed a sassy blond in many

   of the 150 films she appeared in during the 1930s through 1950s, died Sept.
17 in her Hollywood home, a friend said this week. The cause of death apparently
was from complications of injuries she suffered in the January earthquake in
Northridge, Calif., a published report said. Most recently Miss Adrian, born
Iris Adrian Hosletter, had made appearances in late 1960s movies such as "The
Odd Couple," and "The Apple Dumpling Gang." In many of her early roles she
played snappy waitresses and nightclub gals. She also had appeared in "The Road
to Zanzibar."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1994


                             598 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              October 16, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 51

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: Researchers Zero In on Heart-Defect Gene

BYLINE: By Dan Hurley

BODY:


   An international team of researchers has found the genetic Zip codes -- but
not the home addresses -- of two new genes linked to a heart defect that causes
sudden death.

   The discoveries mark "the dawn of a new era -- genetic cardiology," according
to an editorial accompanying the study in the October issue of the journal
Nature Genetics.

   A co-author of the paper, Dr. Arthur J. Moss of the University of Rochester
Medical School in New York, said the study is "big stuff, it really is. This
whole field of molecular cardiology is going to blossom."

   Eventually, genetic diagnosis may allow doctors to find people susceptible to
heart disease and treat them before their illness becomes life-threatening, Moss
said.

   Genetic therapy also may one day be available to treat heart disease, he
said. Cardiologists could "put a catheter into a coronary artery and inject a
virus with the correcting gene directly into the heart," he said.

   The defect Moss and others examined is a rhythm disorder in which the time
between the softer and louder of the heart's two beats ("bu-BUMP") becomes
dangerously long. Called long QT syndrome, it often leads to sudden death in
affected people by age 20.

   Long QT syndrome is so rare that during the past 35 years, only about 1,500
people have been identified with the disease in about 400 families.

   The greater significance of the new study is in uncovering a variety of
genetic pathways that may cause other, more common heart-rhythm disturbances.

   Such disorders are so common that sudden deaths caused by them account for 11
percent of all deaths in the United States each year. Although commonly confused
with heart attacks, they are far more dangerous and sudden, giving the victim no
time to reach for the telephone or, when driving, to pull over to the side of
the road.

   Essentially, they are electrical disturbances in the heart muscles, causing
the heart's pumping rhythm to change from the smooth, syncopated coordination of
a symphony orchestra to the chaotic, ineffectual sputtering of a junior
high-school band.

   By uncovering two new genes linked to such electrical disturbances, the new
study shows that more than one chemical process is involved in recharging the
heart muscles as they prepare for each new pump, Moss said.

   "The recharge involves many different channels -- sodium, potassium, calcium
channels that are responsible for recharging the cells," he said.

   "In all likelihood, what we're picking up with the different gene linkages is
the different currents that are operative, he said."

   In 1991, a group led by Dr. Mark T. Keating of the University of Utah -- who
is the senior author of the new paper -- reported that in families where long QT
syndrome was common, an area on the short arm of chromosome 11 was involved.

   Although they were not able to identify the specific gene, they were able to
narrow it down to a tiny area that was well-marked.

   In the new paper, they report that in nine families, they found long QT
syndrome to be linked to locations on the small arm of chromosome 3 and on the
long arm of chromosome 7.

   But an association between the disease and any of the three gene locations
could not be found for three of the families, suggesting that at least one other
gene also must be linked to long QT syndrome.

   Dr. Prakash Deedwania, chief of cardiology at the University of California,
San Francisco, in Fresno, said that "this kind of research is going to bring us
in the future to uncover the genetic basis of other cardiac abnormalities."

   An editorial accompanying the study said the research should be useful to
doctors seeking to prevent sudden death in affected patients.

   "Early identification of genotypically affected, asymptomatic individuals
would enable a detailed clinical work-up and appropriate therapy," wrote Ketty
Schwartz, a doctor in Paris.

   Preventive treatment includes taking drugs called beta blockers, which have
been shown to reduce the risk of heart-rhythm disturbance.

   For the patients who do not respond to such drugs, doctors can remove a small
portion of the heart muscle from which the disturbed electrical signals emanate.

GRAPHIC: In laser heart surgery, doctors use this $ 350,000 machine to apply a
carbon-dioxide laser to the surface of the heart. The laser, controlled by a
computer, fires between heartbeats. See also related stories.; Medical Tribune
News Service

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1994


                             599 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1994 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      October 13, 1994 Thursday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-14

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Genetic-defects 'fix' discovered CU researchers build on work of Tom
Cech

BYLINE: Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical/Science Writer

BODY:

   A way to "fix" genetic defects in cells has been developed by University of
Colorado researchers who have built on the work that won Tom Cech a Nobel Prize
in 1989.

    The process holds promise for fixing such genetic diseases as muscular
dystrophy, cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia. However, researchers said the
technique - molecular reconstructive surgery - was done only in Escherichia
coli, a common bacterium.

   "There are still significant obstacles that the development of this new
technology must overcome," said Cech, a CU-Boulder researcher. "Our hope is to
set the stage for an approach that will become practical in the next decade."

   Efficiency of the process would have to be increased and the system adapted
to human cells before human genetic disease could be treated.

   A paper in today's issue of the journal Nature describes the findings by Cech
and his CU-Boulder biochemistry colleague Bruce Sullenger, both associated with
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

   The technique involves inserting a catalytic ribonucleic acid - RNA -
molecule, known as a ribozyme, into a cell to replace a defective portion of
messenger RNA, which carries genetic instructions.

   The ribozyme essentially snips out the "bad" RNA and replaces it with "good"
RNA information so the genetic material can produce normal proteins, the authors
said.

   In some genetic defects, mutated, deleted or rearranged genetic material
produces aberrant messenger RNA and, ultimately, nonfunctioning proteins.

   Ribozymes are molecules of RNA, a form of genetic material that is copied
from chromosomal deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA. Ribozymes have the ability to
speed up or to catalyze very specific chemical reactions in living cells.

   Cech shared the Nobel Prize for chemistry for the discovery of RNA catalysis.
Prior to the ribozyme discovery, it was thought that protein enzymes were the
only agents capable of speeding up biological reactions and processes.

   The scientists said RNA repair technology depends on development of
gene-therapy methods. Gene therapy involves introducing DNA to human tissues,
where it is taken up by the cells and the information is expressed genetically.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1994


                             600 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              October 11, 1994, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 210 words

HEADLINE: Cell Transplant May Be Treatment Breakthrough for Brain Disorders

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The transplant of cells into the brain offers hope for breakthroughs in
treatments of brain injuries, genetic disorders and tumport, researchers said
Monday.

   The research may show new ways to deliver medication to the brain, said Dr.
John Laterra, principal investigator on the project. Medication is often
delivered through the bloodstream, but both the brain and tumors have barriers
that naturally thwart such a delivery strategy.

   The breakthrough involves endothelial cells, which are plentiful in blood
vessels, and can survive and proliferate after transplant.

   Cells in the experiments were genetically modified to secrete therapeutic
agents. Then they are transplanted into the affected areas of the brain. Early
results show the cells slow tumor growth.

   A report on the research at Johns Hopkins University and Kennedy Krieger
Institute in Boston is being published in today's edition of the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   "This important work will bridge the gap between what is occurring now in
gene therapy with the identification of therapeutic agents, and being able to
deliver them to where they are needed," said Gary Goldstein, president of
Kennedy Krieger.

   The institute helps children with brain disorders.

GRAPHIC: Reuters

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1994
