
                             801 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 4, 2003, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: Ailing San Diego biotech cuts its work force in half

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Corautus Genetics, a company created recently from the merger of two
cash-strapped gene therapy companies, said yesterday that it has cut half of its
small work force.

   The publicly traded San Diego biotechnology company let 15 of its 30
employees go to conserve its dwindling cash and focus resources on a proposed
midstage Phase 2 study of its gene therapy for heart disease.

   Corautus, created in September by the merger of San Diego's GenStar
Therapeutics and privately held Vascular Genetics, said it has about $5 million
in cash -- enough to finance operations for about three months.

   The company also announced yesterday that its president, Robert Sobol, the
former chief executive of GenStar, has resigned.  Shares of Corautus closed
unchanged at $1.45.

   The financially troubled company is one of many area biotech firms that are
cutting back on staff and research programs, either because of setbacks in
clinical trials or an inability to raise capital in the current economic
climate.

   Earlier this week, Carlsbad's Isis Pharmaceuticals cut 50 jobs, part of a
restructuring related to the failure last month of its lead drug candidate in a
clinical trial.  Isis has enough cash to finance operations to 2006.

   Corautus' financial condition remains precarious.  The company will need to
raise more money to launch its clinical trial, but investors are particular wary
of some subsets of biotech -- among them gene therapy.

   Despite decades of research, no gene therapy company has gotten a product
approved in the United States, and the field has suffered various clinical
setbacks, including the death in 1999 of a gene therapy patient.

   More recently, the Food and Drug Administration in January put a temporary
hold on enrollment of new patients in some U.S. gene therapy trials after it
learned that two children in French gene therapy trials had developed leukemia.

   Corautus is developing a therapy that utilizes a gene that promotes the
growth of new blood vessels to repair heart damage and had hoped to launch a
human study in the second half of 2003.

   "The public and private equity financial markets are the toughest we have
seen in years," said Richard Otto, chief executive of Corautus, in a written
statement.  "It is critical that we make preparations that enable us to operate
at the most efficient levels, while ensuring that we initiate our trial on
schedule."

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2003


                             802 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              April 4, 2003 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 405 words

HEADLINE: Ailing San Diego biotech cuts its work force in half

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Corautus Genetics, a company created recently from the merger of two
cash-strapped gene therapy companies, said yesterday that it has cut half of its
small work force. The publicly traded San Diego biotechnology company let 15 of
its 30 employees go to conserve its dwindling cash and focus resources on a
proposed midstage Phase 2 study of its gene therapy for heart disease. Corautus,
created in September by the merger of San Diego's GenStar Therapeutics and
privately held Vascular Genetics, said it has about $5 million in cash -- enough
to finance operations for about three months. The company also announced
yesterday that its president, Robert Sobol, the former chief executive of
GenStar, has resigned.

   Shares of Corautus closed unchanged at $1.45. The financially troubled
company is one of many area biotech firms that are cutting back on staff and
research programs, either because of setbacks in clinical trials or an inability
to raise capital in the current economic climate. Earlier this week, Carlsbad's
Isis Pharmaceuticals cut 50 jobs, part of a restructuring related to the failure
last month of its lead drug candidate in a clinical trial.

   Isis has enough cash to finance operations to 2006. Corautus' financial
condition remains precarious.

   The company will need to raise more money to launch its clinical trial, but
investors are particular wary of some subsets of biotech -- among them gene
therapy. Despite decades of research, no gene therapy company has gotten a
product approved in the United States, and the field has suffered various
clinical setbacks, including the death in 1999 of a gene therapy patient. More
recently, the Food and Drug Administration in January put a temporary hold on
enrollment of new patients in some U.S. gene therapy trials after it learned
that two children in French gene therapy trials had developed leukemia. Corautus
is developing a therapy that utilizes a gene that promotes the growth of new
blood vessels to repair heart damage and had hoped to launch a human study in
the second half of 2003. "The public and private equity financial markets are
the toughest we have seen in years," said Richard Otto, chief executive of
Corautus, in a written statement.

   "It is critical that we make preparations that enable us to operate at the
most efficient levels, while ensuring that we initiate our trial on schedule."
Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             803 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2003 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                 April 3, 2003 Thursday Met and metro Editions

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: ANOTHER ALZHEIMER'S TREATMENT; Boosting level of brain enzyme looks
promising

BYLINE: GIL GIDEON, ggil@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   Byline: GIDEON GIL

   Source: The Courier-Journal

   Increasing the levels of a natural brain enzyme could break down or prevent
the formation of protein plaques that accumulate in the brains of Alzheimer's
disease patients, according to research at the University of Kentucky and
elsewhere.

   Many scientists believe that the plaques, consisting of fragments of the
amyloid protein, are a major cause of Alzheimer's and that preventing their
formation could be a treatment method.

   Previous research has shown that areas of the brain most affected by plaque
formation have the lowest levels of the enzyme neprilysin and that mice without
this enzyme have higher levels of the amyloid protein fragments in their brains.

   A team of scientists - including Lou Hersh, chairman of the UK medical
school's Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry - used gene therapy
to increase the level of neprilysin in one side of the brains of mice.

   They found that the number of protein plaques in the treated side was reduced
by about half compared with the untreated side, Hersh said.

   Hersh and colleagues at The Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La
Jolla, Calif., and at the University of California San Diego reported their
findings last week in The Journal of Neuroscience. The research was funded by
the National Institute on Aging, the Alzheimer's Association and the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research.

   "What this paper does is show the potential for using these enzymes for
preventing Alzheimer's disease, or the progression of Alzheimer's disease,"
Hersh said, though he added that it would be many years before it could lead to
an effective treatment in humans.

   Further experiments at the University of South Carolina, which have not yet
been published, show that increasing neprilysin levels in mice before plaques
have accumulated can prevent their formation, Hersh said.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2003


                             804 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 1, 2003 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg.E-1

LENGTH: 398 words

HEADLINE: IT'S PITTSBURGH VS. CLEVELAND FOR BIOTECH STAR;
 REGION HOPES TO LURE FAST-GROWING FIRM FROM OHIO RIVAL, OTHER SUITORS

BYLINE: JOYCE GANNON, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Pittsburgh is one of four regions hoping to entice a promising Cleveland
biotech company to relocate its headquarters.

    The company, Athersys Inc., is seeking $100 million in capital to expand and
has talked to economic development officials in Pittsburgh and elsewhere about
leaving Cleveland if it can't secure the money from state and local sources
there.

    Athersys officials in early March were in Pittsburgh to meet with Donald
Smith, interim chief executive of the Pittsburgh Life Sciences Greenhouse, an
incubator for biotech enterprises. Smith was not available for comment
yesterday.

    Pam Golden, spokeswoman for the Pittsburgh Regional Alliance, said she was
not able to discuss the region's efforts to put together a economic development
package to attract Athersys. The city of Cleveland expects to present its
financial incentive package to Athersys by late tomorrow, said Tim Mueller,
chief development officer for that city.

    "We're being pretty aggressive," said Mueller, who declined to give
specifics of what Cleveland will offer Athersys to stay in town.

    The 8-year-old firm develops therapeutic products for life-threatening
diseases and is engaged in stem-cell research and gene therapy.

    Founded in 1995 by two former Stanford University scientists, Athersys has
100 employees and sales of about $10 million. It has outgrown its current
location in Midtown Cleveland and has an option to build a $60 million
headquarters facility in the city's suburbs.

    Besides Pittsburgh, Athersys has been in discussions with officials in
Phoenix, Minneapolis-St. Paul, and the Research Triangle area of North Carolina
that includes Raleigh-Durham.

    "If stem cell research and gene therapy is their focus, it's hard to imagine
a more strategic, compelling location for them than Pittsburgh," said Tom
Petzinger, chief executive officer of LaunchCyte, an Oakland company that
invests in and helps develop biotech firms. Petzinger said Pittsburgh offers a
strong base of support for those technologies including the University of
Pittsburgh's McGowan Center for Regenerative Medicine and other biotech efforts
under way at Pitt.

    Convincing Athersys to locate here would be a coup for the region because
the company is "one of the crown jewels they highlight in Cleveland in their
efforts to develop a local life sciences industry," Petzinger said.


NOTES:
Joyce Gannon can be reached at jgannon@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1580.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2003


                             805 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      March 30, 2003 Sunday FINAL Edition

SECTION: ARTS & SOCIETY, Pg. 6F

LENGTH: 4370 words

HEADLINE: To Protect and Do No Harm;
 Bioethicist Ruth Faden spends her days balancing what is medically possible
against what is right, on a national scale.

BYLINE: LINELL SMITH

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   News from the world of bioethics often produces a high-tech tangle of
science: Stem-cell therapy ... reproductive cloning ... pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis. Then a headline hits home: Hospitals Outline Smallpox Vaccination
Plan.

   The vaccination: To get it or not to get it?

   To be safe in case of a biological war that seems increasingly possible? Or
to risk needless side effects, illness, perhaps even death?

   Bioethicist Ruth Faden takes the matter further: Should those who are
healthiest have a duty to be vaccinated to keep the disease from spreading to
those most apt to be harmed by it?

   Faden, who directs the Phoebe R. Berman Bioethics Institute at Johns Hopkins
University, has been thinking about the many implications of national smallpox
vaccination for quite some time. It's her job to encourage the right people to
take on such complex issues so that public policy can be both reasonable and
ethical.

   "One of the really big questions is the question of compensation," she says.
"So what ought to happen if someone becomes ill from the vaccine?

   "We've thought through a set of commitments for what we owe those who put
their lives in harm's way on a military context or law enforcement context. But
what are we going to do if people are in harm's way merely because they live in
the United States and are the subject of hostile attacks? ... Do we want to fold
what we ought to do with respect to smallpox into the model that already exists
for children harmed as a consequence of traditional childhood immunization?"

   Faden knows the final decisions will be made by politicians, the same group
that voted for the victims' compensation fund after Sept. 11 without thinking
clearly about its premise or consequences.

   This is why she wants to get people talking about such issues now, why she
has written newspaper articles about this proposed defense against bioterrorism.
She wants knowledgeable discussion: On smallpox, on stem-cell therapy, on health
care rationing, on genetic testing, on physician-assisted suicide, on HIV-AIDS,
on informed consent, on the many pressing medical and scientific issues
beginning to shape life in the 21st century.

   And she's looking for all points of view -- just as she did nine years ago
when she chaired the president's advisory committee on human radiation
experiments. Faden says part of her role is to bring together many minds from
many disciplines to consider the ethical fallout from scientific success.

   "This work is humbling, really humbling," she says. "I feel like I've really
begun to accomplish something if there begins to be careful attention to 'This
is a problem.' "

   But how many problems can you field at once? Several years ago, in the days
when grandmothers started giving birth to triplets, a student of Faden's voiced
the unspoken:

   "She said, 'How do you keep up with the Freak of the Week phenomenon?' " the
bioethicist recalls. "It's a horrible way of phrasing it, but some weeks do feel
like that. You get up in the morning and you're afraid to look in the
newspaper."

   Ruth Faden is rushing to another meeting. Petite, bright-eyed, impeccably
dressed, the 53-year-old scholar is pulling a small suitcase on wheels that
serves as her briefcase. Despite a bad back, the pace is brisk. "Fast women run
in our family," her mother used to say, and whatever Faden does seems to have
particular urgency and focus.

   Take her ability to chair a meeting, for instance. To consider all
perspectives while moving forward in an effective, timely manner -- hardly small
potatoes when you're steering philosophers, surgeons, lawyers and others with
lots to say. It's as if she's conducting different sections of an orchestra, one
colleague notes, recognizing the strength of different voices and helping them
work together.

   "In a room full of very smart people, Ruth's not afraid to say 'Gee, I'm not
sure about that.' Or 'I'm not sure what the right answer is,' " says Joe
Carrese, a Hopkins physician affiliated with the institute. "While typically
she's the one with the brilliant insights, she's not afraid to say if she
doesn't have the absolute handle on what should be done or how it should be
done. It invites everyone to let down their guard and think more creatively."

   Over the past eight years, Faden has managed to guide the Bioethics Institute
into a highly respected, highly independent star in the vast Hopkins universe.
Scholars associated with the center have helped develop guidelines in such areas
as obtaining fetal tissue for stem-cell research. They have discussed the care
of dying patients and the protocol of AIDS research in developing countries.
They helped set the national guidelines under which pregnant women and newborns
should be tested for HIV. Faden has also helped facilitate the process of
self-examination: She contributed to the inquiry into Hopkins' own research
practices after the death of a 24-year-old volunteer in a 2001 asthma study.

   Her stewardship has helped make the institute "world-class," says Tom Murray,
president of the Hastings Center in Garrison, N.Y., the nation's most prominent
independent bioethics research institute.

   "A great many people would say it's the best university-based bioethics
center in the United States, or for that matter, the world," he says.

   Now the institute has a separate presence in Washington: The Genetics and
Public Policy Center. Two years ago, the Bioethics Institute received $9.9
million from the Pew Charitable Trusts to establish this program dedicated
exclusively to raising public awareness of genetic science and the questions it
generates.

   Because the institute is academically based, it does not foster an
ideological agenda such as those often found at policy think-tanks such as the
Heritage Foundation and RAND Corpora-tion. It also remains independent of any
department at Hopkins. The institute draws its roughly two dozen faculty members
from many parts of the university: medicine, public health, nursing, and arts
and sciences. Their mission is to train the next generation of physicians and
scholars, educate the public and advance the national discussion on bioethics.

   The institute does not take an official position on any issue, although that
isn't what reporters on deadline want to hear.

   "Simply saying 'This is wrong' or 'This should be morally permitted' doesn't
do anything to advance the (public) dialogue," Faden says. "One of the problems
of becoming more prominent is that some people don't want to hear your reasons,
they just want to hear your decision.

   "What I can contribute is my reasoning. You want to hear why I think it's
wrong so you can see whether you find my reasoning persuasive, whether it
coheres with your own values and commitments and beliefs. If it doesn't, then I
want to hear your reasons why you think my view is incorrect or why you want a
different outcome than I do on moral terms."

   And the scholar always reserves the right to change her mind.

   "I would certainly never want to be in a situation where I couldn't say 'I
was wrong. I took that position last month or six years ago, but I've since
changed my view and here's why ...

   "To some people, (the ethics of) physician-assisted death is very obvious. To
me it's not. I think that it would be really awful if people had the view that
you couldn't see subtle differences between situations such that you might hold
one view in one situation and not in another."

   Much of her time at the institute has been filled with such challenges. Faden
might go from one meeting about the gender burden in elder care -- in America,
the single best predictor of being institutionalized is not having a daughter --
into a staff conference about how to handle advance medical directives for an
adolescent with AIDS. There, the attending physician may be mired in an
emotionally-charged quandary over how to respond to the requests of a dying
patient who is 17 -- still legally a child -- but whose parents are nowhere to
be found.

   "Or what if someone wants their life support removed," she asks, "and the
parents want otherwise? It's an awful, agonizing problem -- the stuff of which
TV dramas are made."

   When Ruth Faden was born, the field of bioethics did not exist. As the only
child of Holocaust survivors, however, she grew up with an acute awareness of
justice and civil rights.

   Faden lived in Oxford Circle, a middle-class section of northeast
Philadelphia where her father worked as a furrier. Her mother, who had talents
as an artist and poet, altered clothes for wealthy women in her rowhouse
basement. She also spoke out often about the horrors she and her husband had
experienced in the concentration camps of Auschwitz and Birkenau.

   "She would talk to church groups and school groups and youth groups very
articulately and very compellingly," Faden says. "For obvious reasons, she was
very committed to civil rights issues. She was deeply offended by any hint of
anything that would smack of racial or religious injustice."

   The immigrant couple worked hard to send their child to college, an
opportunity they had been denied. Ruth got her undergraduate degree in American
civilization at the University of Pennsylvania -- studying the life of women in
Colonial America -- and wrote her master's thesis on 17th-century poet Anne
Bradstreet at the University of Chicago.

   But her activist beliefs also pressed her into the service of social change.
While studying in Chicago, Faden took a part-time job teaching women students
about their reproductive options, helping to develop a program of sex education
for the city's schools. Later, she studied public health management at Berkeley,
eventually getting a second master's in public health education and a doctorate
in health psychology.

   It was the early 1970s, the heyday of such groups as the Coalition for the
Medical Rights of Women, a hodgepodge of attorneys, health-care providers and
graduate students looking into such issues as sterilization abuse. Faden became
a dedicated volunteer.

   "The most galvanizing issue in California at that moment -- and, in part,
nationally -- had to do with allegations that women, particularly minority and
especially Hispanic non-English speaking women, were being forcibly sterilized
(when they gave birth) without their complete understanding," she says.

   By then, the country had awakened to the abuses of medical research and
issues of informed consent. The post-World War II Nuremberg trials had revealed
the horror of human experimentation by Nazi physicians. Later, the media's
discovery of the syphilis research at Alabama's Tuskegee Institute brought the
outrage home to America. In 1973, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts held
hearings into how the U.S. Public Health Service had abused nearly 400
African-Americans by knowingly withholding treatment for their venereal disease.

   For decades, government researchers studied the progression of syphilis in a
group of poor men who merely thought they were receiving free medical care. No
one told them they were part of a medical experiment. No one told them they had
syphilis -- or warned their sexual partners. No one told them the pink pills
they swallowed to treat their "bad blood" were placebos.

   And no one gave them penicillin after it was proven to cure syphilis.

   "Kennedy's hearings resulted in very high visibility for the first time on
questions we would certainly now call questions in bioethics. But we didn't have
that vocabulary yet," Faden says.

   There were other ethical dilemmas as well. Abortion and pre-birth genetic
testing such as amniocentesis raised more questions: When did life begin? What
were the rights of the unborn?

   With more machines sustaining "life," what was the definition of death? When
was it ethical to harvest an organ from a donor? When did a patient have the
right to die?

   With limited medical resources, who should have access to lifesaving
technologies?

   It was becoming apparent that medical breakthroughs could bring new forms of
discrimination.

   Spurred by her concern about patients' rights, Faden plunged into an
examination of the issue of informed consent, the practice of educating patients
fully about a proposed treatment -- including its risks -- before obtaining
their permission to implement it. Ultimately her work led her to write what is
still the field's landmark text, A History and Theory of Informed Consent, with
her husband, philosopher Tom Beauchamp of Georgetown University.

   Meanwhile, conferences on such issues were attracting scholars from law,
philosophy, medicine and the social sciences who gradually formed the field and
its interdisciplinary approach to problem solving. Professorships in bioethics
began to appear at many medical schools.

   Faden returned east to teach at the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health and
Georgetown's Kennedy Institute of Ethics, eventually initiating a joint degree
program between the two universities. Before long, she had attracted a core
group of scholars from different departments at Hopkins that met monthly to
discuss medical cases and issues. She was increasingly sought out as a mentor. A
book she co-edited, AIDS, Women, and the Next Generation, influenced federal
policy.

   The assignment that catapulted her to national prominence came in 1994. At
the request of President Bill Clinton, Faden agreed to chair an advisory
committee looking into the claim that the government had conducted radiation
experiments on unwitting human subjects during the Cold War and subsequent
years.

   Faden quickly assembled a staff of 60 experts. For the next 18 months, she
worked day and night, sifting through scientists' accounts and witnesses'
testimony. The committee interviewed hundreds of people and combed through tens
of thousands of documents to uncover not only the extent of experimentation, but
also to determine whether the government had acted in an unethical manner.

   Bioethicist Art Caplan has called the effort "a pioneering public policy
project on how to integrate historical social scientific work and ethical
recommendations."

   It was also a major juggling act for a working mother. Although Karine,
Faden's oldest child, was in college, the scholar also had a 7-year-old son.
Every day, Faden made a point of leaving her office in Washington early enough
to have dinner with the family at their home in Montgomery County. After putting
Zack to bed, she'd head back to the office, returning home after midnight to
grab a few hours of sleep before it was time to get her son ready for school.
Then it was off again to Washington to hear some people defend aspects of the
experiments while others told of their devastation.

   "There were always potentially conflictful situations (between) people, like
the people who were still working in Los Alamos and all the people who thought
they were victims," remembers Ruth Macklin, professor of bioethics at Albert
Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, N.Y. "Ruth brought everyone
together."

   After reviewing the evidence, the committee decided that much of the research
was unethical and suggested the government apologize. In addition, the committee
recommended criteria for compensating certain individuals because the government
had kept the studies secret from them or their families.

   At the end of the investigation, the U.S. government did apologize to victims
and their families, recommitting to a greater awareness of informed consent and
human research policies.

   And Hopkins realized that Ruth Faden was too valuable to lose. The university
moved forward on its plans to launch a bioethics institute, and offered her the
top slot.

   Running the Bioethics Institute is akin to running a school with multiple
departments and research pursuits, says Jeffrey Kahn, director of the Center for
Bioethics at University of Minnesota.

   "People are often very good scholars, but they're not great teachers. Or
great teachers, but not administrators. Ruth is a great scholar and teacher and
she can lead groups," he says.

   She's also good at raising money. Since the founding of the institute, Faden
has helped obtain $31 million toward stabilizing its future.

   "I feel passionately that bioethics is a field that can make a social as well
as intellectual contribution," she says. "That said, it's not essential to a
university the way an English department is or the way a department of medicine
is to a medical school. You can envision a world without bioethics programs --
and that made me anxious."

   Although there are roughly 50 bioethics centers attached to academic medical
centers in the U.S., only a handful have Hopkins' size and scope. One current
project at the institute, for instance, concerns finding ethical ways to obtain
informed consent from people with progressive dementia while another seeks to
improve methods of talking to grieving relatives about donating organs from a
newly deceased loved one.

   Scholar Jeremy Sugarman sees similarities between bioethics and Wallace
Stevens' poem "Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird."

   "There are many ways of working in the field of bioethics which may involve
people from multiple disciplines," he says. "To do it well, you need to have an
understanding of the methods and limitations of its disciplines: Philosophy,
law, history, religion and theology, ethnography, quantitative research,
qualitative research, economics. And depending what issues you're addressing,
medicine and public health."

   Sugarman, who heads the Center for the Study of Medical Ethics and Humanities
at Duke University Medical Center, is a colleague whom Faden mentored. So is
Minnesota's Jeffrey Kahn, who marvels at Faden's ability to chair meetings.

   "She understands the issues herself because she's very, very smart, but she's
also able to bring along a group of people not all equally versed in various
disciplines, and make sure everyone reaches a high level of understanding and is
in real agreement," he says. "You can always achieve consensus if you water
something down sufficiently, but she reaches it at a high level."

   And somehow, in the middle of meetings and fund-raising, Faden is also moving
forward with co-author Madison Powers of Georgetown on a book about what a just
society owes its citizens in the realm of health care. The theory she has
developed carries practical implications for such areas as Medicare reform.

   "What does it mean to make Medicare free only to people who have the
financial need? It's no longer an entitlement," she says. "So what were the
foundational justifications for Medicare in the first place? Was it that we
wanted to help those in greatest need and the elderly were among those? Or did
we think the elderly deserved it because of the contributions they had made? It
makes some considerable difference what our commitments were at the time and
also what commitments we'd like to make now."

   Faden believes America may be uniquely suited to accept what bioethics has to
offer. Part of the reason the field has developed so quickly and dramatically,
she says, is because the nation does not define itself by religion or race.

   "Although some proportion of our population would look to churches or
synagogues or mosques regarding (bioethical) issues, some significant proportion
wouldn't. In any event, no one's looking to the same single source. So, when a
moral problem like abortion pops up, there's no one place to go for the answer.
There's a hole. In part, it has been filled by bioethics as an intellectual
enterprise."

   The fact that the discipline moves different perspectives toward consensus --
reflecting the nation's pluralistic nature -- is appealing to Americans, she
thinks, even if the process is slow.

   "I think some issues can be sorted right out, but they tend not to be very
compelling," she says. "If something is obviously right or obviously wrong, then
it's obviously right or wrong. When it takes real work -- both analytically and
humanly -- to get clear on the position you're defending, it gets tough."

   And for Faden, that's when her work is most engaging.

   A Brief History of Bioethics

   1947

   Nuremberg Tribunal convicts physicians of committing war crimes under the
guise of medical experimentation. Leads to the Nuremberg Code of directives for
human experimentation. The first principle: The voluntary consent of a human
subject is absolutely essential.

   1954

   Donation of one kidney from a healthy patient to a relative. Is it right to
subject a healthy person to major surgery and the loss of an organ even to save
the life of another?

   1956

   Mentally retarded children at Willowbrook State School in Staten Island,
N.Y., are injected with hepatitis virus, a practice that continues over a number
of years, so that researchers can better understand the natural history of the
disease and develop a vaccine. Should people who are incapable of informed
consent, such as children and people with mental disabilities, ever become
research subjects?

   1962

   Life magazine article: "They decide who lives, who dies" tells of a committee
in Seattle, mostly non-physicians, whose duty is to select patients for entry
into its new chronic hemodialysis program. Who should have access to scarce
lifesaving technology? Who gets to choose the patients?

   1967

   South Africa's Dr. Christiaan Barnard transplants human heart from donor into
a patient with terminal heart disease. Was the heart donor truly dead? Was heart
taken without regard to wishes of its source while living? How do you define
death?

   1968

   Harvard Medical School committee proposes definition of brain death, an
action that allows more organs to be harvested to save lives.

   1973

   U.S. Supreme Court issues Roe vs. Wade decision, authored by Justice Harry
Blackmun, allowing women to have abortions. Should women have control over
reproduction? What are the rights of the unborn?

   Sen. Edward M. Kennedy holds hearings into the Tuskegee syphilis study, a
Public Health Service experiment that deprived a group of African-American men
of treatment for syphilis for more than 30 years. Raises issues again of medical
experimentation and informed consent.

   1974

   National Research Act. Federal government publishes comprehensive regulations
protecting rights of human subjects in biomedical and behavioral research.

   1976

   Karen Ann Quinlan's irreversible coma leads to decision in first legal case
about life support ever adjudicated. The court decides her parents may order her
respirator discontinued. She dies in 1985. Case spurs right-to-die and hospice
movements. What is meaningful life? Who decides?

   1978

   Louise Brown, first "in vitro" baby, born. Should the "natural" magic of
conception be manufactured in a test tube?

   1981

   "Defining Death," a report by a presidential commission on ethical problems
in medicine, offers a legal definition of death: "The irreversible cessation of
cardio-respiratory functions or the irreversible cessation of all functions of
the brain including the brain stem." Over the next few years, this definition is
adopted by the majority of state legislatures.

   1982

   The Baby Doe case. The parents of a Down syndrome baby decline permission for
surgery to correct an intestinal defect, preferring to see the baby die rather
than grow up retarded. Hospital in Indiana seeks court order to perform surgery
despite the parents' objections. Courts uphold parents' decision; baby dies. The
public becomes aware of the ethics of neonatal intensive care. Does anyone have
a right to decide that a baby's life is not worth living?

   1982

   Barney Clark becomes the first person implanted with Jarvik 7 mechanical
heart, a permanent artificial heart that robs him of freedom and causes many
strokes before he dies 112 days later. Is a medical intervention successful if
its only benefit is to extend life?

   1987

   Baby M.'s surrogate mother refuses to relinquish the child she contracted to
bear for a couple. Finally, courts give baby to the couple but grant the
biological mother visitation rights. What determines a parent?

   1990

   Human Genome Project gets under way.

   1994

   Italian woman gives birth at 62. Is there something "unnatural," and
therefore wrong, about science helping post-menopausal women bear children?

   Assisted-suicide legislation accepted in Oregon by popular vote.

   President Bill Clinton appoints national

   Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments investigating possibly
unethical experiments funded

   during the Cold War and

   in subsequent years

   by the government.

   The committee decides that much of this research was unethical and

   suggests that the government apologize.

   1996

   Dolly the sheep cloned

   by nuclear transfer.

   Who has the right to create life?

   1998

   Scientists establish cultures of human embryonic stem cells that can grow
into any specialized cell. Inflames controversies about the moral significance
of embryos.

   1999

   HIV vaccine trials raise questions about use of placebos in clinical trials
conducted by wealthy nations in Africa and Asia.

   Death of Jesse Gelsinger in gene therapy experiment raises further questions
about protection of human subjects.

   2000

   NIH and Celera Genomics announce completed draft of entire human genome.

   2001

   President Bush backs limited research on existing lines of human stem cells;
no new embryo use.

   2002

   The Netherlands becomes the first nation to legalize euthanasia.

   This list has been compiled from various sources, including The Birth of
Bioethics by Albert R. Jonsen and the National Reference Center for Bioethics
Literature at Georgetown University's Kennedy Institute of Ethics.

   The field of bioethics developed in response to such medical abuses as the
Tuskegee syphilis study and to the "suffocating medical paternalism" of doctors,
according to Dan Callahan, a founder of the Hastings Center, a bioethics
research institute in Garrison, N.Y.

   "It answered the need for some strategies to evaluate the meaning of the new
medical knowledge and technology, especially genetic engineering," he wrote in
an essay for The Nation.

   The following timeline of the history of bioethics contains important events
and some of the questions they raise.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Ruth Faden, director of the Phoebe R. Berman Bioethics
Institute at Johns Hopkins.; 2. 3-day-old, 8-cell embryo created through in
vitro fertilization; 3. Nurember Tribunal; 4. A lab assistant examines sample of
purified DNA as part of the Humane Genome project.; 5. Dr. Christian Barnard; 6.
Justice Harry Blackmun; 7. Karen Ann Quinlan; 8. Louise Brown; 9. Barney Clark;
10. Baby M.; 11. Human Embryonic stem cells; 12. RUTH FADEN; 1. Doug Kapustin :
Sun Staff; 2. Photos by Newscom, Associated Press; 3. Associated Press File,
1946; 12. PHOTO BY DOUG KAPUSTIN / BACKGROUND BY PETER YUILL : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2003


                             806 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 9; Column 2; Society Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 187 words

HEADLINE: WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS;
Lauren Shaftel, Matthew Williams

BODY:

   Lauren Ruth Shaftel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Mel A. Shaftel of New York,
was married yesterday to Dr. Matthew Lanier Williams, a son of Lynn H. Williams
of Birmingham, Ala., and the late Larry M. Williams.

   The Rev. Dr. Forrest Church, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the
ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.

        Mrs. Williams, 30, is a freelance public relations writer and marketing
specialist in Durham, N.C. She graduated from Yale and received a master's
degree in print journalism from the University of Southern California.

    Her father, who is retired, was a vice chairman of Lehman Brothers, the New
York investment bank. Her mother, Pamela Shaftel, is a trustee of Kent Place
School, a private elementary-through-high school in Summit, N.J., from which she
retired as a fifth-grade teacher.

   Dr. Williams, 29, is a research fellow in gene therapy for heart failure at
Duke University Medical Center in Durham. He graduated from Duke and received
his medical degree there. His mother teaches science at Pittman Middle School in
Hueytown, Ala. His father was a lawyer in Birmingham.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2003


                             807 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      March 28, 2003 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 3B City/County Digest

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: City/County Digest

DATELINE: SPARROWS POINT

BODY:

   In Baltimore County

   Man, 57, burned in explosion at plant dies of his injuries

   SPARROWS POINT - The 57-year-old Baltimore Marine Industries Inc. employee
who was severely burned in an explosion at its Sparrows Point plant Sunday died
from his injuries yesterday at Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center.

   James Ham of the 3600 block of Howard Park Ave. in Baltimore and another man
were at a transformer substation near a ship launching facility in the 600 block
of Shipyard Road when an oil switching device they were working on exploded. The
other man was not injured, officials said.

   Investigators have determined the explosion and resulting fire began in the
electrical transformer and were accidental, said Capt. Glenn A. Blackwell, a
county Fire Department spokesman.
Detectives seek victims of purse snatchings

   TOWSON - Baltimore County detectives are seeking other possible victims of an
East Baltimore man accused of grabbing purses from elderly women in
supermarkets.

   Troy Lee Brockington, 24, of the 5200 block of Anthony Ave. was charged with
grand theft and petty theft Wednesday. He was also arrested Jan. 22 and charged
with one count of robbery and four counts of theft, after police alleged that he
stole purses at supermarkets in the Parkville and White Marsh areas. He is being
held at the Baltimore County Detention Center in lieu of $25,000 bail.

   County investigators believe he was also involved in thefts in Baltimore City
and Howard County over the past three months. Anyone who has been the victim of
a purse snatching and has not reported it is asked to call police at
410-307-2020 410-887-5040.
Hopkins medical ethicist to take part in lecture

   TOWSON - Dr. Peter B. Terry, a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, will discuss ethical issues in medicine Monday night, the fifth
lecture in the Baltimore County League of Women Voters' six-part series, Focus
on Contemporary Issues II.

   Terry, a medical ethicist, will discuss topics such as stem-cell research,
gene therapy and end-of-life decision making.

   Light refreshments will be served at 5:15 p.m., and the talk begins at 6
p.m., at the Sheppard Pratt Conference Center, 6501 N. Charles St. Tickets are
$10. Information: 410-464-1902.
In Baltimore City

   Fund established for son of Marine killed in Iraq

   A trust fund has been established to pay for the college education of the son
of a Baltimore Marine killed in Iraq in a helicopter crash last week, Rep. C.A.
Dutch Ruppersberger announced yesterday.

   The fund is for 10-year-old Kenneth Waters-Bey of Baltimore, the son of Staff
Sgt. Kendell Damon Waters-Bey. The Marine, who grew up near Herring Run Park and
attended Northern and Harbor City high schools, was among 12 U.S. and British
servicemen who died March 20 when their helicopter crashed near the Kuwait
border.

   Donations may be sent to: Harbor Bank of Maryland, Account No. 8100247851,
3240 Belair Road, Baltimore 21213-1228.
Interfaith leaders schedule Prayers for World Peace

   A group of interfaith religious leaders will gather from 3 p.m. to 5:30 p.m.
Sunday for Prayers for World Peace at Faith Presbyterian Church, 5400 Loch Raven
Blvd. in Northeast Baltimore.

   The event will include readings, prayers and songs for peace. The service,
which will include Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Hindu and Native American
participants, "is not only a time to pray, but a time to prayerfully listen and
learn about other religions, customs and cultures so that we may, through a
better understanding, build bridges between people," said organizer Kay Ballard.

Goodwill to hold workshop on jobs for ex-offenders

   Goodwill Industries of the Chesapeake will sponsor a job preparation workshop
for ex-offenders today at the agency's headquarters, 222 E. Redwood St.

   The event, which runs from 9 a.m. to noon, will feature representatives from
local employers.

   It also will include discussions on topics ranging from self-image and skills
training to money management and life after prison. Those attending can also get
help with resume preparation.
Officials to discuss project to restore Stony Run

   City officials heading a public works project to restore the Stony Run stream
in North Baltimore will present their plans at a public meeting from 9:30 a.m.
to 11:30 a.m. tomorrow at Loyola College.

   Bill Stack, Baltimore's director of water quality, and other speakers will
describe a construction project that they hope will restore year-round flow to
the stream. Neighborhood residents are invited to discuss aesthetic and erosion
issues.

   The meeting will be held in Room B01 in Knott Hall at the college, 4501 N.
Charles St. The nonprofit Jones Falls Watershed Association will be the host.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2003


                             808 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      March 28, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 790 words

BODY:

   It was a sun-splashed Florida afternoon, not sun-dappled, mind you,
sun-splashed; let's be clear. It was April 5, 1993, and the Florida Marlins were
playing the Los Angeles Dodgers, the significance of which derived from the fact
that prior to 040593, the Florida Marlins existed only as part of the ecosystem
and the National Audubon Society's Field Guide To North American Game Fish.

    But on this day, the Marlins would play an unexpectedly good approximation
of major-league baseball, beating the Dodgers, 6-3. I was privileged to be in
the press box for the first game in franchise history at then Joe Robbie
Stadium, and what I remember as much as anything was the delightful performance
of the Marlins' mascot, Billy the Marlin, if only because I really don't know if
I can remember anything about it that day, including Billy the Marlin.

    Nonetheless, I was stunned and saddened this week to learn that the Marlins
released Billy after 10 seasons and planned to replace him with some
wet-behind-the-gills hotshot from the sales department.

    How could I be making this up?

    Two days before the start of the baseball season, I'm trying to give the
game every possible psychic free pass. I refuse to dwell on, for example, the
roughly $5,400 Randy Johnson will now make per pitch under his re-worked
contract ($33 million for two years). I refuse to dwell on the fact that the
players union is looking into the notion that owners conspired to keep salaries
at something like an average of $2.5 million this off-season. I refuse to dwell
on the notion that the umpires, cowed by their own disastrously overplayed union
politics the past few years, seem to have regained their ominous truculence. And
I'm OK with the fact that the Pirates' first seven games have seven different
starting times and that one of them, April 4 at Philadelphia, is scheduled for
1:33 p.m. If that game starts at 1:33, just as was threatened by the old
left-hander Jim Rooker, I'll walk home. Though not from Philadelphia certainly.

    But how can baseball in its still-queasy public relations posture allow the
Marlins to free Billy? I guess this means that ultimately, it's all about
winning and losing, and the Marlins have done plenty of losing over the past
five years. They're 352-457 over that span, and clearly someone in the front
office took a look at things and decided the mascot just wasn't getting it done.

    Billy, whose real name is John Routh, at first threatened legal action
against the club, but the Marlins said that getting relief from Billy's $75,000
salary had nothing to do with its typically crushing player payroll, which now
includes a $10 million, one-year deal for fading catcher Ivan Rodriguez.

    "We're looking for someone with more energy," a Marlins spokesman told The
Associated Press's Steve Wine in South Florida. "It was time to make a change."

    Sounds like the old philosophical differences rationale. The sticking point
was that Billy was trying to be entertaining and the Marlins were not.

    Wine had lunch recently with Billy, and as the memories flowed forth, it was
all too clear that the marginally promising start of this season has already
curdled. There'll be no Billy the Marlin to turn up on ESPN's brilliant
Sportscenter commercials. There'll be no Billy the Marlin cavorting through the
empty stands of Pro Player Stadium, doing the Hokey Pokey with the occasional
customer.

    "Ya put your dorsal in, ya take your dorsal out ..."

    For many of Florida's youngest baseball fans, that was what it's all about.

    That summer of ' 93 seems so long ago to Billy. He reminisced with Wine
about his development in a top baseball program at the University of Miami,
where he was Sebastian the Ibis. Once, at the Sugar Bowl, a bullet fired in the
French Quarter creased Routh's temple, prompting what for my money is the second
greatest mascot quote ever: "It's going to take more than a bullet hole in the
head to keep me out of this game." (The No. 1 mascot quote of all time remains
the San Diego Chicken's "If ya can't stand the heat, get out of the chicken.")

    What's a 43-year-old freshly released game fish to do in this world? Billy
talked about going back to the minors. Seeing if he could sit in for Hugh
Manatee, the Marlins' Class A mascot. Perhaps he could do color on Celebrity
Spearfishing. If there were Celebrity Spearfishing.

    They can yank off his fish head, but there will always be one thing the
Marlins can't take from him. The ring, baby. Thanks to Jim Leyland's 1997 World
Series Champion Marlins, Billy the Marlin has a ring. All he's got to do is say
it over and over: "I've got a ring and Ernie Banks doesn't ... I've got a ring
and Ernie Banks doesn't."

NOTES:
Gene Collier can be contacted at gcollier@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1283.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2003


                             809 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     March 27, 2003 Thursday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TODAY, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1642 words

HEADLINE: Daddy's Girl;
 She's only 11, but Alyssa Kreinschroeder already knows life's uncertainty. It
arrives in times of peace, and in times of war.;
 OVER HERE;
 Clarksville, Tenn.

BYLINE: Larry Bingham

BODY:

   On the day Alyssa Kreinschroeder's father told her he was being deployed to
the Persian Gulf, he said he could be gone for a year. A year is a long time for
a girl of 11 to imagine being away from her father, so Alyssa asked him: Was
there any chance he'd come home sooner?

   Alyssa, the oldest of four kids, has always known she could ask her dad
anything, and he'd tell her the truth. He'd been honest when her twin brothers
were born prematurely, when doctors discovered her grandmother's heart problems,
and when her mother, who is 30, was diagnosed last summer with a fast-moving
cervical cancer that spread to her pelvis, her spine, her lungs and her brain.

   After so much uncertainty, Alyssa thought she was ready for whatever her dad
had to say.

   Until he said no.

   Claus Kreinschroeder, who is 31, is not Alyssa's biological father, but he's
the dad she has known since she was 3. Her mother, Kris, says God meant for
Claus and Alyssa to be together. Six months into Kris and Claus' courtship,
Alyssa was calling him daddy - to his delight and Kris' worry it would scare him
away.

   It didn't. And they married when he finished basic training.

   Last month, when Claus said he'd be away for at least 12 months, Alyssa
didn't cry. She didn't want to make her dad feel bad, so she simply said, OK.

   He had talked to her weeks earlier about the possibility of war. She knew the
difference between a dictator and a president, and she'd asked for her dad's
opinion: Did he think American soldiers should go to Iraq?

   He told her his opinion didn't matter. He said being a soldier in the Army -
in the 327th Infantry Regiment of the 3rd Battalion of the 101st Airborne
Division - was his job. President George W. Bush was his boss, and if President
Bush said they were going to war, he'd leave their home in Clarksville, Tenn.,
and go.

   Alyssa's dad didn't tell her that he would miss her cheerleading competitions
or that he would not be in the back yard to spot her backward handsprings - at
least, not for a long time. And she didn't ask if he'd be expected to kill
people - or worse, if there was a strong chance he could be killed.

   Back when Alyssa was a toddler, her dad used to throw her into the air. He
tossed her so high her mom would make nervous jokes. Alyssa never cried the way
the twins do when he throws them, or the way her 5-year-old sister, Madeline,
screams when he tosses her. Alyssa always had faith that her dad would be there
to catch her.

   On the night the twins were born, Alyssa's dad called her from the hospital
at Fort Carson, Colo. Only 25 weeks into her pregnancy, Alyssa's mom had gone
into labor. The doctors had stopped the labor for seven weeks. Yet the twins
still arrived eight weeks early. They each weighed just 4 1/2 pounds.

   Hayden, Alyssa's dad told her, was born first and appeared to be doing fine.
But Mathias had stopped breathing three times. Alyssa's dad warned her that her
baby brothers might not come home.

   Alyssa was 8 then. She never believed the twins would die. The way she saw
it, "God would not put them on this Earth and just take them away. I just didn't
think that would happen."

   When her dad brought her to the hospital's neonatal intensive care unit,
Alyssa did not gasp the way adult visitors did at the sight of the two small
boys and the tangle of tubes and machines. She didn't hesitate to touch them,
either. She walked to the incubator that held her brothers and sang a lullaby as
she stroked their tiny backs.

   Three years later, she helps care for the twins while their father is away.
Hayden swings from the refrigerator door one day, pretending he's Spider-Man.
Another day, he is sitting inside the washing machine with the lid closed.
Hayden is the one who took GI Joe swimming in the toilet and clogged the
commode, and Mathias is the one who ran around the gym during cheerleading
practice, peeling up tape from the mats. When they get to be too much - so much
that Alyssa's mom locks herself in the bathroom - Alyssa knows it's time to take
charge. She baby-sits so her mom can go to the bookstore alone.

   On March 1, the day their dad left, Alyssa did not go to the ceremony at Fort
Campbell to say goodbye. Growing up a child of the Army, she has developed
methods for dealing with uncertainty. In eight years, she has moved five times.
She has lived in Wisconsin, Colorado, Georgia and Tennessee. She has cried when
leaving old friends, and cried at the thought of having to make new ones.

   The day her dad left for Iraq, she did not want to see him get on an
airplane. She thought it would be easier to imagine him coming home if she only
watched him leave their brick ranch house. As if he were backing out of the
driveway like any other day. As if he were going to work and would come home
soon.

   In the kitchen is a map of the world from Soldiers magazine that Alyssa's dad
laminated for the kids before he left. He stuck a pin in the town where they
live, and another in Kuwait, where he said he'd be for a while. He told Alyssa
to move the pin as the war progressed and the 101st advanced into Iraq.

   Alyssa and her dad talked about terrorists after Sept. 11, and her
sixth-grade social studies teacher said some people stockpiled food and water
and hoped duct tape around the windows would keep them safe. The way Alyssa
understands the war, "Saddam Hussein wasn't disarming, and President Bush didn't
want us to get bombed."

   She knows her dad is a first lieutenant, and he used to drive tanks. When he
came home from training last year to take care of her mom, he became a liaison
to the 1st Brigade, and Alyssa is not quite sure what all that means. She knows
he has a gun. She knows he might have to use it. Last week, she was reminded
that her dad could get shot.

   Alyssa was at cheerleading practice when someone threw grenades and fired a
gun into the tents where Alyssa's dad worked in Kuwait. Three hours later they
learned that her dad was safe, but when they first turned on the TV news,
Alyssa's mom was so scared she dropped to her knees.

   Across from the map in the kitchen is a wall-hanging that Alyssa's aunt sent
last year, when her mom's cancer kept spreading. "Faith," the wall-hanging
reminds Alyssa, "is the assurance of things hoped for, the belief in things not
yet seen."

   Alyssa's dad was training cadets at West Point when the results of a biopsy
revealed "high-grade cancer cells" in her mom's cervix. He came home after the
cancer spread, after every MRI discovered a new tumor.

   He cooked, cleaned and watched her and Madeline and the twins while he also
cared for their mom. When Kris was sickest, in bed most of the day or gone to
see a doctor, Alyssa's dad told her the truth.

   The doctors didn't exactly say her mom had only six months to live. What they
said was something drastic had to happen - soon - or she would die.

   The tumors, Alyssa's dad said, were not going away.

   Three weeks of chemotherapy at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 45 miles
south in Nashville, ended when doctors found that Kris - who had been healthy up
until then - had a kidney disease. The entire family went to Minnesota last
autumn for Kris' gene therapy treatments at the Mayo Clinic. Alyssa asked a
girlfriend on the cheerleading team, whose parents are preachers, to pray.

   The first time the Clarksville Cheer Extreme team, the Panther All-Stars,
went out of state for a competition, Alyssa's mom drove. They stopped every 30
miles on the road to Louisville, Ky., because her mom kept getting sick, but
they made it. The doctors eventually declared the cancer in remission and
Alyssa's mom - at least for now - OK.

   On the day he left for Iraq, Alyssa's dad asked her to help her mom while he
is away.

   The next day, Alyssa was at Kenwood Middle School when she overheard a circle
of girls talking about the war. One said she was against it. The others agreed.
They stopped talking when they saw Alyssa. They knew her dad was overseas.

   As one of the kids elected to the student government, Alyssa knew of plans to
honor all the dads serving overseas by posting their pictures on the "Honor
Board" in the cafeteria. Alyssa couldn't decide which picture to take. She
didn't want one in which her dad is wearing a helmet because she wanted the
other kids to see his handsome face. He doesn't smile when he's wearing a
uniform, so none of those would do.

   Alyssa was home from school another day and watching the TV when protests in
Nashville caught her attention. What the protesters said seemed aimed not at
President Bush but at soldiers like her dad.

   When Alyssa told her mom what she'd seen, Kris talked about freedom of speech
and the Constitution. Those, she said, are the rights your dad is fighting for
in Iraq.

   Alyssa decided she was going to do her part. She came up with the idea of
staging a rally. Doing something in school, she thought, would be more effective
than sitting in her front yard waving a sign.

   Her mom said she'd need speakers, so Alyssa thinks about asking one of her
girlfriends - Eva, Bridgett or Cassandra - to speak because they also have
fathers in Iraq. Alyssa thinks she will invite the wife of her dad's lieutenant
colonel, too, because she always seems to know what to say. Last year, she gave
Alyssa's mom a candle that says "Hope" on the side.

   Alyssa thinks of her dad when she passes his picture on the table by the door
or opens her mom's closet to borrow a pair of shoes and sees his. The map in the
kitchen shows her where he is, and the television in the den reminds her of what
could happen.

   The rally, Alyssa thinks, will show the world the faith she has in her dad.

   She will make signs that say "Support Our Troops" and "God Bless America,"
and color them red, white and blue. The only part of the rally she hasn't
figured out is how to ask the principal for permission.

NOTES:
SEE RELATED STORY (Hard lessons, wherever you are)

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Alyssa Kreinschroeder, with sister Madeline on her back,
helps out her mom, Kris, with the family, including twins Mathias and Hayden
(background).; 2. Madeline finds a moment to herself near a picture of her dad,
Claus, who left for Kuwait this month.; 3 & 4. Kris Kreinschroeder writes a note
to her husband's battalion. She credits Alyssa (below, with brothers Mathias and
Hayden) with helping hold things together.; MONICA LOPOSSAY RIESSER : SUN STAFF
PHOTOS

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2003


                             810 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 27, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 960 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports.

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Senate panel backs online sales taxes

   The race to collect more sales taxes from Internet shoppers quickened when a
California Senate committee passed bills to crack down on online retailers and
join nearly 40 other states doing the same.  Supporters said the legislation
could eventually add more than $1 billion yearly to California's battered
treasury.

   Two years ago, Gov. Gray Davis vetoed similar bills, saying they could damage
an emerging California-centered industry.  Now, as Davis struggles with a
deficit up to $35 billion across the next 16 months, he is open to all ideas,
said a spokeswoman.

   One bill by Sen. Dede Alpert, D-Coronado, would raise an estimated $22
million yearly by forcing California to collect sales taxes aggressively from
Internet retailers who have a physical presence in California. Associated Press

   Dole shareholders approve takeover

   Dole Food Co., the world's largest vegetable and fruit producer, said
shareholders approved chief executive David Murdock's plan to buy the company
and own it privately.  The Westlake Village-based company expects the
transaction to close March 28, after financing is completed.  About 70 percent
of shares not owned by Murdock and his affiliates were voted for the takeover,
the company said. Bloomberg News

   WD-40 sees jump in sales, profits

   WD-40 yesterday reported net income for the second quarter ended Feb. 28 of
$8.2 million, or 49 cents a share, compared with net income of $6.5 million, or
41 cents a share, during the same period a year ago.

   The San Diego-based company, which manufactures industrial lubricants and
other consumer products, said net sales for the quarter jumped 14.5 percent, to
$58.3 million.

   WD-40 said it saw strong results in Asia, Canada and Europe as well as some
challenges in the U.S. markets during the second quarter.

   Bill would affect some dietary aids

   Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., introduced a bill that would require makers of
dietary aids that contain stimulants, such as the controversial herb ephedra, to
prove their products are safe before selling them.  Several companies, including
San Diego's Metabolife International, market ephedra products as diet aids and
energy boosters.

   In 1994, Congress exempted dietary supplements from pre-marketing safety
testing, placing the burden on the federal government to prove they are unsafe.
Durbin's bill would give the Food and Drug Administration authority to require
proof of safety from any dietary supplement maker if the FDA receives
information that the product is causing death or serious health problems.

   Lawmakers target offshore companies

   California lawmakers want to rescind a law that lets expatriate companies
deduct a portion of their income from state taxes and to ban those companies
from winning state contracts.

   Companies with offshore addresses for tax purposes would not be allowed to
let their U.S. subsidiaries deduct interest and royalty payments from their
California income taxes, under a bill proposed by Sen. Jackie Speier.
California loses an estimated $10 million a year from expatriated companies
using the so-called "water's edge" tax deduction, Speier said.

   Public scrutiny of offshore businesses increased after after Tyco
International Inc's former chief executive officer was charged with fraud.
Expatriated companies save 4 percent to 6 percent on taxes by being based
offshore. Bloomberg News

   Ceregene licenses Genentech genes

   Ceregene said that it has licensed genes from San Francisco-based Genentech
that will be used in developing neurological gene therapies.  Genentech has an
option to become the San Diego biotechnology company's development and marketing
partner for the proposed gene therapies after Ceregene completes certain
studies.  Financial terms were not disclosed.

   WORLD & NATION

   DirecTV, Disney reach accord

   DirecTV and Disney Corp. ended a stand-off, saying they have reached a broad
agreement that the satellite broadcaster would continue to carry Disney
television channels including ABC Family.  The companies did not disclose terms
of the deal, which ended several months of negotiations.

   DirecTV said earlier this month that it would drop Disney's ABC Family
channel at the end of this month rather than paying a 35 percent price increase
it said Disney was demanding. Reuters

   Univision deal gets antitrust OK

   Univision Communications Inc., the biggest U.S. owner of Spanish-language
television stations, was cleared by antitrust enforcers to purchase Hispanic
Broadcasting Corp. for $2.3 billion.  Univision's buyout of Hispanic, the No. 1
Spanish-language radio broadcaster, still requires approval by the Federal
Communications Commission, which has asked for more information about the
transaction.

   The acquisition of Dallas-based Hispanic Broadcasting, announced last June,
would let Univision expand by adding more than 65 radio stations, many in
smaller markets. Bloomberg News

   Job cuts likely at Sony Music

   Sony Music is expected to announce an estimated 1,000 job cuts as early as
tomorrow as it races to complete a planned restructuring before the close of the
fiscal year of parent Sony Corp., sources close to the situation said yesterday.

   Reuters

   Appeal promised in steel dispute

   The United States said yesterday it would appeal a preliminary World Trade
Organization ruling against steep steel tariffs imposed last year by President
Bush, if the trade body's final decision was unchanged.

   A U.S. trade official, speaking on condition of anonymity, confirmed reports
that a WTO dispute settlement panel issued an interim ruling yesterday against
the United States in the high-profile and internationally divisive case.

   Reuters


LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2003


                             811 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 27, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-3:7; B-2:1; B-6:2; B-10:6

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: Alzheimer's scientists see hope in gene put into mice

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Gene therapy experiments in mice have reduced damaging plaques in brain tissue
found in Alzheimer's disease, a discovery that could someday lead to new
treatments for the devastating illness.

   A study involving the Salk Institute and the University of California San
Diego in La Jolla and the University of Kentucky suggests that transferring the
gene neprilysin into the brains of people suffering from Alzheimer's may provide
an effective way to treat the disease.

   Salk researchers transferred the gene into the brains of mice suffering from
Alzheimer's using a modified and harmless version of the human immunodeficiency
virus to gain entry into neural cells of the animals.

   Neprilysin appeared to reduce the levels of debilitating plaques in the
brain, caused by the accumulation of a protein called beta-amyloid, by nearly 50
percent when compared with untreated animals, scientists said.

   The study, appearing this week in the Journal of Neuroscience, marks the
first time researchers have showed that increased levels of neprilysin decrease
the accumulation of beta-amyloid in animals.

   "This study supports a role for neprilysin in the regulation of
beta-amyloid," said Inder Verma, a professor at the Salk Institute and co-author
of the study.  "It (also) highlights the potential of using viral vectors for a
gene therapy approach to treat, or perhaps prevent, Alzheimer's disease."

   Gene therapy trials in humans, if continued research calls for them, remain
years away.

   Alzheimer's disease, the most common form of dementia among older people,
afflicts an estimated 4 million Americans.  The disease is progressive and is
marked by a severe loss of memory and the ability to reason.  People suffering
from advanced stages of Alzheimer's need 24-hour care.

   Scientists do not know what causes the disease, but autopsies clearly show
the accumulation of beta-amyloid plaques and other abnormal structures called
"tangles" in the brain.

   In the latest study, scientists not only saw beta-amyloid levels fall, they
also saw improvements in cognition.

   "These mice also show healthier and more complex synaptic contacts," said
Eliezer Masliah, a UCSD professor of neuroscience and senior author of the
study.

   The finding, which scientists said they will study further, suggests that
neprilysin may also help reverse the decline in human memory and cognition
associated with Alzheimer's disease.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2003


                             812 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 27, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 943 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports.

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Senate panel backs online sales taxes The race to
collect more sales taxes from Internet shoppers quickened when a California
Senate committee passed bills to crack down on online retailers and join nearly
40 other states doing the same.

   Supporters said the legislation could eventually add more than $1 billion
yearly to California's battered treasury. Two years ago, Gov. Gray Davis vetoed
similar bills, saying they could damage an emerging California-centered
industry.

   Now, as Davis struggles with a deficit up to $35 billion across the next 16
months, he is open to all ideas, said a spokeswoman. One bill by Sen. Dede
Alpert, D-Coronado, would raise an estimated $22 million yearly by forcing
California to collect sales taxes aggressively from Internet retailers who have
a physical presence in California. Associated Press Dole shareholders approve
takeover Dole Food Co., the world's largest vegetable and fruit producer, said
shareholders approved chief executive David Murdock's plan to buy the company
and own it privately.

   The Westlake Village-based company expects the transaction to close March 28,
after financing is completed.

   About 70 percent of shares not owned by Murdock and his affiliates were voted
for the takeover, the company said. Bloomberg News WD-40 sees jump in sales,
profits WD-40 yesterday reported net income for the second quarter ended Feb. 28
of $8.2 million, or 49 cents a share, compared with net income of $6.5 million,
or 41 cents a share, during the same period a year ago. The San Diego-based
company, which manufactures industrial lubricants and other consumer products,
said net sales for the quarter jumped 14.5 percent, to $58.3 million. WD-40 said
it saw strong results in Asia, Canada and Europe as well as some challenges in
the U.S. markets during the second quarter. Bill would affect some dietary aids
Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., introduced a bill that would require makers of dietary
aids that contain stimulants, such as the controversial herb ephedra, to prove
their products are safe before selling them.

   Several companies, including San Diego's Metabolife International, market
ephedra products as diet aids and energy boosters. In 1994, Congress exempted
dietary supplements from pre-marketing safety testing, placing the burden on the
federal government to prove they are unsafe.

   Durbin's bill would give the Food and Drug Administration authority to
require proof of safety from any dietary supplement maker if the FDA receives
information that the product is causing death or serious health problems.
Lawmakers target offshore companies California lawmakers want to rescind a law
that lets expatriate companies deduct a portion of their income from state taxes
and to ban those companies from winning state contracts. Companies with offshore
addresses for tax purposes would not be allowed to let their U.S. subsidiaries
deduct interest and royalty payments from their California income taxes, under a
bill proposed by Sen. Jackie Speier. California loses an estimated $10 million a
year from expatriated companies using the so-called "water's edge" tax
deduction, Speier said. Public scrutiny of offshore businesses increased after
after Tyco International Inc's former chief executive officer was charged with
fraud. Expatriated companies save 4 percent to 6 percent on taxes by being based
offshore. Bloomberg News Ceregene licenses Genentech genes Ceregene said that it
has licensed genes from San Francisco-based Genentech that will be used in
developing neurological gene therapies.

   Genentech has an option to become the San Diego biotechnology company's
development and marketing partner for the proposed gene therapies after Ceregene
completes certain studies.

   Financial terms were not disclosed. WORLD & NATION DirecTV, Disney reach
accord DirecTV and Disney Corp. ended a stand-off, saying they have reached a
broad agreement that the satellite broadcaster would continue to carry Disney
television channels including ABC Family.

   The companies did not disclose terms of the deal, which ended several months
of negotiations. DirecTV said earlier this month that it would drop Disney's ABC
Family channel at the end of this month rather than paying a 35 percent price
increase it said Disney was demanding. Reuters Univision deal gets antitrust OK
Univision Communications Inc., the biggest U.S. owner of Spanish-language
television stations, was cleared by antitrust enforcers to purchase Hispanic
Broadcasting Corp. for $2.3 billion.

   Univision's buyout of Hispanic, the No. 1 Spanish-language radio broadcaster,
still requires approval by the Federal Communications Commission, which has
asked for more information about the transaction. The acquisition of
Dallas-based Hispanic Broadcasting, announced last June, would let Univision
expand by adding more than 65 radio stations, many in smaller markets. Bloomberg
News Job cuts likely at Sony Music Sony Music is expected to announce an
estimated 1,000 job cuts as early as tomorrow as it races to complete a planned
restructuring before the close of the fiscal year of parent Sony Corp., sources
close to the situation said yesterday. Reuters Appeal promised in steel dispute
The United States said yesterday it would appeal a preliminary World Trade
Organization ruling against steep steel tariffs imposed last year by President
Bush, if the trade body's final decision was unchanged. A U.S. trade official,
speaking on condition of anonymity, confirmed reports that a WTO dispute
settlement panel issued an interim ruling yesterday against the United States in
the high-profile and internationally divisive case. Reuters

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             813 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 27, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3:7; B-2:1; B-6:2; B-10:6

LENGTH: 408 words

HEADLINE: Alzheimer's scientists see hope in gene put into mice

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Gene therapy experiments in mice have reduced damaging plaques in brain
tissue found in Alzheimer's disease, a discovery that could someday lead to new
treatments for the devastating illness. A study involving the Salk Institute and
the University of California San Diego in La Jolla and the University of
Kentucky suggests that transferring the gene neprilysin into the brains of
people suffering from Alzheimer's may provide an effective way to treat the
disease. Salk researchers transferred the gene into the brains of mice suffering
from Alzheimer's using a modified and harmless version of the human
immunodeficiency virus to gain entry into neural cells of the animals.
Neprilysin appeared to reduce the levels of debilitating plaques in the brain,
caused by the accumulation of a protein called beta-amyloid, by nearly 50
percent when compared with untreated animals, scientists said. The study,
appearing this week in the Journal of Neuroscience, marks the first time
researchers have showed that increased levels of neprilysin decrease the
accumulation of beta-amyloid in animals. "This study supports a role for
neprilysin in the regulation of beta-amyloid," said Inder Verma, a professor at
the Salk Institute and co-author of the study.

   "It (also) highlights the potential of using viral vectors for a gene therapy
approach to treat, or perhaps prevent, Alzheimer's disease." Gene therapy trials
in humans, if continued research calls for them, remain years away. Alzheimer's
disease, the most common form of dementia among older people, afflicts an
estimated 4 million Americans.

   The disease is progressive and is marked by a severe loss of memory and the
ability to reason.

   People suffering from advanced stages of Alzheimer's need 24-hour care.
Scientists do not know what causes the disease, but autopsies clearly show the
accumulation of beta-amyloid plaques and other abnormal structures called
"tangles" in the brain. In the latest study, scientists not only saw
beta-amyloid levels fall, they also saw improvements in cognition. "These mice
also show healthier and more complex synaptic contacts," said Eliezer Masliah, a
UCSD professor of neuroscience and senior author of the study. The finding,
which scientists said they will study further, suggests that neprilysin may also
help reverse the decline in human memory and cognition associated with
Alzheimer's disease. Bruce Lieberman: (619)293-2836;
bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             814 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            March 27, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: KENNER PICAYUNE; North Kenner; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 619 words

HEADLINE: Couple dedicated to ending Tay-Sachs

BYLINE: By Warren Spinner

BODY:

   "From the shores of beautiful Lake Pontchartrain to the I-10 corridor, the
citizens of North Kenner are working hard and having fun! Here's the news . . .
"

Our North Kenner Notable for March is a couple: Susan and Dan Pancamo of
Driftwood.

   They are being recognized for unselfish contribution to families who have
given birth to children with a rare but devastating genetic disease called
Tay-Sachs.

   Although their story is sad, it's full of hope. It is a story that I and
others in the community watched unfold, knowing that, barring a miracle, it
would end with the death of a child.

   Dan and Susan Pancamo brought a seemingly healthy baby into the world on Oct.
17, 1994. Sam was later diagnosed with Tay-Sachs, a fatal genetic disorder that
causes progressive destruction of the central nervous system. The Pancamos found
inner strength to care for this baby as only parents can.

   Although he couldn't respond to his surroundings, Sam could feel the presence
of those around him. He was unable to smile or cry. He couldn't see or hear. He
never crawled, walked, sat up or talked. And yet this child, who could break
your heart in a second, had a profound impact on so many people.

   Sam would never toss a ball around with his older brother, Andrew, or his
younger brother, Max. But the attention and energy of the family went to take
care of Sam's needs. The boys understood, helped whenever they could and looked
upon their sibling as a brother, not a bother. They learned lessons of life in
the process that many adults never learn.

   Sam lived for four years, one month and one week.

   The Pancamos' dedication to Tay-Sachs disease began shortly after their son
was diagnosed. And their resolve to see this disease eliminated remains strong.

   Since 1995, Dan and Susan Pancamo have been actively involved with the
National Tay-Sachs and Allied Disease Association in the parent peer support
group, which was created to offer support to families with newly diagnosed
babies.

   They have traveled throughout the country to be with these families, to hold
their hands and help them find the strength to continue. They have helped to
raise thousands of dollars for research. Dan Pancamo serves as a vice president
on the national association's board and is involved in the research initiative
as well as the advocacy group that helped pass the Rare Disease Act of 2002,
which Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., co-sponsored and President Bush signed.

   Some of the research dollars are being directed to Tulane's Gene Therapy
Group. The research involves stem cells. It is believed that many of the answers
will be found in the next few years and will carry over to other diseases such
as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

   There is no cure or effective treatment for Tay-Sachs. However, there is
active research being done in many investigative laboratories in the U.S. and
around the world, according to a Web site about the disease.

   Tay-Sachs was principally found in couples of eastern European Jewish origin.
Susan Pancamo fits the bill. Dan Pancamo does not, but it was discovered that
Dan, being of Irish descent, carries a Celtic version of the gene. It also has
been found that French Canadians who relocated to south Louisiana as Cajuns have
a high risk of carrying the Tay-Sachs gene.

   The Pancamos keep the memory of their son alive and give meaning to a life
that ended before it had a chance to blossom. They are truly notable citizens
here in north Kenner. To learn more about Tay-Sachs and related diseases, go to
the www.ntsad.org Web site.

   . . . . . . .

Warren Spinner may be reached at warrenspinner@cox.net or 466-0485. Mail news to
him at 37 Echezeaux Drive, Kenner, LA 70065.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2003


                             815 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 26, 2003, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 115 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
GENZYME BIOSURGERY IN GENE THERAPY DEAL

BYLINE: NAOMI AOKI

BODY:

   Genzyme Biosurgery said yesterday it has struck an alliance with a
Baltimore-based biotechnology start-up developing gene therapies for cardiac
arrhythmias, bolstering its focus on treating heart disease. The Cambridge firm,
a division of Genzyme Corp., will take an equity position in Excigen Inc., a
company formed last year by two Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
physicians. Genzyme Biosurgery will fund the program as well as conducting its
own research.  Excigen will initially pursue gene therapies for atrial
fibrillation, a condition that triggers irregular, erratic and rapid heart
rhythms, and bradyarrhythmia, a condition in which the heart beats too slowly.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2003


                             816 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 25, 2003, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 51 words

HEADLINE: FOR THE RECORD / CORRECTION;
FOR THE RECORD

BODY:
BECAUSE OF REPORTING ERROR, A STORY IN THURSDAY'S BUSINESS SECTION ON
TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES INC. INCORRECTLY DESCRIBED THE AVAILABILITY IN EUROPE OF
REPLAGAL, THE COMPANY'S TREATMENT FOR FABRY DISEASE. THE DRUG WAS APPROVED IN
EUROPE IN AUGUST 2001 AND HAS BEEN MARKETED THERE SINCE SEPTEMBER 2001.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2003


                             817 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 25, 2003, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 859 words

HEADLINE: THE GROWING SCIENCE BEHIND GROWING HAIR

BYLINE: By Beth Greenberg, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   Implants, transplants, drugs, follicle-cleansing shampoos. With up to 80
percent of the population experiencing some degree of hair loss, it's no wonder
that more than $7 billion is spent annually on treatments and cures, and that
science is focusing closely on our follicles.

   Of the approximately 5 million hairs on the human body, 100,000 to 150,000
are found on the scalp. Of those, 50 to 100 are lost every day. A hair, which
grows at a rate of about a half-inch per month, can grow for three to five years
before it is shed and a new hair begins to grow. But the hair growth cycle can
be interrupted by any of a number of factors, including genetics, age, and
lifestyle.

      Although genetics accounts for 95 percent of all hair loss cases, there
are many types of baldness, also known as alopecia, and many causes. Alopecia
areata (patchy hair loss), alopecia totalis (loss of all hair on the head), and
alopecia universalis (loss of all hair on the body) are autoimmune disorders.
The affected person's hair follicles are mistakenly attacked by his or her own
immune system, resulting in the arrest of hair growth. But loss of hair growth
can also occur as a result of nutritional deficiencies, such as too little
protein, iron, or zinc in the diet; pregnancy or other hormonal shifts;
emotional stress; or exposure to medications such as chemotherapy drugs, which
affect all rapidly dividing cells, including hair cells. Even tying hair too
tightly - in corn rows, for example - can cause hair loss.

   While hair loss itself is not physically harmful, the emotional side effects
and the negative perceptions can be debilitating. "[Some] people are
devastated," said Robyn Gmyrek, assistant clinical professor of dermatology at
Columbia University's New York Presbyterian Hospital. "They won't socialize;
they're embarrassed, and they think everyone's looking at their hair."

   While miracle cures have been around since time immemorial, including washing
the scalp with human urine or dish detergent (both of which are useless), great
leaps in the science of hair loss have been made in recent years. Propecia,
originally prescribed to ward off prostate cancer, helps prevent hair from
thinning. Minoxidil (Rogaine) stimulates hair growth. But real progress in the
science of hair loss - and growth - was made at Columbia University in 1998 when
a team of researchers discovered the first human gene associated with hair loss.
They named it "hairless." Linked to alopecia universalis, the hairless gene, it
is believed, will help lead to a better understanding of the hair cycle in
general, and eventually, to the development of more-effective treatments. "How
hairless functions is not yet known," said Janice Brissette, an assistant
professor at the Cutaneous Biology Research Center at Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School. "But we know the consequences of the loss
of that gene." People who are missing the hairless gene have a defect in their
hair's growth cycle, and their follicles are unable to produce hair. Once
hairless and other triggering genes are understood, it eventually might be
possible to turn them on and off, encouraging hair growth where it is minimal or
nonexistent, and turning it off in places where it is undesirable.

   Male pattern baldness, which is nongender specific and therefore more
appropriately called androgenetic alopecia, affects more than 50 percent of men
over 50 years old, and about 20 percent of women in the same age bracket. Hair
might be lost from the crown of the skull, the temples, or a combination.
Unfortunately for those millions of people, "pattern baldness seems to be more
complicated than one gene," Brissette said.

   Androgenetic alopecia is a genetic condition, influenced by the male hormone,
dihydrotestosterone, or DHT. Research has indicated that for people with this
kind of hair loss, while their hormone levels may be normal, they have a higher
number of DHT receptors in the areas where they are losing their hair. It is
still unclear to researchers how DHT damages hair follicles, but as people age,
their hairs grow thinner, growth cycles decrease, and eventually no hair, or
miniaturized hair, is all that is produced.

   The next step in the science of hair growth may be found at AntiCancer Inc.
in San Diego, where researchers are exploring the use of gene therapy to treat
hair loss as well as graying hair. They were able to modify the genes in mouse
hair follicles, also introducing a gene that makes things glow green, producing
mice that grew glowing green hair. They also were able to successfully graft the
genetically modified skin onto hairless mice: "We transplanted it back to the
mice and it was obviously active because they began growing green fluorescent
hair," said AntiCancer's president, Robert Hoffman. The company's first goal is
to use the technology to treat hair loss due to chemotherapy, but company
officials also hope to apply it down the line to androgenic alopecia and other
conditions.

   But, while fluorescent green tresses might not be everyone's idea of a
hair-loss solution, the answer is growing closer.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Male pattern baldness affects more than 50 percent of men over
50, and about 20 percent of women in the same age bracket. Hair might be lost
from the crown of the skull, the temples, or a combination. / GLOBE STAFF FILE
PHOTOS

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2003


                             818 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                       March 23, 2003 Sunday Home Edition

SECTION: Features; Pg. 1L

LENGTH: 2024 words

HEADLINE: Focused on a cure;
A new generation of treatments fights cancer cells while leaving healthy ones
intact

BYLINE: DAVID WAHLBERG

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   Margie Freeborn-Bood went to the doctor for sleeping pills to counter her
husband's snoring.

   But she also had a "little Southern lady's cough" that caught her doctor's
attention, and he ordered a chest X-ray.

   Freeborn-Bood ended up with a diagnosis she never dreamed of: late-stage lung
cancer, one of the deadliest tumors. The X-ray showed massive spots on the
50-year-old Atlanta woman's lungs.

   After reading that she probably wouldn't live another six months,
Freeborn-Bood --- who doesn't smoke --- divided her diamonds and china among her
two adult children.

   Then she started taking an experimental drug called Iressa. Two years later,
she is still working as a Publix floral arranger and tests show her lungs are
nearly clear.

   "I had prepared myself to die," said the pixie redhead who weighs barely 100
pounds. "But I'm still here."

   Legions of cancer patients like Freeborn-Bood are living longer because a new
catalog of therapies is arriving in doctors' offices, researchers say.

   Since half of American men and a third of women will develop cancer, the hope
is millions someday may be aided by these new treatments.

   The old catalog, featuring the one-size-fits-all standards of surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy, is being updated with pills that target the genetic
mechanics of cancer.

   And soon to come, researchers say, are vaccines that boost the immune system
to better tackle tumors and gene therapy techniques to make chemotherapy drugs
work better.

   Some say the new therapies could transform cancer from a death sentence into
an easily treatable disease.

   Biological breakthroughs

   "Cancer is going to be like pneumonia," said Paul Bunn, president of the
American Society of Clinical Oncologists, the nation's largest group of cancer
doctors. "It won't be gone, but it will be controllable. . . . Twenty to 25
years from now, chemotherapy will be a thing of the past."

   Traditional, intravenous chemotherapy drugs are carpet-bombers that harm all
dividing cells, causing hair loss, nausea and fatigue as they combat cancer.

   Doctors struggle to kill the cancer without killing the patient.

   New treatments like Iressa, often in pill form, are smart bombs that home in
on cancer cells, leaving healthy cells mostly alone. And they have fewer side
effects.

   The new approaches are a major thrust of the Georgia Cancer Coalition, a $1
billion, 10-year effort expected to use $400 million of the state's tobacco
settlement funds and $600 million in private money and federal grants to fight
the state's war on cancer.

   More than $20 million has gone so far to researchers at Emory University,
Georgia Tech and elsewhere, who hope to add to the expanding cancer therapy
catalog.

   When Freeborn-Bood was diagnosed with lung cancer, her doctors said it was
too advanced to operate. She endured six months of chemotherapy, which left her
nauseated and weak. She couldn't work, play with her grandchildren or make
quilts with her wool-spinning club.

   "It took two days to vacuum one room," she said. "I was too tired to even get
dressed."

   Her doctor suggested enrolling in a study of Iressa. Her energy gradually
came back, allowing her to spend time with flowers, family and friends.

   Such new therapies stem from recent biological breakthroughs, including the
mapping of the 30,000 or so human genes.

   Scientists are now recognizing and battling cancer not as one disease, but as
more than a hundred variations of cell growth gone amok.

   The more scientists learn about the genetic mix-ups that lead normal cells
astray, the more they can set up roadblocks to keep healthy cells on the right
path.

   Tumor cells soon will be run through computers to identify which gene
mutations are causing problems in each patient and which drugs would best
control those defects, said Dr. Michael Johns, executive vice president for
health affairs at Emory.

   "I don't want to hype it too much, but there is a lot of hope," Johns said.

   Not all good news

   But there are reasons to be cautious. Cancer researchers have previously
rolled out promising strategies with great fanfare --- such as the immune
stimulants interferon and Interleukin 2 in the 1980s --- only to have side
effects and weak responses mute the trumpets.

   Gene therapy, involved in some of today's novel cancer approaches, has led to
deaths and safety questions in noncancer experiments.

   The Food and Drug Administration recently halted several gene therapy studies
after children in France developed leukemia while receiving the treatment.

   And the new cancer therapy catalog's cover story --- Gleevec, a drug for
relatively rare forms of leukemia and stomach cancer --- has helped many
patients. But the cancers it attacks have one main gene defect. Most tumors have
multiple genetic mistakes that will require assaults on many fronts, scientists
say.

   Even Iressa, the crimson pill apparently keeping Freeborn-Bood alive, has had
only minimal success on most lung cancer patients. An FDA advisory committee
recommended the drug's approval in September, but the FDA hasn't ruled.

   One who wasn't helped by the new drugs was Gene Carlson, a 56-year-old
nuclear power plant trainer from Norcross, who learned he had colon cancer a
year ago.

   After surgeons removed the tumorous part of his colon, he started on a
cocktail of three drugs that included Avastin, one of the new targeted drugs.

   But the cancer quickly spread to his lungs, liver and brain. As a last
resort, he received radiation and traditional chemotherapy for a few weeks.

   But shortly after mustering up enough strength to visit family in Wisconsin,
he died in Georgia on March 13.


   "These new drugs may have been positive for other people, but they've been a
failure with me," Carlson said a week before his death. A father of two, he was
trying to stay alive to see as much of his 2-month-old granddaughter as
possible.

   "Cancer cells are clever and can bypass new drugs easily," warned Dr. Lynn
Schuchter, a cancer researcher at the University of Pennsylvania.

   In the early stages

   Still, many experts believe Gleevec, Iressa and the other new drugs are to
cancer what penicillin was to bacterial infections, ushering in a new age of
more promising agents.

   "Once science gets its foot in the door, it can open it so much wider," said
Dr. Larry Norton, an oncologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New
York.

   At Emory's Winship Cancer Institute, patients are taking experimental drugs
from the newest editions of the cancer therapy catalog.

   One, called Velcade, shows promise for multiple myeloma, a blood plasma
cancer. Another, Tarceva, might tame lung cancer.

   These drugs, like Gleevec and Iressa, throw various switches to stop cancer's
runaway train.

   For a regular cell to become cancerous, scientists have found, four basic
parts must break down:

* The first is the accelerator, or oncogene; it churns out of control, causing
cells to quickly multiply.

* Then the brakes, or tumor suppressor genes, go bust.

* Next, the emergency brake --- a group of genes that normally cause hazardous
cells to commit suicide, a process known as apoptosis --- degrades.

* Finally the fuel tank goes haywire, as a gene controlling an energy source
known as telomeres makes the cell think it has a limitless supply.

   Velcade installs a fuel filter that slows down the train, according to Dr.
Sagar Lonial, an Emory oncologist. He is giving the drug to multiple myeloma
patients who haven't responded to standard chemotherapy or bone marrow
transplants.

   Rudolph Byrd, an African-American-studies professor at Emory, was Lonial's
first Velcade patient. Since beginning the drug last fall, signs of his cancer
have dropped to undetectable levels, he said.

   After being "completely knocked out" by traditional chemotherapy drugs, Byrd
is able to teach and do research while on Velcade.

   "It's really quite magical," said Byrd, 49. "And it didn't produce any of the
side effects of chemotherapy."

   Vaccines, gene therapy

   While the new drugs target cancer cell weaknesses, cancer vaccines recruit
one of the body's strengths --- the immune system --- to seek and destroy
tumors.

   The immune system has a radar that looks for foreign invaders. Since cancer
cells are home-grown, they can usually sneak around undetected.

   With vaccines, tumor cells are removed from the body, flagged as foreign by
adding a special gene and then injected beneath the skin, where the radar
resides.

   "You create the molecular concept in the body that it has just been infected
with cancer for the first time," said Dr. Jonathan Simons, Winship's director.
He has developed a prostate cancer vaccine.

   In one of Simons' studies, patients with prostate cancer that had spread to
their bones were given 13 shots of the vaccine in their thighs over four months.

   Forty-one percent who got a low dose and 70 percent who got a high dose were
alive two years later, prompting larger trials to start late this year. The
vaccine, known as GVAX, is also being tested for lung, pancreas and colon
cancers.

   Ralph Burnett, a district judge in Maryland, received Simons' vaccine after
having his prostate removed due to cancer at age 53. His PSA level, which
predicts future prostate growth, had risen after the surgery, likely indicating
residual cancer. But it fell after getting the shots.

   "The vaccine bought me valuable time," he said. "I really believe it offers a
new level of promise compared to the old approaches."

   Another technique offering new hope for cancer is gene therapy --- delivering
genes into cancer cells to stop their growth or make them more sensitive to
chemotherapy. Inactivated viruses like the one for the common cold usually serve
as the delivery trucks, since they know how to invade cells.

   Emory researcher Trent Spencer is combining both cancer vaccines and gene
therapy.

   After removing tumor cells, modifying them and putting them back into the
body --- as Simons does with his prostate cancer vaccine --- Spencer goes a step
further. He removes immune cells and inserts a gene into them to shield the
cells from chemotherapy's harmful effects.

   That way, doctors could use chemotherapy after administering cancer vaccines
in a double-threat to tumors. Human trials are years away, but "it's the
combination of approaches that may be most powerful," Spencer said.

   Georgia Tech scientists are improving gene therapy's prospects by exploring
creative ways of getting genes into cancer cells.

   Joe LeDoux, a biomedical engineer, is using viral cousins of HIV, the AIDS
virus, because they know all too well how to penetrate cells. By altering viral
proteins, the killer viruses could be reprogrammed to safely carry a gene
payload.

   Mark Prausnitz, a chemical engineer, is using electric pulses and ultrasound.

   Electrode pulses can pry cancer cells open, and electric fields can move
genes through membranes. Prausnitz envisions placing electrodes on skin near
tumors or inside the body during surgery and zapping in gene drugs.

   Ultrasound waves create bubbles that break cell membranes open, Prausnitz
said. Just as jewelers use ultrasound baths to jar dirt particles from diamonds,
he hopes ultrasound will poke tiny holes in cancer cells for receiving genes.

   Testimony to lab work

   All of the science-speak may seem removed from patients like Freeborn-Bood
facing cancer today. But she says she's a walking testimony that lab work from
years ago is paying off.

   "That's what's keeping my cancer in check," she said, pointing to a box of
Iressa bottles in her tidy condo near Emory.

   While chemotherapy left her vomiting several times a day, Iressa causes only
mild diarrhea and skin rashes.

   Freeborn-Bood gets a chest CAT scan every two months and a body scan every
four months. The tests show her lungs are clear and the bits of cancer in her
bones are at bay, meaning she could defy the longevity odds for many more months
or years.

   "I still live CAT scan to CAT scan," she said. "But I plan for the future.
And I'm getting back to being active again."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Margie Freeborn-Bood of Atlanta, who was diagnosed two years ago
with late-stage lung cancer, started taking an experimental drug called Iressa.
Today, she is still working as a Publix floral arranger and tests show her lungs
are nearly clear. / MIKHAIL BOUTCHINE / Special; Photo: Three new cancer drug
therapies.
Shown from left to right: A bottle of Gleevec pills, a bottle of Tarceva pills,
and a bottle of Iressa pills. / JEAN SHIFRIN / Staff; Photo: Rudolph Byrd, an
Emory professor of African-American studies, has been taking a new drug,
Velcade, for his multiple myeloma, which has dropped to undetectable levels. /
SUNNY SUNG / Staff; Graphic: NEW CANCER DRUGS
Many new cancer therapies, often pills, are called "targeted" drugs because they
go after specific molecules involved in cancer cell growth. Older chemotherapy
drugs generally affect all dividing cells. While the new medicines show promise
--- especially for some patients who have failed other treatments --- success
rates vary and in some cases, only work in narrowly defined situations. Here's a
look at a few (shown from left):

* Gleevec: For patients with chronic myeloid leukemia or gastro-intestinal
stromal tumors, a type of stomach cancer. Blocks a protein called BCR-ABL, which
shuts down growth of mutant cells. Made by Novartis, approved in 2001.

* Tarceva: For non small-cell lung cancer and pancreatic cancer patients. Acts
similarly to Iressa. Made by Genentech. In late-stage studies, not yet submitted
for approval.

* Iressa: For small-cell lung cancer patients. Prevents cancer cells from
reproducing by blocking an epidermal growth factor receptor called tyrosine
kinase. Made by AstraZeneca, approval pending.

* Herceptin (not shown): For breast cancer patients with over-expression of
HER2, a growth factor on some cancer cells. Made by Genentech, approved in 1998.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2003


                             819 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             March 23, 2003 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; Pg. T07

LENGTH: 965 words

HEADLINE: Prescribing Perfection

BYLINE: Reviewed by Shannon Brownlee

BODY:

   BETTER THAN WELL

   American Medicine Meets

   The American Dream

   By Carl Elliott

   Norton. 357 pp. $ 26.95

   In the late 1960s, the pharmaceutical company Sandoz introduced a new
tranquilizer called Serentil, which was aimed at people who felt nervous in
social situations. Serentil, according to the ad, could ease the "anxiety that
comes from not fitting in," a feeling that practically every person on the
planet has undoubtedly experienced. But Sandoz was prevented from tapping this
potentially enormous market by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which
forced the company to withdraw the drug and issue a statement to the effect that
Serentil was useful only for "certain disease states" and was not intended for
use in everyday, anxiety-provoking situations.

    Thirty years after Serentil flopped, pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline
launched its own ad campaign for Paxil, an antidepressant that could also be
used to treat "social phobia," a debilitating form of shyness that psychiatrists
had recently identified as a diagnosable ailment. The company sent out press
releases describing the disease, provided reporters with lists of sufferers
willing to speak publicly about their condition, and papered bus shelters with
posters and the slogan "Imagine Being Allergic to People." The promotional
campaign hardly mentioned the drug, let alone the manufacturer, notes author
Carl Elliott, because pharmaceutical companies have learned the lesson of
Serentil: If they want to sell a drug that will "take the edge off some sharply
uncomfortable aspect of American social life," as Elliott puts it, they first
need to persuade Americans that their discomfort is due to a bona fide medical
problem. "SmithKline does not need to sell Paxil," he writes. "What they need to
sell is social phobia."

    That, in a nutshell, is the pattern of America's obsession with enhancement
technology: drugs and procedures that are supposed to make us happier, calmer,
sexier. In a word, better. "Doctors begin using a new drug or surgical procedure
that looks as much like cosmetic intervention . . . as a proper medical
treatment," Elliott writes. The technology triggers a heated debate; "Brave New
World is invoked." But in the end, the technology is accepted as a part of
ordinary American life. Today dozens of drugs, including Paxil, Viagra and
Prozac, straddle the fuzzy line between enhancement and medical treatment, and
millions of Americans blithely undergo surgical procedures for everything from
pudgy thighs to excessive blushing.

    The acceptance of enhancement has been aided, says Elliott, by the American
devotion to the self, which allows us to see everything from which brand of
jeans we wear to cosmetic surgery as just another way to find and express the
inner person. The quest for the true self can take extreme forms. Elliott
recounts stories from an underground group of Americans who are not only
sexually attracted to amputees; they also want to have one of their own limbs or
digits amputated because, in the words of one sufferer, "I don't feel like
myself with this whole body."

    Nut cases? Maybe, but it's possible to see their desire as merely a strange
new twist on the American pursuit of self-fulfillment. Fifty years ago, it would
have seemed equally inconceivable that thousands of perfectly healthy people
would willingly undergo a major operation each year to change their sex -- or
that one day such surgery would be considered a perfectly reasonable treatment
to repair the psychic well-being of a person who is born one sex but who cannot
feel complete unless he or she becomes the other. "We tend to see ourselves as
the managers of life projects," writes Elliott, managers who must constantly
search for ways to make our lives better, richer, more psychologically healthy.
But this notion of life as a project leads to a degree of moral uncertainty, and
to the belief that we are solely responsible for the outcome of our endeavors.
To that end, we have drafted medicine and technology into the service of having
good lives rather than being good people.

    Better Than Well is a superbly crafted book. Lucidly written, often funny,
it offers a penetrating look at our self-obsessed, over-medicalized,
enhancement-addicted society. But Elliott goes further than this. Better Than
Well also lays the groundwork for thinking about the difficult and contentious
issues surrounding gene therapy and human genetic engineering. One day, parents
will be able to practice the ultimate form of enhancement, endowing their
offspring with desirable genes.

    Bioethicists often draw a bright line between so-called therapeutic
technologies, which are deemed good and moral, and enhancement technologies,
which are not. Thus genetic therapy that can cure a disease such as cystic
fibrosis is good, but genetic engineering to give a child blue eyes or greater
intelligence is bad. The problem with this construction, as Elliott makes clear,
is that the distinction between treatment and enhancement gets a little blurry
in a society that has become adept at turning many aspects of ordinary existence
into medical problems. Is it enhancement to give growth hormone to increase the
stature of boys who will achieve only below-average height? Or therapy to
protect their egos? And once biotechnologists find the genes for stature, will
we want to ensure that all our sons are above average and all our daughters do
not grow too tall?

    The ability to alter the genes in embryos is coming soon to a culture that
sees self-expression and identity as commodities that can be purchased. The
implication of this eloquent, disturbing book is that it will be very difficult
to stop genetic enhancement, or even slow it down. *

   Shannon Brownlee is a senior fellow at the New America Foundation.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2003


                             820 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      March 21, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 775 words

BODY:

   Even by best-case estimates, we could well spend the entirety of the NCAA
basketball tournament, the remainder of the hockey and basketball seasons, and
some chunk of the imminent baseball season learning about perspective.

    Or re-learning it, because sports is always quick to assume that we've
forgotten it.

    The war, we were told 50 times this week, "puts it all in perspective." This
will continue.

    It is probably closer to the truth to say war takes everything out of
perspective. War is more like another pet quote from the sportscape, that
something has been "blown out of proportion." As I write this, Iraq is literally
being blown out of proportion and some number of its citizens blown off the face
of the earth.

    Try that for perspective.

    In deciding to proceed with the tournament as planned, NCAA President Myles
Brand confronted two issues when he need only have dealt with one. After
consulting with Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge and local authorities, he
determined that the safety of the athletes and the fans and of anyone else
headed to tournament sites this weekend could be reasonably assured. Had any
specific building, team hotel or relevant airport terminal, for example, been
judged vulnerable to attack, the obvious choice would have been to refigure,
postpone or cancel the tournament.

    The issue Brand needn't have been concerned with is this notion of
appropriateness.

    "We have to be respectful of our men and women in uniform," Brand said. "On
the other hand, I think we have to be very careful not to let Saddam control our
lives."

    As thoughtful as that seems, it's also a stark indication of how seriously
sports takes itself, no matter the extent of whatever crisis is currently
putting "it all in perspective."

    I don't think courageous American troops plowing through artillery fire,
missile launches, and even chemical and biological weapons on the way to
Baghdad, much care whether Pitt is playing Wagner at the time, nor do I think
that any of Saddam Hussein's final thoughts would be, "Hey, at least I screwed
up the NCAA tournament."

    Officials are right to think that, with a war on, basketball is not
important. It's remarkably similar to when there's not a war on. It's not
important then, either. The proof is in the number of situations under which
someone in sports is moved to say, "This puts it all in perspective."

    In peace time, everything from an auto accident to someone banging his head
after slipping on the soap in the shower and having to spend a night in the
hospital might be said to put it all in perspective. The point is, it doesn't
take very much at all, much less the potential start of World War III, to put
sports in perspective, but sports rarely seems to accept that humility.

    The minute the war ends, somebody's failure to find cap room for a nose
tackle will be written as "potentially devastating." Within weeks of Sept. 11,
when 343 firefighters died going up the steps of the flaming towers, athletes
pounded their chests for making a simple open-field tackle. That puts it all in
perspective.

    Still, in examining the varied relevancies of cultural staples in time of
war, the occasionally good and beneficial decision gets made. The war has
apparently eliminated the red carpet portion of the Oscars telecast. Bully. If
it would only cancel Regis Philbin's morning show outright or the remainder of
the Penguins season, few would complain.

    One of the most anticipated events on the sports calendar, the ever-growing
protest conflagration surrounding the Masters next month, has had some of its
buzz quieted by events in Iraq. The big Martha and Hootie Show, starring Martha
Burk of the National Council of Women's Organizations, Hootie Johnson of the
National Council of Good ol' Boys, and co-starring Jesse Jackson's Rainbow
Coalition, the anti-Jackson Brotherhood Organization of a New Destiny, the Ku
Klux Klan, and before it actually came off, probably People For the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (golf swings can endanger gophers you know), is now
something of lesser expectation.

    Burk and a Coalition spokesman said this week that the war will "alter the
tone" of protests. Burk still wants the Augusta National Golf Club to admit
female members, and Augusta still wants to boil her in a witch's cauldron, but
comportment shall apparently be quite civil.

    The war could further obscure the next regularly scheduled retirement of
Michael Jordan, coming up shortly. We might not even have the time to check on
whether Jordan's retirements have now outnumbered Police Academy movies.

    That too, I think, puts it all in perspective.

NOTES:
Gene Collier can be reached at gcollier@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1283.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2003


                             821 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      March 20, 2003 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 048

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   TKT maneuvers affect 80 jobs

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said yesterday that it notified 80 workers they
will lose their jobs as the Cambridge biotech refocuses on its core business of
developing drugs for rare diseases. In addition, 20 employees have resigned,
leaving the company with 346 employees. - STAFF

   Thermo axing staff

   Thermo Electron Corp. said yesterday that it will cut about 20 people at
month's end from its Thermo Detection unit as it closes a facility in
Chelmsford. Half of the staff at the Chelmsford facility, which employs about
40, will be offered jobs in a unit in Franklin, a company spokesman said. Other
jobs will be added at a facility in Minnesota. - STAFF

   Viisage shares increase

   Shares in Viisage Technology Inc. rose 43 percent yesterday after it said the
U.S. Department of Defense will expand its licensing of the company's
facial-recognition systems. Viisage makes systems that compare facial images
against databases of criminals and terrorists. - BLOOMBERG

   Verizon gains approval

   WASHINGTON - Verizon Communications Inc., the largest U.S. local-telephone
company, won approval yesterday from regulators to sell long-distance service in
Maryland and West Virginia, the final two states where it needed permission,
allowing the company to offer the service across the United States. - BLOOMBERG

   Duke to sell stake

   Duke Energy Corp., of Charlotte, N.C., has an agreement to sell its 50percent
stake in Duke-UAE Ref-Fuel for $ 306 million to Highstar Renewable Fuels LLC and
DLJ Merchant Banking Partners III LP. The sale includes six waste-to-energy
facilities in Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania.
The 80-megawatt Bay State plant is in Rochester. - STAFF

   Diller leaves Vivendi

   LOS ANGELES - Barry Diller resigned yesterday as co-chief executive of
Vivendi Universal Entertainment in a move that could help clear the way for the
company's cash-strapped French parent to sell its Universal Studios, Universal's
theme parks and other entertainment assets. - AP

   SEC hits Household

   CHICAGO - Federal regulators accused Household International Inc. yesterday
of violating securities laws by making false and misleading statements about its
policies last year. The lending giant, which earlier ran afoul of authorities
for alleged predatory-lending practices, agreed to a consent order by the
Securities and Exchange Commission to resolve the latest matter without
admitting to or denying wrongdoing. - AP

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2003


                             822 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 20, 2003, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 323 words

HEADLINE: TRANSKARYOTIC TO LAY OFF 80 DECISION BOOSTS BATTERED SHARES; STAFF
DOWN TO 346

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge gained 3.3 percent
yesterday after the company announced it was laying off 80 employees to cut
costs.

   The move is part of an effort to focus on near-term drug development after a
series of legal and regulatory setbacks delayed possible regulatory approval of
TKT's drug Replagal and caused shares to lose 85 percent of their value.

      "This painful action reflects our need to enhance fiscal discipline," said
Michael Astrue, TKT's chief executive, in a statement. "After a careful analysis
and review of our core business, we believe we have aligned our resources with
our refocused strategy. This period of retrenchment has been emotional for us
because we are losing talented, dedicated employees who have done a great deal
for TKT."

   Between the layoff and attrition, TKT's work force will shrink about 22
percent to 346 employees. The firm's stock gained 18 cents to close at $5.55.

   TKT's stock has been battered since it disclosed in October that clinical
data didn't support Replagal's approval by the US Food and Drug Administration
for Fabry disease. That disclosure was confirmed in January when an FDA advisory
panel voted unanimously not to recommend approval of Replagal. Genzyme's
treatment for Fabry disease received approval.

   Meantime, a patent dispute has prevented TKT from selling Replagal in Europe,
where it has been approved.    Astrue, TKT's former general counsel, quit the
firm last December and was rehired as CEO in February. He said at the time that
staff cuts would be necessary.

   Near-term, TKT is intent on resubmitting Replagal for regulatory approval.
The company also said it will focus its near-term efforts on developing protein
replacement therapies. Other research programs involving gene therapy will be
developed with larger corporate partners, Astrue said recently.

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.

CORRECTION-DATE: March 25, 2003, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

   DAY'S BUSINESS SECTION ON TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES INC. INCORRECTLY DESCRIBED
THE AVAILABILITY IN EUROPE OF REPLAGAL, THE COMPANY'S TREATMENT FOR FABRY
DISEASE. THE DRUG WAS APPROVED IN EUROPE IN AUGUST 2001 AND HAS BEEN MARKETED
THERE SINCE SEPTEMBER 2001.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2003


                             823 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    March 20, 2003 Thursday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: WEST ZONER; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 2458 words

HEADLINE: WHY IS STARR STILL CHAIRMAN?

BODY:

   I am a lifelong Republican, senior citizen and voter in every election. I am
appalled that the Education Committee has not removed Sen. Charles Starr from
its leadership and the committee yet.

   Education of our children is the greatest asset we have, and he has never
supported public education, in my opinion, for Washington County. I have
realized this since moving here in 1984 and have never voted for him. Please
don't walk, but run, to erase his eyesore from your committee.  DORINDA DAGGETT
Hillsboro Honest opinion, wrong job Sen. Charles Starr, as chairman of the
Senate Education Committee, has not only the right to express his opinion
concerning his advised student flight from the public school system, but the
duty to apprise all Oregonians of his biases and preferences regarding his
commitment to public education. It is too bad that more politicians do not rise
to that level of honesty in their public pronouncements.

   Having said that, he could not have made it more clear that he is not
dedicated to improving the public schools, presumably for home school/charter
school options, which he does support. My advice to Starr is simple: If you're
gonna talk the talk, then you gotta walk the walk -- both logic and principle
compel your resignation.  MICHAEL HENRY Beaverton Save our school system There
are a couple of reasons an elected official would advise constituents to abandon
public schools.

   One would be a philosophical opposition to the concept of public education: a
belief that this idea that has propelled the United States into economic, social
and technical predominance in the world was, after all, a mistake.

   It does not matter how good or bad public education is to someone who holds
such a belief. That's not the point for those who believe that public education
is a bad idea.

   The other reason is a belief that public schools are in fact not providing a
good education. It is easy to understand how such an idea has traction.

   For more than two decades, an antischool campaign has been effectively waged
by a small minority of extremists. Criticism of government is healthy and should
be expected, because public institutions operate in the sunlight, unlike Enron
and private institutions.

   It is an error, however, to believe that anecdotal problems characterize the
entire education system. Oregon's system of education is, in fact, excellent
measured against any number of objective standards. One example: Oregon has had
the best SAT scores in the nation for the past 13 years.

   A lack of adequate funding threatens our successful system. Oregonians should
run, not walk, to save one of the best school systems in the country. ED DENNIS
Hillsboro city councilman Starr's opponent gets my vote Now more than ever, the
families of Oregon need more than what is characterized by Sen. Charles Starr's
comments. We deserve if not passionate, then at least positive, leadership of
the Senate Education Committee.

   After revealing the depth of his negativity toward public education, to
continue occupying the chairman's seat is appalling. My confidence in the
Legislature to steer us through the education crisis has been dwindling. Now
it's gone.

   Because of the support shown him by Sen. Peter Courtney and others, I plan to
run, not walk, to help any candidate running against Starr and his supporters in
the next election.  KATHY TURNER Forest Grove Do the honorable thing Given Sen.
Charles Starr's low opinion of Oregon public schools and his comment that
parents should flee them, he should do the honorable thing and resign -- not
only as chairman of the Senate Education Committee, but also from the committee
itself. His attitude would make it difficult for him to be an adequate proponent
for the schools.  ANNE KOPPEL CONWAY Beaverton 19th century courtesy, politics
Sen. Charles Starr is charming and a gentleman. He exudes a courtesy that seems
to come straight from the 19th century. So, unfortunately, do his politics.

   He is, of course, entitled to them and to carry them to the Legislature. But
the Senate is not compelled to reward such a lack of comprehension regarding
public education with the chairmanship of the Senate committee on education.

   Another problem with him as chairman of that committee is that it is
impossible for most of the public to have confidence that the Legislature is
trying to do anything about the crisis we are facing. Starr should step down as
chairman, and if he doesn't do it voluntarily, his colleagues should enforce his
departure.  JUDD S. CONWAY Beaverton Responsibility to step down I am really
disappointed in Charles Starr, the head of our committee in Salem, telling
parents they should run away from public schools and go to a private school.

   Private schools have no qualifications for their teachers; they can be
anybody. He was irresponsible in making a statement like that. The teachers, I
think, should be depressed enough with all the stuff that's going on and giving
up all their free days, etc. This was very irresponsible on his part. He should
step down.  JO ANN SWICK Beaverton Starr right on the money Sen. Charles Starr
should stay in. He's the only one who has the right slant on the schools. The
school districts are an absolute mess, and somebody should take care of all of
them.  CHARLOTTE BERNARDO Aloha Opine, now resign Charles Starr should not be a
chairman of the Senate Education Committee. It's pretty obvious what he thinks.
Of course, he has every right to express his feelings, and now his feelings came
out. He simply should not be a chairman.  SOPHIA JOHNSON Hillsboro Dedication
lacking I was shocked and disappointed to read the remarks that Sen. Charles
Starr made to a constituent. To be chairman of the Senate Education Committee,
one should have a genuine belief that public education is critical to the
success of the people of this state and nation. Starr shows a lack of commitment
to Oregon's public schools.

   In these times of budget crisis in our state and schools, we need someone who
will think creatively to find solutions to our education problems. Suggesting
that people run away is not the answer.

   Our schools continue to strive for educational excellence even in light of
our budget problems, and I am proud of their continued creativity and hard work.
I will keep my children in public education and rest assured that they will have
an excellent education, even though it may take even more participation and
dedication on my part as a parent, taxpayer and Beaverton School Board member.
ANN JACKS Aloha No clue, bunch of baloney He's the head of this powerful
committee that decides the future of our children's education. How dare he make
that kind of a statement, that charter schools and home schooling are a much
better deal and pull your kids out of public school. He doesn't have a clue!

   What gives him the right to say these things? Has he ever sat in the
classroom? He should be pulled off of that committee, for one thing. This free
speech thing, that's a bunch of baloney. He's the head of the committee! He
needs to go.  KIRSTI NESS Hillsboro Don't dodge the truth Finally . . . a state
legislator who has faced the facts and told the truth! Charles Starr, an elected
official and chairman of the Senate Education Committee, has done what few -- if
any -- other legislators have the political courage to do: Say it like it is.
Starr's truthfulness is what we all would like to see in our elected officials.

   Simply because one states the obvious -- that the public school system is
broken -- doesn't mean you are opposed to fixing it. On the contrary, you can't
fix something if you don't think there is a problem.

   Starr's efforts are well documented, not backward but smart and wise, and the
public agrees with him on the Ten Commandments, charter schools, phonics and
ending bilingual education in favor of English immersion. It is Susan Castillo
and her union buddies, the educational establishment, and The Oregonian that
need some truth serum. Or haven't they noticed the flood of parents and teachers
who are opting to place their children in private schools?

   It's about time for some truth-telling in Salem -- and in The Oregonian --
about education.  DAVID CROWE Tigard Tough times, bad attitude After reading
Sen. Charles Starr's letter, I am outraged that Oregon Senate leaders would
allow him to continue in his post as Senate Education Committee chairman.
Oregonians deserve better.

   As our Legislature fails to provide adequate and stable funding to public
schools, teachers are represented by a man who voices disdain for the public
school system. Starr dealt a huge blow to educators across the state, further
violating our faith in elected officials. He dishonors our work and does not
support those he is supposed to represent.

   How can we possibly have faith that our government has the best people
leading legislative efforts to solve the problems we face? This is obviously not
the man to serve the people and educators of Oregon as we struggle to climb out
of the funding crisis.

   He is representing his personal agenda and is hard at work further weakening
the public school system. In a state in which public schools are literally
shutting down, this is unacceptable. Starr is out of touch with reality. I urge
him to visit the public schools he should be representing rather than spending
his time writing inaccurate, inflammatory statements about them.

   Furthermore, he has been spending so much time backpedaling from his
comments, he has failed to realize the honorable thing for him to do is to
resign his chairmanship. The Oregon Senate leadership should run -- not walk --
to remove Starr as chairman of the Senate Education Committee. I urge both
Republicans and Democrats to make this decision in the interest of public school
children across the state.  MARIAH BOWDEN Sixth-grade teacher, Twality Middle
School Tigard Starr doesn't measure up The most alarming item in this whole Sen.
Charles Starr affair is his slur about the "dumbing down" of American education.
The truth is, if we judge by test scores, students are performing better than
ever.

   This is reflected in IQ scores (a massive amount of data showing that scores
have risen almost 2 standard deviations since the 1920s). SAT and ACT scores are
up, even as more students take these tests, and achievement tests are
continually renormed upward, even as they are made more difficult.

   Studies here and in Europe show that days in school have a direct
relationship to IQ scores. Granted, test scores aren't everything, but in the
current climate, they are extensively used to judge students, schools and
teachers.

   How appropriate is it to have someone in charge without a clue about what our
state has lost educationally? ROBERT W. CLORE Columbia City Future is at stake
Oregon's future depends on our children -- all of our children. The
Legislature's job is to make decisions that strengthen and vitalize our public
schools. Those who guide the Legislature's decisions should be those who are
most committed to improving our public school system. We can't afford to have
this effort led by someone who doesn't support public schools. There's too much
at stake.  VICTORIA SAAGER Hillsboro Starr's stance rings true Of course Sen.
Charles Starr should retain the chair on the Senate Education Committee. It is
refreshing when a state politician has the backbone to stand up and tell us that
our K-12 education system is not worthy of our children.

   It is obvious the union does not have Starr in its hip pocket, and that
surely must cause its members great concern. Their approach is to get rid of him
rather than enter into a dialogue that would produce change. They don't want
change, and how could anyone dare to tell them they are turning out some
inferior products? Starr is right on the mark.  RED VANDEHEY Hillsboro The
following is in response to last week's question: Should OHSU build a
high-security research laboratory on its Hillsboro campus to fight bioterrorism?
Bio lab merits discussion Although I have listened with an open mind to the
experts at Oregon Health & Science University assure me that their proposed Bio
Level 4 lab is "absolutely safe," the prospect of an accidental exposure of our
community to the deadly viruses that would be studied on the Hillsboro campus
weighs heavily on my mind. That an accidental release has never happened at this
type of lab does not preclude the possibility that it could happen.

   While the engineering for multiple levels of safety seems excellent in
theory, no one can say for sure whether its construction will be perfect in
execution. Human error and mechanical failure may occur, and we cannot judge
exactly how, where or when until it is too late; witness Chernobyl, Three-Mile
Island, the Challenger and Columbia, never mind the releases of toxins we learn
about years later when the government records are no longer classified.

   Why not locate this facility in a more isolated area than on one of
Washington County's busiest, most densely populated thoroughfares? I understand
why: expediency and economics.

   OHSU already owns the real estate: the primate lab built in the 1960s (when
Northwest 185th Avenue was a two-lane country road) and in the Vaccine and Gene
Therapy Bio 3 Lab built in 1998.

   It is also not feasible to move its cadre of valuable scientists, who have
been attracted to this metro area over the years, to an isolated rural site
without the amenities of the city and the proximity to the university and a
large support system.

   One leading OHSU scientist admitted that he wouldn't want to work or live in
a place like Umatilla or Hanford. I can't say that I blame him, but the whole
community is affected by this decision.

   It would be wise for citizens to become informed about the Bio 4 Lab and all
its ramifications. It is interesting to research what is going on in other
communities, such as the University of California at Davis, which has applied
for the same grant and is experiencing great community debate over its siting.
We should debate the issue among ourselves and with our public officials as well
as at community meetings where OHSU will speak.

   OHSU cannot be faulted in its attempts to reach out to the community to
inform us and to seek our support, but we have to be ready to ask the most
difficult question at the heart of the matter: Should the most hazardous part of
the project, the Bio Level 4 lab, be located in such a densely populated area?
Siting should certainly be an integral part of the maximum safety equation.
KAREN CRESSA Hillsboro

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2003


                             824 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            March 19, 2003 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: Geron Soars After Research Backs Cancer Vaccine

BYLINE: From Associated Press

BODY:

   The stock price of struggling Geron Corp. skyrocketed Tuesday after the
company said its experimental cancer vaccine showed promise in fighting all
types of the disease.

   The money-losing biotechnology company had laid off much of its staff in the
last year.

   Its stock recently had languished below $2 a share.

   Geron's stock soared $2.47 a share, closing at $4.20 on Nasdaq.

   Nearly 18 million Geron shares traded hands Tuesday, up from about 113,000
shares on an average trading day.

   Though investors cheered Geron's cancer research, which was published in the
current issue of the scientific journal Cancer Gene Therapy, wary analysts
pointed out that the vaccine involved laboratory experiments and is several
years from regulatory approval.

   "I'm extremely uncomfortable with these type of announcements," said John Mc-
Camant, editor of Medical Technology Stock Letter. McCamant said Geron
scientists and others have been working on similar research for several years
and that its payoff is far off -- if it ever comes.

   The vaccine is a human cell genetically engineered to produce a telltale
protein called telomerase that is common to most cancers. The cell is designed
to provoke immune responses that let humans naturally fight cancer infections.

   The genetically engineered vaccine helped kill three types of cancer cells --
including melanoma and colon cancer -- in the laboratory, according to the
journal paper.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2003


                             825 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                             March 17, 2003 Monday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 1590 words

HEADLINE: MYSTERY MALADY A BAFFLING IMMUNE DISORDER MAY BE MORE WIDESPREAD THAN
ONCE THOUGHT WHEN IMMUNITY FAILS

BYLINE: BY KAREN ANGEL

BODY:

   B y age 16, Kelly Brown had come down with pneumonia four times. In between,
he was usually sick - often with a cold that took a long time to go away, and
once with a lymph node on his neck swollen to the size of an orange.

   Vita Edwards has had 14 bouts of pneumonia and countless episodes of
sinusitis. A former X-ray technician, she hasn't worked since 1979 because of
her health problems.

   Both Brown, 27, and Edwards, 53, spent years plagued by mysterious illnesses
and worry before they got a diagnosis: primary immunodeficiency, or PI.

   It's is a genetic disorder of the immune system, in contrast to a secondary,
or acquired, immune-system disease like AIDS. "People are looking for something
invading your body when you get sick all the time, but this is something
[already] inside your body," says Brown, whose baffled doctor said his ailment
resembled a horse disease.

   PI was first recognized about 50 years ago. Since then, researchers have
identified nearly 100 forms, ranging from mild to extremely severe.

   A milder form might involve deficiencies in one type of antibody-producing
cell (B or T cells, for example) or minor deficiencies in both B and T cells. A
more severe form might be caused by major B- and T-cell deficiencies. In some
types, the phagocytes, cells that swallow foreign bodies like bacteria and
viruses, are faulty.

   escaping diagnosis

   One of the most frequently seen PIs - the type both Brown and Edwards have -
is common variable immunodeficiency (CVI), characterized by low levels of
antibodies. The symptoms, which can strike at any age, include frequent ear
infections, sinusitis, bronchitis and pneumonia; there's also an increased risk
of certain cancers.

   One of the rarest PIs, affecting perhaps one infant in 500,000, is severe
combined immunodeficiency (SCID), whose victims live in protective "bubbles" to
prevent infection while awaiting a bone-marrow transplant.

   With SCID, thrush (a fungal infection in the mouth) and skin rash usually
appear by the age of 3 months. Because their immune systems barely function, the
patients are highly susceptible to life-threatening infections such as
meningitis and blood poisoning. Before transplants, the disease was always
fatal, usually in infancy.

   Between 25,000 and 50,000 Americans have PI, according to the National
Institutes of Health. But there may be thousands more who haven't been diagnosed
- one of the biggest challenges with this disease, which is still relatively
little known, even among physicians.

   The problem is especially bad in inner cities, because people tend to use
emergency rooms when they're ill, hindering the continuity of their care. But
even those with better access to medical care may see doctor after doctor before
getting a diagnosis. Nearly half of patients don't get diagnosed until they're
adults, and one-third have been hospitalized two to five times before diagnosis,
increasing the odds of permanent damage from scarring of the lungs or other
organs.

   PIs are diagnosed by blood tests that measure the levels and functioning of
antibodies and white blood cells. Since 1980, in about 70% of cases, the main
treatment has been infusions of gamma globulin, a group of blood proteins that
include antibodies; others take antibiotics or drugs such as interferon gamma to
control infections.

   Mount Sinai Medical Center has one of the largest PI research and treatment
programs in the country. The hospital's Jeffrey Modell Center for Research and
Comprehensive Care in Primary Immuno-Deficiency treats some 500 patients.

   On a recent Wednesday, the clinic's Dina LaVigna Infusion Room was filled
with patients receiving gamma globulin IVs. The treatment, which costs from
about $2,000 to $6,000 a month, lets many patients live a near-normal life - a
big contrast to the days before the infusions were available.

   "When I started working in the field in the late '70s, people would
frequently die in their 20s and 30s from this disease," says Dr. Lloyd Mayer,
chairman of Mount Sinai's immunobiology center.

   The center's patients describe an odyssey in which bewildered doctors tested
them for diseases with similar symptoms - AIDS, leukemia, lymphoma, allergies -
and in some cases called them hypochondriacs when they couldn't find anything
wrong. Often, it was the patient's persistence that eventually yielded a
diagnosis.

   Brown, a real-estate agent living in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, was finally
diagnosed at 17. But he wasn't given infusions for three more years, until he
was a sophomore at NYU and found Dr. Charlotte

   Cunningham-Rundles, director of Mount Sinai's immune-deficiency program,
while doing research on the Internet.

   "The difference it has made in my life is tremendous," says Brown of the IVs,
which supply most, but not all, of the antibodies these patients lack; they
generally start kicking in after about six months of treatment.

   Edwards, of Lynbrook, L.I., was diagnosed at 23 when doctors were giving her
a workup for another condition, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, an
auto-immune disease that reduces platelet count.

   The late '90s saw a shortage of gamma globulin after an FDA crackdown on
suppliers, prompted by concerns about the safety of the blood supply. Stepped-up
manufacturing and fewer product recalls have largely resolved that problem.

   But getting their insurance companies to cover the infusions is a problem for
many. Summer Krisel, 17, of Hicksville, L.I., a patient at Schneider Children's
Hospital in New Hyde Park, suffered bad reactions to the infusions, so she
switched to a subcutaneous method, using a syringe to pump the gamma globulin
more slowly and in smaller volume under her skin.

   Summer's mother, Cindi, 43, says her insurance company considers this method
experimental and refused to cover it. Cindi suspects the medical-supply company
she uses is writing off the cost of her daughter's medication; all she knows for
sure is she isn't paying and can't afford the monthly $6,000 bill.

   (The Immune Deficiency Foundation has just started a program to supply gamma
globulin on an interim basis to people without insurance. For more information,
call 1-800-296-4433.)

   a genetic disease

   Like Summer, many PI patients are sickly from birth, but others' symptoms
don't appear till later in life. Some experts believe PI may be brought on by
environmental factors, such as exposure to chemicals or a virus.

   Linda Gonzalez, 59, of Old Bridge, N.J., runs a monthly PI support group at
Mount Sinai. Gonzalez was a healthy young woman before the infections suddenly
started coming on a near-monthly basis: sinusitis, bronchitis and more cases of
pneumonia than she can count. A former administrative assistant at Rutgers
University, she went on disability in 1982 and hasn't worked since. After five
years of tests and hundreds of days spent in the hospital, she finally got a CVI
diagnosis.

   By then, pneumonia had scarred her lungs. For two years afterward, too weak
to walk, she had to use a wheelchair. Now, 20 years after her diagnosis, just
four minutes on the treadmill leave her winded.

   Still, compared with some, Gonzalez is lucky. "We lose a few [patients] every
year," Dr. Cunningham-Rundles says.

   Though PI is genetic, 75% of patients, including most with CVI, have no
family history of it, one of the reasons diagnosis can take so long.

   Genes have been mapped for about 70 PIs, including some 80% of the varieties
of SCID, leading to more accurate diagnosis and genetic counseling. Genetic
testing for those PIs can even be done prenatally, so that a baby can be treated
at birth.

   Lawrence Jackson, a 26-year-old Federal Express carrier who lives in the
South Bronx, spent his childhood in and out of the emergency room until he was
diagnosed with a hereditary PI, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, at age 8. Jackson's
cousin Anthony Lowe, 20, and nephew Kareem Edwards, 8, were spared the same fate
by being put on IVs right away, thanks to early testing.

   transplants widely available

   The long-term goal is to find a cure for PI. Gene-therapy trials in France
had apparently cured nine infants with SCID before two of them developed a
leukemia-like condition in 2002 - a problem that led to suspension of similar
trials in the U.S. this past January.

   Many experts still believe gene therapy may offer the best hope for a cure.
An FDA advisory committee is meeting this month to make recommendations.
Meanwhile, advances in bone-marrow transplantation have led to a high success
rate - 76% to 95% for PI at New York's Memorial Sloan-Kettering Medical Center,
depending on how closely matched the donor and recipient are. Since 1980,
doctors have been able to give a bone-marrow transplant to any child who needs
one by using a parent's T-cell-depleted marrow, thus avoiding rejection.

   "The ability to do transplants from a genetically half-matched donor, a
mother or father, has meant we can transplant any child with SCID," says Dr.
Richard O'Reilly, chief of the marrow-transplantation program at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering. At least 1,000 children with PI in the U.S. have been cured by
bone-marrow transplants, according to the National Institutes of Health.

   One of those is 10-year-old Oscar Genesin of Marine Park, Brooklyn, a patient
of O'Reilly's who had Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome - a PI with combined B- and
T-cell deficiencies and abnormal platelets. His mother, Svetlana, 38, donated
her marrow.

   Three years after the transplant, Oscar is a healthy student in the P.S. 222
program for gifted students; he practices karate and plays soccer and the piano.

   "I feel fine," Oscar says. "I feel lucky."

GRAPHIC: RON ANTONELLI FIGHTING BACK: Oscar Genesin, 10, and mother Svetlana,
whose marrow donations are helping him combat Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. HOWARD
SIMMONS DAILY NEWS CHRONICALLY SICK: Kelly Brown now receives antibodies he
needs intravenously. HOWARD SIMMONS DAILY NEWS HEALER: Dr. Charlotte
Cunningham-Rundles, head og Mt. Sinai's immune-deficiency program, administering
gamma globulin IVs.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2007


                             826 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 13, 2003, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1347 words

HEADLINE: CANCER VACCINES SHOWING PROMISE TREATMENT AIMED AT CURRENT PATIENTS

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Boston doctors are preparing to test a promising experimental lung cancer
vaccine on dozens of patients at local hospitals, part of a booming research
effort that seeks to kill cancers through simple pinpricks.

   More than 80 cancer vaccine trials are unfolding around the country,
according to federal health data, including 12 underway in Boston hospitals,
offering potential treatments for ovarian, skin, blood, colon, cervical, and
lung cancer.

       Unlike conventional vaccines that prevent disease from striking in the
first place, cancer vaccines are aimed at people who have already been treated
for cancer with hopes of avoiding the tumor's return. Researchers use various
methods to alert the body's immune system to the presence of cancerous tumors,
which normally grow undetected by the body's natural defenses.

   In one of the more striking results to date, two lung cancer patients at
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute who had been expected to live less than a year were
still tumor-free after more than three years. Researchers found that patients in
the vaccine test developed powerful immune reactions against their tumors,
though most of the patients subsequently died. A larger second phase of the
trial is expected to start this fall.

   The notion that vaccines, so successful against simple viruses, could fight
complex cancers was ridiculed when first proposed a century ago, and the field
was considered a backwater even a decade back. But vaccine research, building on
early successes in preventing the return of a deadly form of skin cancer, is now
a vital component of cancer research around the world, said specialists.

   "It's quite possible that people could live with their tumors in quite a
healthy state with a vaccine," said Dr. Jeffrey Schlom, who monitors research
nationwide as chief of tumor immunology for the National Cancer Institute,
adding that "the field is still very young."

   Most researchers are thrilled by recent breakthroughs, but acutely aware that
many of the trials are in the earliest stages of human testing. "You don't want
to raise hopes too much on treatments that may not turn out to work," said Dr.
Alan Houghton, the immunology chairman at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
in New York, where much of the pioneering research unfolded. "But my feeling is
that at some point, it may be years, it may be decades, but at some point, these
vaccines will play an important role in cancer therapy."

   Dr. Glenn Dranoff, architect of the Dana-Farber lung cancer vaccine test,
shies away from publicity about his work. When word gets out, he knows the calls
will come from desperate patients convinced that simple injections might save
their lives.

   Dranoff's work exemplifies the recent leaps made in cancer vaccine research.
In the 1990s, he designed a vaccine for the most dangerous type of skin cancer,
melanoma, helping the body's immune system recognize cancerous cells.

   Cancer cells are much harder for the immune system to detect than viruses
that are typically the target of vaccines. Cancer cells are normal body cells
with a few defects that make them multiply uncontrollably into dangerous tumors.
But the defects are too subtle to be detected by the immune system. So Dranoff
decided to paint a genetic bull's-eye on them. First he removed melanoma tumors
from patients. Then, in a lab dish, he infected them with a harmless virus that
he engineered to carry a gene called GM-CSF. This gene alerts the immune system
to intruders. The infected tumor cells - after being treated with radiation that
prevents them from becoming cancerous again - were injected into patients' arms
and legs.

   Dranoff's theory: The GM-CSF gene would attract an immune attack and, in the
process, the immune system would learn to recognize the tumor cells wherever
they might be in the body. Unlike traditional cancer treatments, such as
radiation and chemotherapy, the immune cells could attack cancers at the
earliest stages of growth - before they can even be detected. The technique at
work, known as gene therapy, is a controversial but promising approach that
harnesses recent discoveries about human genetics.

   When the first test of the vaccine ended in 1998, Dranoff's team examined
their patients and found the melanoma tumors in most had been vigorously
attacked by the immune system. It was not 100 percent effective, but it was
proof positive the method worked. Further melanoma tests were launched. Some of
Dranoff's colleagues thought his team should turn its attention to more
widespread and deadly cancers.

   Lung cancer, said Dranoff, seemed an ideal target. "Lung cancer in our
country is the major cause of cancer death," said the soft-spoken Dranoff
recently. "But it has hardly been studied by vaccine researchers."

   He used the same gene therapy technique on 25 patients suffering from
non-small-cell lung cancer, injecting each weekly with his lung cancer vaccine.
This cancer type accounts for 80 percent of all lung cancers. Each patient had
already failed several other standard therapies and had less than a year to
live.

   In 18 patients, the vaccine produced significant immune system responses
against the tumors. Six patients had their tumors surgically examined; in three
of those cases, immune system cells had invaded the tumors, killing thousands of
cancer cells.

   Two patients had no tumors left to be tested, and were cancer-free even three
years after the injections.

   Cancer in five of the 18 patients stabilized for up to 33 months.

   But there was also ample evidence of lung cancer's deadliness: rapidly
spreading cancer forced nine initial test patients to withdraw from the trial,
and today, six years after the trial began, only three of the original 18
patients remain alive. "It is important to be very conservative in reporting the
results of the trial," said Dranoff, with typical caution. "It is encouraging
that the vaccination approach proved feasible, safe, and capable of enhancing
the immune response to lung cancer cells."

   His team is preparing a trial on a larger scale, to begin this fall, to
further test the vaccine's efficacy when combined with other cancer drugs. An
even larger version of the trial, with hundreds of patients, will be run by the
California-based biotechnology firm Cell Genesys Inc., which works closely with
Dranoff.

   Though much of the most promising work remains in melanoma treatment, that is
changing. "Recently more and more work is being done on a large population of
tumors: breast, lung, colon, and prostate," said Schlom.

   Schlom said the vaccines are likely to prove most effective in the early
stages of cancer, when the immune system is still robust. However, because of
ethical rules, only the sickest patients currently can be tested with the
vaccines. Therefore vaccines' effectiveness in early-stage patients, when they
are likely most potent, remains untested. "It's a very, very slow process," said
Schlom.

   However, within two years, federal regulators predicted numerous Phase III
vaccine studies, the final step before government approval, will be underway.

   But there have been setbacks. Cancer cells are extremely elusive targets,
constantly changing their genetic makeup.

   Houghton recently finished a Phase III skin cancer vaccine trial, using a
differnt approach from Dranoff, that found conventional treatment worked better.

   "I really don't know which vaccines will work," he said.

   Still, the field has been significantly advanced in the last five years. In
the early 1990s, skin cancer vaccine research made up more than 90 percent of
the field, said specialists, simply because melanoma tumors, which appear on the
skin, were easier to study. But researchers, capitalizing on recent advances in
genomic science, began identifying genetic targets on other cancers that
vaccines could take aim at, jump-starting the field. "Ten years ago, people had
real doubts," said Dranoff. "But once you have targets, you can use the same
techniques used to fight other infections."

   Raja Mishra can be reached at rmishra@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                             827 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                  March 12, 2003 Wednesday City final Edition

SECTION: STARSOUTH; SCHOOLS; Pg. 3S

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: SCHOOLS;
Here's a look at what is happening in school districts of the StarSouth coverage
area.

BODY:

   Center Grove

   North Grove Elementary School will present its annual Spring Fling from 5
p.m. to 8 p.m. March 22 at the school. The event, featuring the theme "Around
The World," will include games, food, a raffle and a silent auction. The public
is invited. Proceeds will benefit the school.

   Clark-Pleasant

   Break-O-Day Elementary School is participating again in the Shoe Recycling
Program sponsored by the Johnson County Solid Waste Management office.
Collection of old and used shoes continues through March 21.

   Unacceptable shoes include jellies, sandals, skates, slippers, western boots
and shoes with heels 2 inches high and higher.

   Franklin

   Needham Elementary students have raised more than $6,000 for the following
organizations:

   * $1,212 for the American Heart Association's Jump for Heart events.

   * $1,100 for Pennies for Patients.

   * $3,987 for St. Jude Research Hospital Math-A-Thon.

   Top fund-raisers Tevin Hicks, Jericka Sholty and Jacob Lewis are all
first-graders.

   Franklin Central

   The school district will sell surplus items at auction at 10 a.m. Saturday in
the old media center at Franklin Central High School, 6215 S. Franklin Road.

   Among the items up for auction are student desks and chairs, teacher desks,
typewriters, computers, library chairs and shelving, file cabinets, two
wood-burning inserts and ceiling fans.

   A house and two metal barns also will be auctioned, as will two metal barns.
These need to be removed within 30 days. They are on property east of the high
school on Indian Creek Road.

   Only cash or checks with identification will be accepted. Items must be
removed by 4 p.m. and paid for within an hour after the end of the sale. All
items will be sold on an "as is" basis.

   Greenwood

   Emily Bipson won the Northeast Elementary spelling bee recently. She will
represent the school at the April 22 Johnson County contest. Caleb New is the
runner-up.

   Lutheran High School

   Junior Danielle Sass was one of only 48 Indiana students to be selected to
attend the fourth annual Molecular Medicine in Action program.

   This program is designed to give high school students a day of hands-on
science with top researchers at the Indiana University School of Medicine.

   The program takes place at the Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
located at the Indiana University Cancer Research Institute.

   Members of the Indiana Association of Biology Teachers selected Danielle
based on her application, essay and recommendation of sponsoring teacher Kris
Coneybeer.

   "This is a great experience for Danielle, especially since molecular research
is the career she wants to pursue," Coneybeer said.

   The goal of the program is to encourage students to consider careers in
science and give them a sense of the excitement that comes with doing
cutting-edge medical research.

   Danielle will spend the day learning about the latest techniques in molecular
biology and gene therapy, including isolating DNA, amplifying genetic material,
methods for analyzing DNA and chromosomes, and the use of virus-based vectors to
treat genetic diseases.

   Nineveh-Hensley-Jackson

   This year's musical production at Indian Creek High School will be "Return to
the Forbidden Planet" by Bob Carlton, a whimsical show about the adventures that
Capt. Tempest and his crew have on a routine survey flight into outer space.

   The musical is based on the science fiction film from the late 1950s. But in
this version, the playwrights wanted to add a bit of a twist. The story is told
through the classic language of Shakespeare.

   Performances will be at 7:30 p.m. March 20-22 in Indian Creek Middle School
Auditorium. There will be a matinee performance at 2 p.m. March 22.

   Ticket prices are $7 for adults and $5 for students.

   Northwestern Shelby

   The School Board will meet at 7 p.m. today at Triton Central High School.

   Roncalli

   The theater department will present "Fiddler on the Roof" at 7 p.m. March
20-22 in the Roncalli gym. Tickets are $5 for adults and $4 for children under
12 years of age.

   For reserved seating, call (317) 787-8277, Ext. 227.

   St. Barnabas

   Students will be raising money for the American Heart Association by
participating in the Jump Rope for Heart and Hoops for Heart programs. Students
in Grades 1-4 are soliciting pledges to jump rope, and students in Grades 5-8
are soliciting pledges to shoot baskets. The event will be staged through
Friday.

   St. Jude

   Eighth-grader Aaron Stobaugh was awarded first place overall in the Catholic
Youth Organization science fair this month. His project was titled "Stroop
Effect 2."

   Other winners were:

   * Anne Maguire, eighth grade, second place in biology.

   * Luke Allard, eighth grade, sixth place in engineering.

   St. Roch

   The Scholastic Book Fair is taking place from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. through
Friday. Parents, students and friends of the school are welcome to purchase
books and related merchandise in the Parish Life Center.

   St. Rose of Lima

   Students recently read and performed the play "The Bremen Town Musicians."
Students made puppets and created their own props.

   Shelby Eastern

   Waldron Elementary School recently staged its science fair. The top three
students overall will proceed to statewide competition. Honorees were:

   * First place -- Jordan Stocklin, lung capacity of smokers vs. nonsmokers.

   * Second place -- Tyler Charles, batteries.

   * Third place -- Katie Dickerson, windmills and wind power.

   * Earth science -- Chelsea Preston and James Sheets, first; Casey Schonfeld,
second; Annalea Payne, third.

   * Electricity and magnetism -- Jenna Prather, first; Jeremy Doddridge and
Brandon Sheets, second; Noah Hinkle, third.

   * Biology and the environment -- Katelynn Armstrong, first; Nicole Brand,
second; Jarron Hill, third.

   * Physics and machines -- Ross Haymond, first; Darrin Isaac, second; Nathan
Carter and Daniel Pollman, third.

   * Physics -- Brett Highley, first; Joey Raney and Ryan Turner, second; Joseph
Habr and Cody Lingerfeld, third.

   * Chemistry -- Johnathan Nedderman, first; Kristan Ward, second, Brandi
Greenier, third.

   * Animals -- Kelsey Stephens, first; Adrienne Harvey, second; Jessica
Doddridge, third.

   * Diseases -- Karman Stevens, first; Kyle Stevens, second; Rebekah Alexander
and Katelynn Oliver, third.

   * Health -- Tiffney Boyer, first; Heidi Hensley and Emily Wolfe, second;
Amanda Mitchell and Alexis Zobel, third.

   Noell Krughoff, Edwin and Zola Ernstes, Kathy Gahimer, Linda Robertson and
Misty Elliott served as judges.

   Southwestern

   The School Board will meet at 7:30 p.m. today at the high school.

   StarSouth will publish information from school districts in our coverage area
on a daily basis. To submit items, call the StarSouth education team at
1-317-865-4900, fax to 1-317-865-4923 or e-mail information to
starsouth@indystar.com

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                             828 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 11, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: Vical to test safety of its anthrax vaccine on humans

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 San Diego biotechnology company Vical said yesterday that it plans to test the
safety of its experimental anthrax vaccine in humans by the end of the year.

   Vical shares gained 58 cents on news that the vaccine protected rabbits
exposed to the deadly anthrax bacteria, while rabbits that didn't receive the
vaccine all died.  The vaccine produced similar results in mice.

   Vical's stock closed at $2.81, up 26 percent.

   The biotech is one of several drug companies that hope to capitalize on the
$6 billion in federal money earmarked over the next decade for development of
treatments to combat bioterrorism.

   Five Americans died in late 2001 when anthrax-laced letters circulated
through the postal system, and the threat of military action in Iraq has focused
new attention on the need for treatments to counter biological weapons.

   In San Diego, Hollis-Eden Pharmaceuticals is working on an experimental drug
to protect troops and civilians against radiation exposure.  Another local
biotech, Avanir Pharmaceuticals, is also trying to develop a treatment for
anthrax.

   A federal panel last year said a new anthrax vaccine is needed because the
only available one, made by Lansing, Mich.-based BioPort Corp., uses outdated
technology and is cumbersome to administer.  The vaccine, called BioTrax,
requires six injections over 18 months.

   Vical's vaccine uses strands of DNA that encode for two key lethal proteins
produced by the anthrax bacteria.

   When injected, the proteins -- engineered to be nontoxic -- act as a red
flag, signaling the body's immune system to recognize the invader and generate
infection-fighting antibodies.

   The company said its vaccine triggered an immune response in rabbits equal to
or greater than BioPort's vaccine.

   "Anthrax has been identified as a leading bioterrorism agent, and the
recognized shortcomings of the currently licensed anthrax vaccine make
development of an alternative an attractive opportunity," said Vical chief
executive Vijay Samant.

   Vical could use some new opportunities.

   The veteran biotech, which went public in 1991, switched its focus from gene
therapy after the failure last year of its lead cancer vaccine, Allovectin-7, in
a final-stage Phase 3 clinical trial.

   The therapeutic vaccine, designed to treat a lethal form of skin cancer, did
not provide significant benefits to patients.  Allovectin is still being tested
at higher dosages in a mid-stage, Phase 2 study of melanoma patients.

   Vical is also one of several publicly traded San Diego biotechs that are
trading for less than the cash on their balance sheet, denoting a lack of
investor confidence in the company's prospects for a major drug success.

   The company, which has about $112 million in cash, now hopes to develop
vaccines to treat infectious diseases, including a treatment for malaria and
another for cytomegalovirus.

   But the anthrax vaccine could move to the forefront of Vical's research
efforts because of U.S. rules that allow approval of drugs that can't ethically
be tested in traditional ways.

   The Food and Drug Administration can approve such medicines based on animal
studies and Phase 1 human safety data.  Usually, the agency requires
experimental drugs to go through a lengthy testing process in three stages of
human studies.

   But Vical can't test whether its vaccine protects people from anthrax,
because that requires exposing volunteers to a potentially fatal infection.
Instead, the company will inoculate healthy volunteers and monitor whether they
suffer complications in a Phase 1 safety study.

   Even if Vical wins approval for its vaccine, there is no guarantee of
commercial success.  The government has already awarded two rival biotechs,
VaxGen and Britain's Avecia, $22 million to test another experimental anthrax
vaccine.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                             829 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 11, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. E-5

LENGTH: 173 words

HEADLINE: Technology Inc.

BODY:
 HEALTH CARE

   Cardinal Health to add workers

   Cardinal Health said it will add a 70,000-square-foot clinical manufacturing
plant to its existing San Diego research facility.  The Dublin, Ohio-based
company, which employs 130 people at the San Diego research building, provides
laboratory research services to other drug companies.

   Cardinal said it has leased a new manufacturing facility and plans to hire up
to 125 employees in the next year.  The plant will produce sterile liquid and
freeze dried injectable products.

   BIOTECH

   Biotech completes reverse split

   Corautus Genetics said it has converted private stock into common stock and
completed a 1-for-7 reverse stock split.

   The San Diego biotechnology company was formed recently from the merger of
two gene therapy companies, publicly traded GenStar Therapeutics Corporation and
privately held Vascular Genetics.

   Richard Otto, chief executive of Corautus, said the reverse stock split will
give the company flexibility to negotiate future transactions and investments.


GRAPHIC: 2 GRAPHS; 1,2. SOURCE: Bloomberg | UNION-TRIBUNE; 1. San Diego
Technology 2. San Diego life sciences

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                             830 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 11, 2003 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 636 words

HEADLINE: Vical to test safety of its anthrax vaccine on humans

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   San Diego biotechnology company Vical said yesterday that it plans to test
the safety of its experimental anthrax vaccine in humans by the end of the year.
Vical shares gained 58 cents on news that the vaccine protected rabbits exposed
to the deadly anthrax bacteria, while rabbits that didn't receive the vaccine
all died.

   The vaccine produced similar results in mice. Vical's stock closed at $2.81,
up 26 percent. The biotech is one of several drug companies that hope to
capitalize on the $6 billion in federal money earmarked over the next decade for
development of treatments to combat bioterrorism. Five Americans died in late
2001 when anthrax-laced letters circulated through the postal system, and the
threat of military action in Iraq has focused new attention on the need for
treatments to counter biological weapons. In San Diego, Hollis-Eden
Pharmaceuticals is working on an experimental drug to protect troops and
civilians against radiation exposure.

   Another local biotech, Avanir Pharmaceuticals, is also trying to develop a
treatment for anthrax. A federal panel last year said a new anthrax vaccine is
needed because the only available one, made by Lansing, Mich.-based BioPort
Corp., uses outdated technology and is cumbersome to administer.

   The vaccine, called BioTrax, requires six injections over 18 months. Vical's
vaccine uses strands of DNA that encode for two key lethal proteins produced by
the anthrax bacteria. When injected, the proteins -- engineered to be nontoxic
-- act as a red flag, signaling the body's immune system to recognize the
invader and generate infection-fighting antibodies. The company said its vaccine
triggered an immune response in rabbits equal to or greater than BioPort's
vaccine. "Anthrax has been identified as a leading bioterrorism agent, and the
recognized shortcomings of the currently licensed anthrax vaccine make
development of an alternative an attractive opportunity," said Vical chief
executive Vijay Samant. Vical could use some new opportunities. The veteran
biotech, which went public in 1991, switched its focus from gene therapy after
the failure last year of its lead cancer vaccine, Allovectin-7, in a final-stage
Phase 3 clinical trial. The therapeutic vaccine, designed to treat a lethal form
of skin cancer, did not provide significant benefits to patients.

   Allovectin is still being tested at higher dosages in a mid-stage, Phase 2
study of melanoma patients. Vical is also one of several publicly traded San
Diego biotechs that are trading for less than the cash on their balance sheet,
denoting a lack of investor confidence in the company's prospects for a major
drug success. The company, which has about $112 million in cash, now hopes to
develop vaccines to treat infectious diseases, including a treatment for malaria
and another for cytomegalovirus. But the anthrax vaccine could move to the
forefront of Vical's research efforts because of U.S. rules that allow approval
of drugs that can't ethically be tested in traditional ways. The Food and Drug
Administration can approve such medicines based on animal studies and Phase 1
human safety data.

   Usually, the agency requires experimental drugs to go through a lengthy
testing process in three stages of human studies. But Vical can't test whether
its vaccine protects people from anthrax, because that requires exposing
volunteers to a potentially fatal infection. Instead, the company will inoculate
healthy volunteers and monitor whether they suffer complications in a Phase 1
safety study. Even if Vical wins approval for its vaccine, there is no guarantee
of commercial success.

   The government has already awarded two rival biotechs, VaxGen and Britain's
Avecia, $22 million to test another experimental anthrax vaccine. Penni
Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             831 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             March 11, 2003 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C09

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: Discovering The Leaders Of the Pack

BYLINE: Don Oldenburg, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Think of it as the marketplace's "six degrees of separation." The theory: The
consumer decisions made by 90 percent of us -- including which car we drive,
which PC we purchase and which restaurants we eat at -- can be traced to the
influence of the other 10 percent.

    Don't buy it? Ed Keller, chief executive of RoperASW, a global marketing
research firm that's banking on this persuasive 10 percent being a barometer of
consumer trends, says he has witnessed the phenomenon evolving over three
decades.

    "From big-ticket to small-ticket items, to everyday issues and problems,
consumers are turning to word of mouth from people they know, and it's these
1-in-10 Americans who have become the trusted turned-to people," says Keller,
who with co-author Jon Berry have dubbed them "The Influentials," also the title
of their new book (Free Press; $ 26).

    According to Keller, consumers have become less trusting of institutions
such as advertising, the government, the media, employers and large brands,
leaving a marketplace void that is increasingly filled by the opinion of
influentials.

    Self-reliance has replaced that trust. In the marketplace, self-reliance
translates into people turning to one another for information on everything from
the hottest Caribbean destinations to which Oscar nominees are must-sees.

    From decades of deciphering RoperASW's poll, Keller and Berry, RoperASW's
vice president and senior director of research, have profiled who influentials
are: men and women, median age 45, college background, married with children,
homeowners with good jobs. They are more likely than the rest of the public to
read newspapers, magazines and books, travel, cook, exercise, spend time online,
go to cultural events, volunteer in the community, enjoy music -- and return
products they don't like.

    Keller says they often are local activists who organize petitions, run
church groups, raise funds for the library and write letters to the editor.
"They have influence because they invest the time. They believe individuals can
make a difference. They have a reputation for getting things done. And, in that
respect, they have earned the trust of their friends and neighbors."

    Typically, influentials are at the leading edge of consumer trends moving
from niche and buff status to the mainstream. Current interests: broadband,
digital photography, 20-gigabyte MP3 players (which can store thousands of
songs), DVD players (almost half of them own DVDs), and gene therapy.

    "We're seeing interest in hybrid engine cars," says Berry. "Last summer, 28
percent of influentials were interested in buying one. In January, almost 4 in
10 said they expect hybrid cars to be in broad use in the next four years. You
see them start to talk about things and then you start to see those things
surfacing." (About 52,000 hybrid cars have been sold in the United States,
nearly 35,700 in 2002, according to J.D. Power and Associates. Americans buy
about 17 million new cars each year.)

    RoperASW consults with corporate America on how consumer purchases are
influenced. Keller is warning marketers that the influentials are not easily
fooled by hype. His advice to marketers: "Learn what makes influentials tick and
then target them."

    Amazon.com, says Keller, recently shelved its $ 50-million-a-year TV ad
campaign to focus on services its customers will talk up, such as free shipping.
"You're going to see more of that," he says.

    Another way influentials influence the public that firms need to heed: "At
any given moment, 40 percent of the influentials are walking around with a
complaint about some product or service. They are the ones e-mailing to the
customer-care offices," says Keller.

    Businesses that understand a high percentage of complaints come from the
most influential consumers "can't treat them as nuisances anymore," says Keller.
"Because if they treat them wrong, that will multiply. And if they treat them
right, that will multiply."

    Got a consumer complaint? Question? E-mail details to
oldenburgd@washpost.com or write Don Oldenburg, The Washington Post, 1150 15th
St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2003


                             832 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      March 10, 2003 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg.B-3 TRADING

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: BEWARE OF STOCKS SELLING FOR 100 TIMES REVENUE

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Scott McNealy, the chairman of Sun Microsystems, recently uncorked one of the
best rants I've ever heard.

    "What were you thinking?" McNealy asked, referring to investors who bought
Sun stock when it was riding high at $64 a share, which was 10 times revenue.
"At 10 times revenue, to give you a 10-year payback, I have to pay you 100
percent of revenue for 10 straight years in dividends."

    In his remarks, quoted in Business Week of April 1, 2002, McNealy continued:
"That assumes zero expenses, which is really hard with 39,000 employees. That
assumes I pay no taxes, which is very hard. And that assumes you pay no taxes on
your dividends, which is kind of illegal." He went on to ask, "Do you realize
how ridiculous those basic assumptions are?"

    In my opinion, McNealy makes a totally convincing case. I don't buy stocks
that sell for 10 times revenue. Frequently, I sell them short, betting on a
decline.

    Yet there is something more absurd than a stock selling for 10 times revenue
-- one selling for 100 times revenue.

    Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc. and ICT Technologies Inc. qualify. So do
Trimeris Inc. and Human Genome Sciences Inc. If the past is prologue, these
stocks will plunge.

    Three years ago, when I wrote my first column on this subject, I warned
against seven stocks selling for 100 times revenue or more. Over the next year,
all seven fell, with an average drop of 91 percent.

    Two years ago I singled out four such stocks. Over the next 12 months, all
fell. Average loss: 50 percent.

    One year ago I found three such stocks: Human Genome Sciences Inc.,
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and CV Therapeutics Inc.

    Human Genome Sciences has plunged 71 percent. Transkaryotic has been raked
for an 88 percent loss. CV Therapeutics has dropped 46 percent. The average loss
this time out was 68 percent.

    Over the same period, Feb. 26, 2002 through Feb. 25, 2003, the Standard &
Poor's 500 Index declined 23 percent, including reinvested dividends.

    The past three years, of course, have been bear-market years. In a bull
market with a more ebullient atmosphere prevailing, these types of stocks
doubtlessly would do better.

    Odds Against You

    Still, I think the odds are stacked heavily against you with a stock selling
for 100 times revenue.

    You may have noticed that the number of such stratospherically valued stocks
keeps shrinking. Three years ago I found seven with a market value of $1 billion
or more and the requisite price-sales ratio of 100 or more. Two years ago it was
four; one year ago, only three. This year I found only one: Amylin
Pharmaceuticals Inc. (Ticker: AMLN).

    The shrinkage reflects the way the bear market has wrung many of the
market's excesses.

    To avoid singling out Amylin, I opened the field this year to stocks with a
market value of $500 million or more. That lets in ICT Technologies, Trimeris
and (once more) Human Genome Sciences.

    I have sold short Amylin for several of my clients, betting that it will
decline. So I am not completely objective about the stock. That said, I think
its price is ridiculous.

    Amylin, based in San Diego, Calif., is working on a drug, Smylin, to help
diabetics who are taking insulin control their blood sugar and lose weight.

    The company is seeking approval of the drug in the United States and in
Switzerland. In October it withdrew an application for approval in the European
Union, saying it would resubmit the application.

    In November, Amylin said it would sell about $175 million in new stock to
fund marketing of Smylin, as well as research and development.

    This quarter, Amylin hopes to complete a clinical study of Smylin that will
persuade the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to approve the drug.

    Human Genome Sciences (HGSI) makes my list for a third year in a row. In
February 2001 it sold for about $55 a share. A year later it was around $21, and
today the stock is below $7. Yet even at today's price, it sells for 235 times
revenue.

    Trimeris (TRMS) is working on an AIDS drug called T-20 and other drugs that
may block viral infections. It has little revenue as yet and has posted widening
losses in each of the past four years. Yet investors give Trimeris a
stock-market value of almost $900 million.

    Optimists hope for FDA approval of T-20 as soon as next month. Supposing
that they get their wish, it is worth noting that T-20 will need to be injected
twice a day, and will probably cost more than $30,000 a year for each patient, a
possible deterrent to use.

    ICT Technologies (ICTT) can't seem to decide what business it wants to be
in. It once aspired to be an art company, and now is a distribution company for
air conditioners, telecom products and motor scooters.

    ICT had revenue of about $300,000 in the third quarter. It has announced
contracts for delivery of 250,000 air conditioners and 21,600 motor scooters in
Europe. Inexplicably, it has a market value of $644 million.

    Perhaps one of these stocks will break the group's losing streak. But I
wouldn't bet that way if I were you.

NOTES:
John Dorfman is a columnist for Bloomberg News and is president of Dorfman
Investments in Boston. The opinions expressed are his own. His firm or its
clients may own or trade investments discussed in this column. Contact him at
jdorfman@bloomberg.net or Dorfman Investments, 101 Federal St., Suite 1900,
Boston, MA 02110.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2003


                             833 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2003 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                     March 7, 2003 Friday metro Met Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 1031 words

HEADLINE: Immunity researcher gets break;
Harvard-affiliated hospital seeks collaboration

BYLINE: HOWINGTON PATRICK, phowington@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   Byline: PATRICK HOWINGTON

   Source: The Courier-Journal

   University of Louisville immunologist Haval Shirwan and his company are
starting to get attention from the outside world following publication of
Shirwan's research in a prestigious journal.

   The company, ApoImmune, has signed a research agreement with a
Harvard-affiliated hospital after a medical professor there read an article by
Shirwan's research team in the journal Immunity.

   The article described a method Shirwan has invented to keep the body's immune
system from attacking tissue transplanted from a donor, potentially offering
great benefits for organ-transplant patients.

   "It's rational, it's attractive," said Dr. Terry Strom, professor of medicine
at Harvard, who runs an immunology research lab. "We were going to try and do
this very same thing, but with a different and more demanding technique."

   After reading Shirwan's article in Immunity's December issue, Strom asked
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, a teaching hospital for Harvard
Medical School, to seek a collaboration with ApoImmune. The Louisville company
holds exclusive licensing rights to the discoveries by Shirwan, its chief
scientific officer.

   The agreement gives ApoImmune the benefit of cost-free research and
development of Shirwan's protein technology by Strom's lab at Beth Israel. It
gives ApoImmune first licensing rights to any application the lab finds.

   The Beth Israel research, if successful, could lead to human clinical trials.

   ApoImmune is located in the young Louisville Life Sciences Research Park,
near the downtown medical center. The company's agreement with a Harvard
hospital is a coup for the park as well, said executive director Steven
Spalding.

   "Part of putting ourselves on the map is being about to have those strategic
partnerships with the best of the best out there," he said.

   ApoImmune is negotiating a similar agreement with another major research
university, said Bill Pearse, president and CEO of the 2-year-old company.

   "We're very excited about what he's doing here," Pearse said of Shirwan is .
"He's proving that he's out on the edge leading, (instead of ) following."

   Shirwan, who came to U of L through the "Bucks for Brains" program, has
invented a way to manipulate the body's immune system by coating cells with
specially engineered proteins.

   The technique can be used to trigger an immune-system attack on cancer and
other diseases - a technique that will soon get a clinical trial at Louisville's
Jewish Hospital.

   But it also can be used to convince the immune system not to attack - for
example, to prevent the body from rejecting transplanted organs or tissue.
transplanted from a donor. That was the approach documented in the Immunity
article.

   It described how the U of L team transplanted clusters of pancreatic cells
into rats after "decorating" them with tailored proteins. In a majority of
cases, the proteins tricked the host rat's immune system into not attacking the
donated tissue as foreign.

   The discovery has potential benefit for some diabetes patients, because the
cell clusters, called islets, produce insulin. A common form of diabetes is the
result of the body's inability to produce enough insulin.

   The discovery also has great significance beyond diabetes care. If tissues
and organs could be transplanted without the body rejecting them, recipients
would no longer have to rely on a lifelong regimen of immunosuppressive drugs,
which leave them vulnerable to infections.

   Many scientists, including those in Strom's lab at Beth Israel, are pursuing
ways to block such rejection. But they typically involve gene therapy - altering
DNA and using a virus to introduce it into the body, which is time-consuming and
can be dangerous.

   The dangers were highlighted by the 1999 death of an 18-year-old man taking
part in a gene-therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. Researchers had
used a common virus to deliver healthy genes to his liver.

   "Gene-transfer techniques right now are in a sad state of affairs," Strom
said. If Shirwan's technique can accomplish the same ends without using viruses,
"that's a very good thing," he said.

   "I think it's an important breakthrough," said Wenda Gao, another Harvard
immunology researcher. He said the proteins that Shirwan's group plants on cell
surfaces are more stable and long-lived than the proteins his lab has injected
in mice through gene therapy.

   Shirwan said that though the proteins themselves don't remain on cells more
than a few weeks, their effect is long-lasting because the immune system
"remembers" its identification of the transplanted cells as harmless.

   He said mice who received islet transplants more than 300 days ago - a long
time in a mouse's life - still have not rejected them. "We're clearly very
excited about our technology," he said.

   Shirwan is director of U of L's Molecular Immunology Program. The work
described in Immunity was done by researchers in his U of L lab, who wrote the
article with Shirwan and a researcher at Carnegie Mellon University.

   ApoImmune didn't work on that research but owns rights to it. The company is
focused now on its upcoming cancer trial at Jewish, which Pearse said is
expected to begin early next year.

   Meanwhile, he said, the company has succeeded in purifying the proteins it
uses to stimulate the immune system against cancer and other diseases - a first
step toward being able to provide them to institutions that want to conduct a
clinical trial. It's a "significant technical milestone" for the company, Pearse
said.

   Update

   Last we knew:

   ApoImmune was developing a technique to trick the body into fighting cancer
and other diseases and will soon start testing it at Louisville's Jewish
Hospital.

   The latest:

   A twist on the same technique can be used to persuade convince the body not
to attack certain cells, such as those of transplanted organs. The company has
reached a research -and -development agreement with a Harvard-affiliated
hospital for the technology.

   Why it's news:

   ApoImmune is one of Louisville's more promising efforts to commercialize
university research.

   For more info:

   www.apoimmune.com

GRAPHIC: Esma Yolcu, a senior researcher at the University of Louisville,
counted cells through a microscope at a University of Louisville lab. The
research could be helpful in producing insulin for patients with diabetes.Sadi
Koksoy pulled vials of cells "decorated" with proteins from a centrifuge as part
of an experiment to treat diabetes.S BY MICHAEL CLEVENGER, THE COURIER-JOURNAL

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2003


                             834 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      March 7, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 885 words

BODY:

   Baseball's relentless campaign to insure that no one ever attends a game
without having to lug around one or more piece-of-crap giveaway items will
continue in 2003. (You're stunned!). I bring it up only because it's time for
our severely unawaited annual column on Pirates promotions.

    You may hold your applause.

    When I started this stunt, back in the glory days, by which I mean the Sammy
Khalifa Administration, the Pirates generally had 50 or 60 giveaway/promotion
nights and I helpfully filled in the remaining 20 or 30 dates with my own ideas.
The fact that the Pirates now have 78 dates with some kind of promotional
aspect, leaving only three home dates orphaned and trinketless, is shocking but
still not enough to head off this column. Sorry.

    This year, if I don't like the promotion, I'm just substituting my own. I'm
sure you'll be able to distinguish between actual promotions and Fiction Night.
Fairly sure. Somewhat sure. But without further fondue ...

    April 7 -- Magnetic Schedule Night/Fireworks

    April 8 -- Retro Schedule That Doesn't Stick To Anything Night/No Fireworks

    April 9 -- Pepsi Twist Night according to the Pirates' Web site. The twist
must be that it's a day game (12:35 p.m.)

    April 15 -- Income tax help from still unincarcerated Enron felons night

    April 16 -- Just Watch The Damn Game Night

    April 17 -- Rare Italian Porcelain Candy Dish Night

    April 18 -- Corkscrew Night

    April 19 -- Just Fireworks Night

    April 20 -- Kids Replica Jersey Day

    April 22 -- Kids Replica Steroids Vile Night

    April 23 -- Girls Night Out

    April 24 -- Girls Gone Wild Uncensored Spring Break Video Night

    April 25 -- Just Watch The Dame Game Night II (Do you even like baseball?)

    Apjril 26 -- Batting Practice Cap Night

    April 27 -- Batting Practice Nightcap Day

    May 9 -- Big Bag o' Paperclips Night

    May 10 -- Origami Derek Bell In Operation Shutdown Repose Figure Night.

    May 11 -- Picture Frame/Run The Bases/Powerpuff Girls Characters Night

    May 12 -- Bicycle Pump/Fall Down The Dugout Steps/Banana Splits Characters
Night

    May 13 -- Parrot's Root Canal

    May 14 -- Lap Dance Night

    May 15 -- Nipple Piercing Night

    May 20 -- Night of the Iguana

    May 21 -- Bob Prince Talking Bobblehead Night

    May 22 -- Lanny Frattare Won't Stop Talking Bobblehead Night

    May 23 -- Death to Bobblehead Night

    May 24 -- No Bobbleheads Are Better Than One Night

    May 25 -- What Are We Going To Do With 38,000 Mike Fetters Bobbleheads Day

    June 3 -- Turn Back The Clock Night

    June 4 -- Turn Down The Bed Night

    June 5 -- Turn Over A New Leaf Night

    June 17 -- Turn Around, Look At Me Night With the Vogues

    June 18 -- Girls Night Out II: Wild on Blawnox

    June 19 -- Seniors Stroll The Bases Day

    June 20 -- Ben Gay Night

    June 21 -- Chronic Underachieving Student Night

    June 22 -- Cute But Severely Annoying Little Dog Night

    June 27 -- Just Watch The Damn Game Night III (Do you expect to go through
life just grabbing with both hands all the time?)

    June 28 -- Chrystal Chandelier Night

    June 29 -- Long Day's Journey Into Night

    July 1 -- Bike Night

    July 2 -- Bike Night? Are you serious?

    July 3 -- Hamper Night

    July 4 -- Stars and Stripes Cap Day

    July 5 -- Stars and Stripes Ascot Night

    July 6 -- Etch A Sketch Day

    July 17 --Little Red Ball Attached To A Paddle With An Elastic Band That
Only One In Three Americans Can Use To Any Amusement And Then For Not More Than
One Minute Night

    Juy 18 -- Fireworks Night. What Will We Think Of Next?

    July 19 -- Yes The Steelers Are In Training Camp But We've Still Got 28
Promotions Remaining Night

    July 20 -- Kids Souvenir Bat Night

    July 21 -Superficial Head Injury Night

    July 22 -- Mindboggling Russian Novel Night

    July 29 -- Vladimir Putin Bobblehead Night

    July 30 -Girls Night Out III: Wild on Neville Island

    July 31 -Here's A Damn Sandwich I Mean It Never Ends With You People Night

    Aug. 1 -- Floppy Hat Night

    Aug. 2 -- Floppy Disc Night

    Aug. 3 --Kids Safari Parrot Day

    Aug. 11 -- Adult Safari Parrot Night (Don't Ask)

    Aug. 12 -- Kids Get In Free Night

    Aug. 13 -- Kids Pay Full Price Just Like Everybody Else Night

    Aug. 14 -- Velvet Elvis Day

    Aug. 15 -- Viagra Night

    Aug. 16 -- Jack Wilson Bobblehead Day

    Aug. 17 -- Charlie Brown Bobblehead Day (That being the Peanuts character,
not the brother of Bucco Broadcaster Greg Brown.)

    Aug. 26 -Stunning 24-Inch 14 Carat Gold Necklance Night

    Aug. 27 -- AM-FM Radio Night

    Aug. 28 -- AM Only Radio Night. Where Were You Last Night?

    Aug. 29 -- Josh Gibson Bobblehead Night

    Aug. 30 -- Kids Back To School Security Breach Suspension Clinching Nail
File Night

    Aug. 31 -- Kids Lunch Box Day

    Sept. 12 -- College Night

    Sept. 13 -- Junior College Night

    Sept. 14 -- GED Candidate Day/Parrot Birthday Bash

    Sept. 15 -- Parrot Bail Bond Night

    Sept. 16 -- Fan Decapitation Night

    Sept. 17 -- Girls Night Out IV: That's Enough of That

    Sept. 18 --Perfectly Usable Rotary Phone To The First Guy In The Door Night

    Sept. 19 -- Souvenir Burned Out JumboTron Bulb Night

    Sept. 20 -- Current Player Bobblehead, That's Right We're Not Sure Which
Current Player Yet But My God It Could Be Randall Simon or Julian Tavares And
Isn't The Tension Just Ridiculous Night

    Sept. 21 -- Dog Day Afternoon

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2003


                             835 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       March 4, 2003 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 002

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: Study: Gene therapy less promising for older hearts

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Scientists studying gene therapy to reverse heart failure have run into a
roadblock when it comes to using the technique on those who need it most - the
elderly.

   "In our study, we showed that in the population that will probably be the
most frequent recipients of gene therapy for heart failure, the gene transfer is
10-fold less efficient," said Dr. Roger Hajjar of Massachusetts General
Hospital.

   The idea is to reverse the damage that causes heart failure by injecting into
the hearts a gene responsible for helping heart muscle cells contract.

   The gene, SERCA2a, expresses a protein lacking in patients whose hearts are
failing. As a result, the cells don't contract normally and the hearts can't
pump.

   In animal studies, the researchers are injecting the gene into the hearts of
such subjects using a virus as a delivery agent.

   But in the study today in Circulation, Hajjar said delivery of the gene is
much less efficient in elderly animals.

   At first, the researchers thought there was a problem with the receptors on
the cells of the elderly that prevented the genes from being captured.

   But Hajjar said it appears now that the problem rests with the part of the
cell machinery called the integrins, which serve to keep the cells stable and to
bring the captured genes inside.

   To get around this, the researchers are looking for naturally occuring
stimulants to kick-start the integrins in the cells of older patients.

LOAD-DATE: March 04, 2003


                             836 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                   March 4, 2003 Tuesday, Sports Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell firm needs money, may leave area

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Cleveland-based Athersys Inc. is trying to raise more than $100 million, but
it appears the 8-year-old biopharmaceutical company is not going to get the cash
it seeks locally.

   As a result, it's looking increasingly likely the promising gene-therapy
research company, headed by Gil Van Bokkelen, a California transplant from
Stanford University, will leave town.

   "We are making progress on some fronts," Van Bokkelen said last month about
the company's efforts to raise money, "but not as much as I would like on
others."

   Athersys first met with representatives from the Cleveland Clinic Foundation
late last year, asking for an exclusive research arrangement in exchange for an
equity investment of $25 million, sources said. The Clinic indicated it didn't
have the money for such a deal.

   The company also held meetings with representatives from Case Western Reserve
University regarding "a substantial sum to invest in equity," said James Wagner,
CWRU provost and vice president.

   CWRU eventually said no, citing the tangle the university could get into by
investing in a company against whose research it might find itself competing.
"They hadn't approached us since," Wagner said.

   But in an interview with Crain's Cleveland Business yesterday, Van Bokkelen
said he would like to get at least $10 million from each of three institutions -
CWRU, the Clinic and University Hospitals of Cleveland - and wanted to hear from
them within weeks.

   "It sounds as though . . . Athersys would like to reopen those discussions,"
Wagner said yesterday.

   Van Bokkelen was not available for comment. But Athersys director William
Mulligan, managing director of Primus Venture Partners, said there was no
deadline on raising the money.

   The company is still partnering with the Clinic, UH and CWRU on a
regenerative medicine and adult stem cell research center. Together, they have
developed a plan for the facility and asked the state for $19.5 million.

   By itself, Athersys hasn't scored significant money from the state. Last
week, the company learned it wouldn't get a $1 million grant to advance its
gene-based research from Gov. Bob Taft's plan to boost technology investment.

   The day the company learned it hadn't snared the state money, three Athersys
executives, including Van Bokkelen, were hosted by the Minnesota governor, St.
Paul mayor and officials from Minneapolis-based universities and high-tech
companies, including 3M.

   Last year, Athersys won exclusive rights to stem cell technology that
researchers at the University of Minnesota discovered. The technology holds the
promise of treatments for many diseases.

   Minnesota plans a bioscience facility and intends to stimulate investment in
bioscience projects and companies.

   Other high-tech regions, including the Research Triangle near Raleigh-Durham
in North Carolina, have wooed Athersys. "It's clear we would really like
Athersys," said Robert Taber, a vice chancellor at Duke University's Medical
Center.

   Investors say the company is concerned about its cash. Last month, Van
Bokkelen said the company hadn't raised enough for another goal: a new building
it will need as it outgrows its headquarters on Carnegie Avenue. "For us to move
forward on construction of our headquarters, wherever it will be, we will need
substantial additional capital," he said.

   The company has met with prominent local investors. At a board meeting
tomorrow, Van Bokkelen is likely to discuss these issues, but no resolution is
likely.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2003


                             837 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 3, 2003, Monday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. D-7

LENGTH: 681 words

HEADLINE: Genes map it, but you chart course

BYLINE: Jane Brody

BODY:
 'It's all in the genes." How many times have you heard that?  Well, forget it.
It's not true, at least not for most of the serious health problems that beset
people in Western countries.

   True, some very serious, but fortunately rare, diseases are fully determined
by one's genetic makeup.  Some, like Huntington's disease, are the inevitable
consequence of inheriting a single dominant abnormal gene from one parent.

   Others, like sickle cell disease and cystic fibrosis, are the consequence of
inheriting two abnormal recessive genes, one from each parent.  It is not yet
possible to forestall the unfortunate effects of such single-gene defects,
though gene therapy may eventually counter their effects, if not reverse them
permanently.

   It's not destiny

   Meanwhile, most of us have to contend with a complex set of genes that may or
may not predispose us to ailments, ranging in seriousness from superficial skin
cancer to premature heart disease.  And a genetic predisposition is just that:
It is not destiny, but rather a tendency that can be encouraged or discouraged
to express itself by how we live our lives.

   Some experts estimate that about 30 percent of longevity is determined by
genes; the rest is up to us.

   Even mutations in the cancer-suppressor genes known as BRCA1 and BRCA2 do not
lead inevitably to breast cancer.  Rather, they raise the risk of developing
this disease.

   It is now possible to analyze a woman's blood for the presence of a BRCA
mutation, giving her the option of taking extraordinary preventive measures,
including a double prophylactic mastectomy.

   In the not-too-distant future, we will undoubtedly learn how to identify
similar genetic abnormalities that can influence the risk of developing diseases
such as rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis or Parkinson's disease.

   A few clues

   For most of us, though, it is not possible to determine precisely what sort
of predispositions we may have inherited.  But it is possible to get some good
clues.  One of the simplest is to know what ailments afflicted your biological
parents, grandparents and siblings.  That is why you should always be asked on a
medical questionnaire about your immediate family's medical history and, if your
parents are deceased, the causes and ages of their deaths.

   On both sides of my family, there are fatal illnesses that probably have
genetic components and that may leave my brother and me at higher than average
risk of dying before our time.

   My father, his father and his father's brother all suffered heart attacks in
their mid-50s. For my great-uncle, that first attack was fatal.  For my father
and grandfather, it was a second attack at age 71 that ended their lives.  So
far, at 61, I am free of demonstrable heart disease, as is my brother, who is
57.

   All in the family

   My brother has elevated blood pressure and cholesterol, which raises his risk
of following in our father's footsteps.  He has made some changes in his diet,
and he exercises irregularly, but he has primarily opted to take medication to
keep his blood pressure and serum cholesterol within a normal range.

   I have avoided acquiring any serious risk factors for heart disease.  I never
smoked, my weight is normal and my blood pressure hovers around 100 over 60.
(The borderline for high blood pressure is 140 over 95.)

   As for the other half of my heritage, my mother died of ovarian cancer at 49,
and I had breast cancer at 57. Though I tested negative for a BRCA mutation, my
doctors suggested that I have my ovaries removed in case there was a genetic
link to my mother's cancer.

   I get annual mammograms, as well as a colonoscopy every five years and a bone
density test every three years.  To keep my bones healthy, I take calcium
citrate with vitamin D to supplement my dietary intake and I have added strength
training to my exercise routine.

   Will all this keep whatever noxious genes I may harbor at bay and keep me
hale and hearty into my 90s? Only time will tell.  But based on currently
available evidence, I'm doing the best I can to reach that goal.  You can too.


LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2003


                             838 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              March 3, 2003 Monday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. D-7

LENGTH: 671 words

HEADLINE: Genes map it, but you chart course

BYLINE: Jane Brody

BODY:

   `It's all in the genes."

   How many times have you heard that?

   Well, forget it.

   It's not true, at least not for most of the serious health problems that
beset people in Western countries. True, some very serious, but fortunately
rare, diseases are fully determined by one's genetic makeup.

   Some, like Huntington's disease, are the inevitable consequence of inheriting
a single dominant abnormal gene from one parent. Others, like sickle cell
disease and cystic fibrosis, are the consequence of inheriting two abnormal
recessive genes, one from each parent.

   It is not yet possible to forestall the unfortunate effects of such
single-gene defects, though gene therapy may eventually counter their effects,
if not reverse them permanently. It's not destiny Meanwhile, most of us have to
contend with a complex set of genes that may or may not predispose us to
ailments, ranging in seriousness from superficial skin cancer to premature heart
disease.

   And a genetic predisposition is just that: It is not destiny, but rather a
tendency that can be encouraged or discouraged to express itself by how we live
our lives. Some experts estimate that about 30 percent of longevity is
determined by genes; the rest is up to us. Even mutations in the
cancer-suppressor genes known as BRCA1 and BRCA2 do not lead inevitably to
breast cancer.

   Rather, they raise the risk of developing this disease. It is now possible to
analyze a woman's blood for the presence of a BRCA mutation, giving her the
option of taking extraordinary preventive measures, including a double
prophylactic mastectomy. In the not-too-distant future, we will undoubtedly
learn how to identify similar genetic abnormalities that can influence the risk
of developing diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis or Parkinson's
disease. A few clues For most of us, though, it is not possible to determine
precisely what sort of predispositions we may have inherited.

   But it is possible to get some good clues.

   One of the simplest is to know what ailments afflicted your biological
parents, grandparents and siblings.

   That is why you should always be asked on a medical questionnaire about your
immediate family's medical history and, if your parents are deceased, the causes
and ages of their deaths. On both sides of my family, there are fatal illnesses
that probably have genetic components and that may leave my brother and me at
higher than average risk of dying before our time. My father, his father and his
father's brother all suffered heart attacks in their mid-50s. For my
great-uncle, that first attack was fatal.

   For my father and grandfather, it was a second attack at age 71 that ended
their lives.

   So far, at 61, I am free of demonstrable heart disease, as is my brother, who
is 57. All in the family My brother has elevated blood pressure and cholesterol,
which raises his risk of following in our father's footsteps.

   He has made some changes in his diet, and he exercises irregularly, but he
has primarily opted to take medication to keep his blood pressure and serum
cholesterol within a normal range. I have avoided acquiring any serious risk
factors for heart disease.

   I never smoked, my weight is normal and my blood pressure hovers around 100
over 60. (The borderline for high blood pressure is 140 over 95.) As for the
other half of my heritage, my mother died of ovarian cancer at 49, and I had
breast cancer at 57. Though I tested negative for a BRCA mutation, my doctors
suggested that I have my ovaries removed in case there was a genetic link to my
mother's cancer. I get annual mammograms, as well as a colonoscopy every five
years and a bone density test every three years.

   To keep my bones healthy, I take calcium citrate with vitamin D to supplement
my dietary intake and I have added strength training to my exercise routine.
Will all this keep whatever noxious genes I may harbor at bay and keep me hale
and hearty into my 90s? Only time will tell.

   But based on currently available evidence, I'm doing the best I can to reach
that goal.

   You can too.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             839 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 02, 2003, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 857 words

HEADLINE: Good health not always determined by genetic makeup

SOURCE: New York Times

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   "It's all in the genes." How many times have you heard that? Well, forget it.
It's not true, at least not for most of the serious health problems that beset
people in Western countries.

   True, some very serious and fortunately rare diseases are fully determined by
one's genetic makeup. Some, including Huntington's disease, are the inevitable
consequence of inheriting a single dominant abnormal gene from one parent.

   Others, such as sickle cell disease and cystic fibrosis, are the consequence
of inheriting two abnormal recessive genes, one from each parent. It is not yet
possible to forestall the unfortunate effects of such single-gene defects,
though gene therapy may eventually counter their effects.

   Meanwhile, most of us have to contend with a complex set of genes that may or
may not predispose us to ailments ranging in seriousness from superficial skin
cancer to premature heart disease. A genetic predisposition is just that: It is
not destiny, but rather a tendency that can be encouraged or discouraged to
express itself by how we live our lives.

   Some experts estimate that about 30 percent of longevity is determined by
genes; the rest is up to us.

   Even mutations in the cancer-suppressor genes known as BRCA1 and BRCA2 do not
lead inevitably to breast cancer. Rather, they raise the risk of developing this
disease.

   It is possible to analyze a woman's blood for the presence of a BRCA
mutation, giving her the option of taking extraordinary preventive measures,
such as a double prophylactic mastectomy.

   In the not-too-distant future, we will undoubtedly learn how to identify
similar genetic abnormalities that can influence the risk of developing a
disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis or Parkinson's disease.

   For most of us, though, it is not possible to determine precisely what sort
of predispositions we may have inherited. But it is possible to get some good
clues. One of the simplest is to know which ailments afflicted your biological
parents, grandparents and siblings.

   Another sound approach is to get periodic health checkups. These can, for
example, reveal a tendency toward high blood pressure or Type 2 diabetes.

   If a parent had colon cancer, regular colonoscopies starting at age 40 may
reveal precancerous polyps that can be treated. And if a parent developed
serious osteoporosis, bone-density checks starting at age 50 can signal the need
for treatments that can head off this debilitating disease.

   On both sides of my family, there were fatal illnesses that probably had
genetic components and that may have left my brother and me at
higher-than-average risk.

   My father, his father and his father's brother suffered heart attacks in
their mid-50s. For my great-uncle, that first attack was fatal. For my father
and grandfather, it was second attacks at age 71 that ended their lives.

   So far, at 61, I am free of demonstrable heart disease, as is my brother, who
is 57.

   But my brother's health checkups revealed an elevation in both blood pressure
and cholesterol. He has primarily opted to take medication to keep his blood
pressure and serum cholesterol within normal ranges.

   I have avoided acquiring any serious risk factors for heart disease. I never
smoked, my weight is normal, and my blood pressure hovers around 100 over 60.
(The borderline for high blood pressure is 140 over 95.)

   Though my total cholesterol level is a little higher than I'd like it to be -
about 210 milligrams per deciliter - a major contributor to that total is HDL,
the so-called good cholesterol that acts as an arterial cleanser. My HDL level
is about 70, nearly as good as it can get, even though I do not take estrogen
and only sometimes drink red wine, both of which can increase HDL.

   I also try to keep my cardiac risk at a minimum by exercising daily - walking
briskly for three miles in the morning and swimming between half and
three-quarters of a mile later in the day. Exercise raises HDL, reduces stress
and helps to maintain a healthy circulatory system, normal blood pressure and
normal body weight.

   I eat a mostly healthful diet rich in antioxidants, nutrients and fiber,
loaded with vegetables, fruits, whole grains, nuts, fish, chicken breast, lean
meat, beans and skim milk. I do indulge in frozen yogurt and ice cream (in
controlled portions), dark chocolate and an occasional cookie or piece of pie.

   As for the other half of my heritage, my mother died of ovarian cancer at 49,
and I had breast cancer at 57. Though I tested negative for a BRCA mutation, my
doctors suggested that I have my ovaries removed in case there was a genetic
link to my mother's cancer.

   I get annual mammograms, as well as a colonoscopy every five years and a
bone-density test every three years. To keep my bones healthy, I take calcium
citrate with vitamin D to supplement my dietary intake, and I have added
strength training to my exercise routine.

   Will all this keep whatever noxious genes I may harbor at bay and keep me
hale and hearty into my 90s? Only time will tell. But based on currently
available evidence, I'm doing the best I can to reach that goal. You can, too.


LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2003


                             840 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       March 2, 2003 Sunday, Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 898 words

HEADLINE: Who's who among Cleveland's stem cell explorers

BYLINE: Harlan Spector, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Stem-cell therapies may one day offer cures for a multitude of disorders,
including diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, heart disease
and spinal-cord injuries. In the race to bring regenerative medicine to
patients, dozens of scientists in Cleveland are at work.

   Athersys Inc.

   The biotechnology company in December won exclusive rights for the commercial
applications of a possibly groundbreaking discovery of so-called "multipotent"
stem cells - a unique class of stem cells found in human bone marrow. The cells
have shown ability to become virtually any cell. Athersys is researching
products that use these cells directly in therapy, as well as drugs and proteins
that stimulate tissue repair. The company is also looking at using the cells in
gene therapy.

   Dr. Marc Penn,

   cardiology,

   Cleveland Clinic

   Penn is investigating using stem cells to replace damaged heart tissue after
a heart attack. He and colleagues have identified a molecule released after a
heart attack that drives stem cells from the bone marrow to the damaged tissue
of the heart. But the process is too inefficient to rebuild heart muscle. Penn
has shown in animal studies that it is possible to repair heart tissue by
combining gene therapy to increase expression of this molecule with therapies to
mobilize stem cells.

   Dr. George Muschler,

   orthopedic surgery,

   Cleveland Clinic

   Muschler and colleagues use a patient's own stem cells to improve bone grafts
for fractures that do not heal or other bone deficiencies. Their research seeks
to improve the stem-cell therapy by determining how best to isolate stem cells
from the bone marrow and other tissues, and how to improve transplantation to
make the bone-building cells more efficient.

   Bruce Trapp,

   chairman, neurosciences,

   Cleveland Clinic

   Research is attempting to isolate the stem cell that is responsible for
repairing scarred brains of multiple sclerosis patients. These brain stem cells
give rise to progenitor cells that produce insulation called myelin which
protects nerves in the brain. MS destroys the insulation. Trapp and colleagues
hope to isolate and grow the stem cells for transplant or to induce stem cells
already in the brain to repair damage caused by MS. Researchers believe the stem
cells could possibly differentiate into brain cells to treat Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's diseases.

   Maciej Zbrowski,

   biomedical engineering,

   Cleveland Clinic

   He is studying the most efficient ways to isolate stem cells from large,
mixed populations of cells. The work involves extracting the cells from bone
marrow, blood and umbilical cord blood. These cells can then be studied for
their potential to differentiate into various tissue cells.

   Dr. Stanton Gerson,

   chief of hematology/

   oncology,

   CWRU/University Hospitals

   Gerson's group investigates the regenerative potential of stem cells from
bone marrow, umbilical cord blood and special cells found in bone marrow called
mesenchymal stem cells. Gerson's primary focus is genetically altering stem
cells. He is studying whether implanting a drug-resistant gene into stem cells
can protect the bone marrow of cancer patients from the ravages of chemotherapy.
He is also studying whether it is possible to introduce corrective genes to
defective stem cells in patients with rare childhood genetic disorders.

   Dr. Mary Laughlin,

   oncology/hematology,

   CWRU/University Hospitals

   Laughlin is a pioneer in using stem cells from umbilical cord blood to treat
blood-related cancers such as leukemia. She is researching the potential of cord
blood stem cells to transform into a wide variety of specialized cells. Laughlin
and Dr. Vince Pompili, a UH cardiologist, are studying whether stem cells can
repair heart blood vessels. They expect to test the treatment on the first
patient in July.

   Arnold Caplan

   and Stephen

   Haynesworth,

   biology,

   CWRU

   These Ph.D. researchers study special bone marrow cells called mesenchymal
cells, which were discovered by Caplan. Experimenting with these cells led
researchers at the University of Minnesota to find a special class of bone
marrow cells that can be transformed into virtually any specialized cell in the
body. Scientists at CWRU are studying whether mesenchymal cells can improve
bone, joint, muscular and neurologic disorders, and whether they can grow into
building blocks for blood vessels. Doctors at CWRU and UH study the ability of
mesenchymal cells to improve blood cell formation in cancer patients.

   Robert Miller

   and Jerry Silver,

   neurosciences,

   CWRU

   One of the great hopes of stem cell research is finding out whether stem
cells can repair spinal-cord injuries. Silver is investigating several stem cell
lines for their ability to become glia, which in an immature state can form a
support structure for regenerating nerve fibers. His research attempts to break
through scar tissue and create a pathway for nerve fibers. Miller researches the
regeneration of myelin, the protective insulation around certain nerve fibers.
His lab discovered molecular changes that give rise to cells called
oligodendrocytes, which form myelin. In animal studies, Miller and colleagues
found that injecting glial stem cells into the injury site or stimulating
oligodendrocytes that are already present can enhance repair. The research
suggests possibilities for other neurological diseases.

   - Harlan Spector

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2003


                             841 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    March 2, 2003 Sunday, Sports Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1445 words

HEADLINE: Stem cell research thrives here; chase is on for grants

BYLINE: Harlan Spector, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   When Dr. Stanton Gerson began researching stem cells in Cleveland in 1983,
the special cells were thought to be like microscopic balls of clay capable of
forming only one thing.

   Scientists believed that spongy bone marrow was the single reservoir of stem
cells and that their sole purpose was giving birth to new blood cells. Outside
of specialists such as Gerson who treat blood cancers, stem cells were of little
interest.

   The picture has changed dramatically in the last five years, as scientists
discovered that stem cells, in a variety of adult tissues, in embryos and in
umbilical cord blood, have potential to grow into specialized cells that
theoretically can repair any part of the human body.

   Billions of dollars in private capital and government grants have been poured
into the expanding frontier.

   Hopes for Cleveland's economic future are invested in the frontier as well.
Mayor Jane Campbell is counting on stem cell research to bring jobs and increase
the city's population. The Cleveland Clinic, University Hospitals and Case
Western Reserve University are pulling together for up to $28 million in state
grants for research.

   They plan to join with biotech companies to launch a Regenerative Medicine
Institute.

   In the race to harness the raw potential of stem cells, advanced research is
taking place in the labs along Euclid and Carnegie avenues. Scientists here are
trying to isolate stem cells from bone marrow, umbilical cord blood and other
adult tissues and use them to repair hearts and bones, build blood vessels and
cure disabling neurological disorders.

   The work in Cleveland is free of the controversy surrounding human embryonic
stem cell research. Yet it is far from clear which line of experimentation holds
the greatest promise for curing diseases such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and
diabetes.

   "For the next decade, it will be buy on the rumors," said Gerson, chief of
hematology/oncology at University Hospitals and a professor of medicine at CWRU.

   "It's going to take five to 20 years at various levels just to figure out
where we are."

   Taken from embryos

                Human embryonic stem cells were not discovered until 1998. The
cells come from 5-day-old embryos donated by fertility clinics. The embryos used
in studies are extras that were created for infertile couples through in vitro
fertilization procedures.

   The ability of these cells to become any cell in the body thrust the
breakthrough into the limelight of politics and medicine. Like abortion,
embryonic research generates passionate debate about the moral status of
developing humans.

   President Bush in 2001 restricted the number of federally funded embryonic
stem cell lines available to researchers. He is asking Congress to ban the
cloning of human embryos for research.

   The House approved the ban, 241-155, Thursday. It now goes to the Senate,
which turned down similar legsltion in 2001.

   Right-to-life groups tout adult stem cells as the best hope. Patient and
research activists, including celebrities like Christopher Reeve, are fighting
for embryonic research.

   Last June, a promising development in adult stem cell research supercharged
the political rhetoric.

   Dr. Catherine Verfaillie, a respected researcher at the University of
Minnesota, reported in the scientific journal Nature that she discovered a type
of stem cell in adult bone marrow that can morph into virtually any cell type.
Hers was the first study to suggest that a single class of adult stem cells,
which she termed a multipotent adult progenitor cell, is raw material with
potential to treat a wide range of life-threatening diseases.

   The discovery has important implications for Northeast Ohio.

   Athersys Inc., a Cleveland biotech company, won an exclusive deal to license
applications from Verfaillie's discovery. Speculation is that the company may
relocate to another biotech hub, perhaps North Carolina's Research Triangle. But
Athersys is collaborating with researchers at the Cleveland Clinic and with
planners for the Cleveland Regenerative Medicine Institute.

   Verfaillie's paper raised the possibility that adult stem cells are as
adaptable as embryonic stem cells. Groups such as the National Right to Life
Committee, which opposes embryonic research, heralded the study.

   Nobody is taking a victory lap quite yet. For starters, the research has not
been reproduced by other scientists.

   "Other labs are struggling. They are having a hard time replicating that
work," says Dr. Mary Laughlin, a pioneer in umbilical cord blood stem cell
research. Laughlin was involved in the first cord blood transplants in 1988, and
was recruited from Duke University by CWRU five years ago.

   She believes Verfaillie's multipotent adult progenitor cells are 10 years
away from clinical trials. "Having walked that road, I realize how long the
process is."

   Functional brain cells

   Embryonic stem cells continue to show astonishing potential. At the same time
Verfaillie's results were published, researchers at the National Institutes of
Health reported that stem cells from mice embryos could be turned into
functional, dopamine-producing brain cells. These are the type of cells that are
lacking in those who suffer with Parkinson's disease.

   Developments are announced almost weekly. Experts warn that the understanding
of stem cells is in its infancy.

   "There are things that look promising," Dr. Philip Noguchi, acting director
of the Food and Drug Administration office of cellular, tissue and gene
therapies, told a recent gathering of journalists. "They may or may not work."

   On a less dramatic scale than, say, curing diabetes, stem cells are working,
and have been for decades. Cancer centers routinely perform stem cell
transplants, using blood-forming stem cells to help restore immunities ravaged
by high doses of chemotherapy and radiation.

   At University Hospitals, special bone marrow cells called mesenchymal stem
cells are being tested on patients to restore immunities and treat bone and
muscular disorders. The Cleveland Clinic uses bone-forming stem cells to help
strengthen grafts for fractures that don't heal.

   These cells are naturally programmed to respond to signals in areas of tissue
injury or disease.

   But driving stem cells down different paths to become neurons and liver cells
poses different challenges. These engineered cells aren't normally found in the
human body.

   "We therefore know much less about how these cells can and will respond when
they are transplanted, and how they will interact with other cells," says Dr.
George Muschler, an orthopedic surgeon at the Cleveland Clinic. He is
investigating adult stem cells for bone grafting.

   "We're still having a hard time getting cells to do what we want," says CWRU
neuroscientist Jerry Silver. Nerve cells grown in a lab dish often turn into
fat, skin and other tissues after being implanted in the brains of rodents, he
said.

   Scientists are a long way from human trials, for example, in the case of the
dopamine-producing neurons grown from embryonic stem cells. They don't know how
many cells are needed, whether the cells will behave as intended, or whether
they could form aberrant brain circuits. They don't know if the graft would
take, and if so, how long the repair would last before Parkinson's disease would
take over.

   Researchers aren't sure precisely where to transplant cells to correct many
problems, or whether to transplant the cells before or after they are induced to
become cells with specialized functions.

   Adult and embryonic stem cells come with their own particular baggage.
Patients' immune systems could reject any cell that isn't from their bodies.
Also, embryo-derived cells are prone to mutate as they divide, forming tumors.

   "Controlling what they do is a challenge," says Muschler. "Embryonic stem
cells are complicated because they can do so many things, and they don't come
with brakes."

   Embryonic cells proliferate easily in lab culture. Adult cells are limited in
their ability to renew themselves. Though they have been found in many tissues
and organs, they are rare and difficult to isolate and purify. Unlike embryonic
research, much work on adult stem cells centers on finding cells with the best
"plasticity" - the ability to transform into different cell types - and
attaining large enough quantities for therapy.

   "We're really at the beginning of this," says George Trapp, chairman of
neurosciences at the Cleveland Clinic. "This isn't a sprint, it's a marathon.
We're many, many years, if not decades, from getting therapies applicable to
human disease."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   hspector@plaind.com, 216-999-4543

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                             842 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                      MARCH 2, 2003, SUNDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 1545 words

HEADLINE: Marking first 50 years of DNA revolution;

Double-helix discovery began era of genetic manipulation

SOURCE: Chronicle Science Editor

BYLINE: David Perlman

BODY:
A half-century has passed since a brash, impatient and not particularly
generous-minded young American biologist named James Dewey Watson arranged some
cardboard cutouts at a table in an English laboratory and formed the twisted
spiral known as the double helix of DNA.

    Aided by a striking X-ray photograph of the complex molecule, Watson and his
British research partner, Francis Crick, defined the precise chemical structure
of all the genes governing heredity and predicted they could be manipulated and
replicated to carry their genetic information onward from generation to living
generation.

    "It was one of the defining moments in the history of biology and science,"
says Paul Berg of Stanford, another Nobel laureate and a pioneer in what we now
call genetic engineering, or recombinant DNA.

    His assessment is shared by many in the field, and by scientists on both
sides of the Atlantic who last week celebrated the 50th anniversary of this
seminal event -- arguably the most significant to biology since Charles Darwin
published his theory of evolution in 1859.

    "Watson and Crick got lucky, but their discovery has been fundamental to our
understanding of all heredity on a chemical level," says Stanford's Nobel
laureate Arthur Kornberg, who created the first synthetic but biologically
active core of a virus in a test tube.

    Stanley Cohen, the Stanford medical geneticist who -- along with UC San
Francisco biochemist Herbert Boyer -- launched what is now the global
biotechnology industry by cloning bacteria, said Watson and Crick "clearly
established the molecular structure of our genes and provided the essential road
map for all that has gone on since in the manipulation of DNA to understand the
genetics of disease, to produce new drugs and improve new food crops for the
world."

    It is no wonder that such a discovery was commemorated worldwide last week
with symposia, fulsome speeches and black-tie dinners hailing the new world of
genetics introduced by the two men, who with Maurice Wilkins, a biophysicist at
King's College in London, shared the 1962 Nobel Prize for their work.

    There remain concerns, however, that unlimited genetic manipulation may yet
create difficult problems in medical and agricultural research efforts as well
as raising unforeseen environmental issues, some scientists maintain.

    The gene workers at last week's celebrations will recall that it was an
obscure Austrian monk named Gregor Mendel who unwittingly opened up the science
of genetics when he discovered the basic nature of heredity with his experiments
cross-breeding pea plants.

    And all scientists know that DNA itself was first identified as the crucial
molecule of all genes in 1944, through the experiments of Oswald Avery, a
bacteriologist, and his colleagues at Rockefeller University in New York.

    At least a few researchers will also continue a long-standing dispute over
Wilkins' role in the project, and whether it was he or a colleague who should
have shared the Nobel Prize with Watson and Crick. The seminal X-ray image
revealing the shape of a DNA crystal was not from a Wilkins photograph but from
one by Rosalind Franklin, who died of cancer at the age of 37 five years before
the prize was awarded.

    But no scientist would deny that even 50 years later, the gene revolution is
still in its early stages.

    Research teams are rushing to complete a final draft of the entire human
genome -- identifying the chemical sequence of every single gene that defines a
human being -- while many animal genomes have already been determined.

    At the same time, about 6,000 companies and countless universities and other
research institutions throughout the world are exploiting the knowledge of DNA
to seek new drugs, new predictors of susceptibility to disease in humans and
animals, and new crops redesigned genetically to resist pests, stave off plant
diseases or thrive in formerly hostile environments.

    It took nearly 20 years after the Watson-Crick discovery before Stanford's
Paul Berg first figured out how to combine the DNA of two different organisms
and showed in experiments that segments of the genes of two unrelated viruses
could be spliced to create a genetic hybrid.

    At almost the same time, Cohen and Boyer, chatting in a Honolulu
delicatessen, realized that together they could harness specific enzymes to cut
the genes of unrelated bacteria and combine them to create new organisms -- and
later new human cells with new properties.

    Their achievement led Boyer to found the world's first biotechnology company
-- Genentech -- which engineered bacterial genes to yield the first artificial
human hormone, somatostatin, and subsequently another vital hormone, human
insulin.

    With these discoveries, some scientists began to fear that unconstrained
tinkering with genes might yield unpredictable results, or perhaps even some
kind of "Andromeda Strain" of organism that could pose unforeseen dangers.

    So in 1975, Berg and other researchers, who had agreed to a brief moratorium
on their experiments, convened a now-famous conference at Asilomar near
Monterey. There, they agreed on plans for limiting certain types of possibly
hazardous research. What emerged was the creation of a new government agency
known as the RAC -- the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee within the National
Institutes of Health.

    As the potential for human hazards diminished, the RAC today has become
concerned primarily with overseeing and regulating research and experiments in
gene therapy -- a field that holds great potential but is still in its infancy.

    Despite the RAC, there was still a widespread fear of genetic engineering.
The research was banned for a while in some communities, and a year after the
Asilomar conference, California legislators held hearings to consider creating a
state agency with power to regulate all such research. The idea died aborning.

    But Congress continued to seek tough restrictions on genetic engineering
research. Scientists like Cohen, who had avoided any ties with biotech
industries to maintain his credibility, lobbied hard and successfully to ward
off unnecessarily rigid limits on genetic research.

    Thus, today, medical geneticists have achieved some remarkable results, and
recombinant DNA research has already produced valuable new drugs against human
disease. Epogen, for example, boosts the production of red blood cells and saves
the lives of patients with kidney failure; Herceptin and Rituxan are new
genetically engineered cancer drugs.

    And genes predisposing humans to many hereditary diseases have been
identified, while some -- despite fears of privacy invasion, job discrimination
or rejection for health insurance -- have helped patients understand or even
avert health problems. Two genes implicated in breast cancer, as just one
example, can now be detected -- and thousands of women predisposed to the
disease can seek early diagnosis or treatment.

    Dolly, the notorious cloned sheep, may have aged and died prematurely, but
genetic improvements of livestock are inevitable -- a kind of acceleration of
natural stock breeding.

    And crop plants improved through genetic engineering are already on the
market, despite the refusal of many countries to import their seeds.

    Corn endowed with genes from the microbe bacillus thuringensis, which is
toxic to many insect pests, is now widely used by farmers eager to avoid
expensive and dangerous pesticides.

    There is still widespread opposition to many of these new products, however.
The Natural Resources Defense Council, for example, declares:

    "Genetically engineered organisms have many potential applications in
agriculture, including novel foods, pesticides, and animal drugs. Our list . . .
suggests the variety of benefits companies have envisioned. These include, among
others, animals engineered for leaner meat, plants engineered for herbicide
tolerance or insect resistance, and bacteria engineered to produce drugs for
livestock.

    "But do these products actually represent societal benefits? Certainly, the
companies that develop and market them believe they have benefits, and
commercial success is one gauge of the need for and usefulness of a product. But
the inquiry must go deeper. Society must consider whether these products are
needed and whether better alternatives exist for meeting those needs."

    Whether or not these caveats prove valid, the revolution begun by Watson and
Crick is well under way and irreversible. It may mark a new kind of evolution by
human design, but probing and even manipulating the human genome is only in its
infancy -- for better or worse.

   ---------------------------------------------

    Genetics Webcast

    A five-day symposium commemorating the discovery of the structure of DNA is
ending today at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, where James D. Watson, now
73, is president. Featuring interviews and talks by Watson and other leaders of
the genetics revolution, the programs have been Webcast and archived by a team
from San Francisco's Exploratorium. Today's final events as well as archives of
the previous days are on the Internet at www.exploratorium.edu/origins/
coldspring/webcasts.html.E-mail David Perlman at dperlman@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2003


                             843 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 1, 2003, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TRIALS ARE RESTORED BY FDA DESPITE CANCER CASES

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   SILVER SPRING, Md. - Restoring momentum to a beleaguered experimental medical
field, federal officials yesterday permitted 27 recently halted gene therapy
patient trials to proceed despite revelations that the advanced technique caused
cancer in two young patients.

   Federal officials froze the trials last December after French researchers
reported the cancer cases, raising fears among some researchers that gene
therapy would remain under an ethical cloud for years. The much-touted field, in
which doctors attempt to cure patients by inserting genes into them, is still
recovering from the 1999 death of a test patient.

       The suspended trials were a small but marquee group among the more than
200 US gene therapy patient experiments underway, cleverly using a common virus
to deliver genes inside cells that could potentially treat cancer, HIV, multiple
sclerosis, immune disorders, and other ailments. The use of the virus had
actually worked well in treating so-called "bubble boy syndrome," but the cancer
cases made clear that the virus can do damage as well.

   But yesterday, a research panel convened by the Food and Drug Administration
agreed the technique's healing potential outweighed the cancer risk. They voted,
with only one "nay" among 21 members, to green-light the suspended trials. The
endorsement, however, came with a caveat: Each gene therapy researcher involved
in those trials must convince federal officials that all patients undergoing the
experimental treatments are amply warned of its cancer risks.

   The FDA will "now go back and look at each trial in an active mode," said Dr.
Philip D. Noguchi, the FDA's chief gene therapy regulator. "We'll work with each
researcher through all the issues."

   Patient safety advocate Paul Gelsinger, whose teenage son Jesse's death in a
1999 gene therapy experiment prompted a federal overhaul of the research,
approved of the panel's decision, particularly praising its openness, a contrast
with the initial secrecy surrounding his son's death.

   The panel refused to give the go-ahead to two recently suspended US trials
similar to the French research that gave the two boys cancer. They involve
X-linked severe combined immune deficiency disease or X-SCID, commonly known as
"bubble boy" disease after a 1980s high-profile case in which a patient lived
within a sealed plastic enclosure to guard against infection.

   The FDA will review each patient involved in these two trials to determine
whether they possess a heightened risk of developing cancer, and if all means of
conventional treatment have been exhausted. A third related trial, involving a
variation of SCID, will also be restricted in the same way.

   The two French cancer cases arose in X-SCID patients, who were born without a
critical immune system gene, making them extremely vulnerable to viruses. Even
the common cold can be a mortal threat, and many must live in sealed sterile
rooms. Most die during childhood. A matched bone marrow transplant can help,
though these risky and rare procedures often fail.

   Gene therapy scored its first - and only - success to date against this
daunting condition.

   Researchers at the Necker Hospital in Paris removed the faulty immune cells
from patients, all infants. The cells were mixed in a lab dish with a
retrovirus, a type of virus that wedges its own DNA directly into a patient's
DNA. But this was no ordinary retrovirus: researchers stripped it of dangerous
genes, then inserted the very immune system gene the patients lacked. In the lab
dish, the retrovirus did its job, infecting the bone marrow cells. The modified
bone marrow cells were then put back in patients.

   It worked, generating headlines around the world. The bone marrow spread the
corrective gene, quickly rebuilding the infants' immune systems. Nine of 11
patients responded, and were soon discharged from the hospital to live, for the
first time in their lives, like normal children.

   The success, in 2001, electrified the field, which was still reeling from
Jesse Gelsinger's death.

   But troubling news arrived last September. One boy developed leukemia, a
blood cancer. Analysis indicated the retrovirus had wedged itself on top of a
gene called LMO2, involved in cell replication. The disturbed LMO2 gene caused
the bone marrow cells to multiply uncontrollably - and a patient that once
desperately needed healthy immune cells had too many, causing cancer.

   The boy was put on high-dose chemotherapy. But researchers figured the cancer
was a fluke. But in December came a second leukemia case, prompting the FDA to
suspend all gene therapy trials that use a retrovirus to deliver treatment.

   The two children with leukemia are "doing well," said Dr. Marina
Cavazzana-Calvo of Necker University. The other seven patients responding to the
treatment continue to live normal lives.

   The FDA panel, comprised of researchers, ethicists, and patient advocates,
unanimously agreed that bubble boy patients should only get gene therapy if all
other treatment options were exhausted. Before, some researchers viewed gene
therapy as equivalent to the conventional treatment, bone marrow
transplantation, rather than last ditch.

   "It's not easy striking the right balance here," said panel member and
ethicist Thomas Murray of the Hastings Center in New York. Murray supported
lifting the suspension of the 27 gene therapy trials. The lone dissenter on that
vote was John Coffin of Tufts University, who said that researchers still know
little about the biology behind the cancerous side effects, and approvingly
cited the cautious approach of another high-profile scientific probe.

   "We're not going to send space shuttles up until we find out what happened to
the Columbia," he said.

   Raja Mishra can be reached at rmishra@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2003


                             844 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    March 01, 2003, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: FDA: Gene therapy is too risky;
Leukemia concern spurs call for limits

SOURCE: Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - A highly touted experimental genetic therapy that cured nine
youngsters of a deadly immune system disorder but then caused leukemia in two of
them should be severely restricted and allowed only for patients who have no
other option, a Food and Drug Administration advisory committee concluded
Friday.

   The decision represents a serious blow to the field of gene therapy, which
after 12 years of frustration had begun to bask in the glow of its first
successes when it became clear late last year that recent cases of leukemia in
two toddlers were caused by the gene treatments they had received as infants.
The treatment used genetically engineered viruses to deliver new genes into the
children's cells.

   The FDA had asked a panel of experts to look at the scientific details of the
experiment, which was conducted in France, and advise the agency as to whether
similar studies already started or poised to take place in this country should
be allowed to go forward. Some researchers had hoped that close scrutiny would
suggest a way to reduce the risk of leukemia while retaining the treatment's
therapeutic effects.

   Instead, committee members Friday repeatedly expressed fears that they would
be convening again in six months to discuss new cases of leukemia in some of the
other children who already have been treated for the disease, known as X-SCID.

   "We need about two more years before I can say how safe this therapy is,"
said committee chairman Daniel Salomon of the Scripps Research Institute in La
Jolla, Calif., referring to the apparent lag time between treatment and onset of
cancer.

   Members of the FDA group - the biological response modifiers advisory
committee - had been asked to focus on the narrow question of whether the agency
should lift or modify the suspensions the FDA recently imposed on 30 U.S. gene
therapy experiments that resemble in various ways the French experiment. But the
daylong deliberations frequently digressed into a more general tribunal on gene
therapy.

   "I'm wondering if it should all go back to the lab and, instead of using
people, go back to the mice," said Abbey Meyers, president of the National
Organization for Rare Disorders, a patient advocate on the committee who has for
years expressed frustration with what she has described as a history of gene
therapy patients being misled about the technique's risks and benefits.

   Along with several other committee members, Meyers criticized funding
agencies such as the National Institutes of Health for failing to pay for the
expensive long-term studies in monkeys and other long-lived animals that would
be necessary to document delayed risks of the treatments.

   Others, however, reminded the committee that for many patients with incurable
diseases, experimental gene therapies are their only hope for life.

   "The risk-benefit ratio is easy to calculate for them," said Rachel Salzman,
chief scientific officer of the Stop ALD Foundation, who has family members with
adrenoleukodystrophy, the deadly metabolic disease made famous in the movie
Lorenzo's Oil. "The bottom line is, there's a lot of sick and dying patients out
there that are counting on you," Salzman told the committee.


LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2003


                             845 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             March 1, 2003 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 366 words

HEADLINE: Panel Urges Limiting Gene Therapy Tied to Cancer

BYLINE: From the Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   An experimental genetic therapy that cured nine children of a deadly immune
system disorder but caused leukemia in two of them should be restricted to
patients who have no other option, a Food and Drug Administration advisory
committee concluded Friday.

   The decision represents a serious blow to the field of gene therapy, which
had begun to bask in the glow of its first successes when it became clear last
year that recent cases of leukemia in two toddlers were caused by the gene
treatments they had received as infants. The treatment used genetically
engineered viruses to deliver new genes into the children's cells.

   The FDA had asked a panel of experts to look at details of the experiment,
which was conducted in France, and advise the agency whether similar studies
already started or poised to take place in this country should be allowed to go
forward. Some researchers had hoped that close scrutiny would suggest a way to
reduce the risk of leukemia while retaining the treatment's therapeutic effects.

   Instead, committee members Friday expressed fears that they would face new
cases of leukemia in other children who have already been treated for the
disease, known as X-SCID.

   "We need about two more years before I can say how safe this therapy is,"
said committee chairman Daniel Salomon of the Scripps Research Institute in La
Jolla, referring to the apparent lag time between treatment and onset of cancer.
Members of the FDA group -- the biological response modifiers advisory committee
-- had been asked to focus on the narrow question of whether the agency should
lift or modify the suspensions the FDA recently imposed on 30 U.S. gene therapy
experiments that resemble the French experiment. But deliberations frequently
digressed into a tribunal on gene therapy.

   "I'm wondering if it should all go back to the lab and, instead of using
people, go back to the mice," said Abbey Meyers, president of the National
Organization for Rare Disorders.

   The committee advised FDA officials not to allow patients into either of two
pending U.S. studies whose design mirrored the French study unless the patients
had no access to, or had already failed to respond to, alternative treatments.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2003


                             846 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      March 1, 2003 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy scaled back;
Treatment's links to leukemia prompt FDA to limit its use

BYLINE: RICK WEISS Washington Post

BODY:

   Washington -- A highly touted experimental genetic therapy that cured nine
youngsters of a deadly immune system disorder but then caused leukemia in two of
them should be severely restricted and allowed only for patients who have no
other option, a Food and Drug Administration advisory committee concluded
Friday.

   The decision represents a serious blow to the field of gene therapy, which
after 12 years of frustration had begun to bask in the glow of its first
successes when it became clear late last year that recent cases of leukemia in
two toddlers were caused by the gene treatments they had received as infants.
The treatment used genetically engineered viruses to deliver new genes into the
children's cells.

   The FDA had asked a panel of experts to look at the scientific details of the
experiment, which was conducted in France, and advise the agency as to whether
similar studies already started or poised to take place in this country should
be allowed to go forward. Some researchers had hoped that close scrutiny would
suggest a way to reduce the risk of leukemia while retaining the treatment's
therapeutic effects.

   Instead, committee members Friday repeatedly expressed fears that they would
be convening again in six months to discuss new cases of leukemia in some of the
other children who have already been treated for the disease, known as X-SCID.

   "We need about two more years before I can say how safe this therapy is,"
said committee chairman Daniel Salomon of the Scripps Research Institute in La
Jolla, Calif., referring to the apparent lag time between treatment and onset of
cancer. "Until then, regardless of its incredible benefits, I'm not comfortable
supporting it anymore unless there is no alternative."

   Members of the FDA group -- the biological response modifiers advisory
committee -- had been asked to focus on the narrow question of whether the
agency should lift or modify the suspensions the FDA recently imposed on 30 U.S.
gene therapy experiments that resemble in various ways the French experiment.

   The committee advised FDA officials not to allow patients into either of two
pending U.S. studies whose design mirrored the French study unless the patients
had no access to, or had already failed to respond to, alternative treatments --
including imperfect but potentially helpful bone marrow transplants.

   It recommended somewhat less stringent criteria for the resumption of the
nation's single gene therapy study aimed at a related immune system disorder,
known as ADA-SCID. And it recommended that the agency allow 27 more distantly
related gene therapy experiments to go forward, as long as prospective
participants are fully informed about the new possible risks and are closely
followed for signs of leukemia.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003


                             847 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 286 words

HEADLINE: Resumption of Gene Therapy Trials Backed

BYLINE:  By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration said yesterday that
the agency should allow some halted gene therapy trials to resume, but only
where there are no alternative treatments.

        Twenty-seven trials were suspended on Jan. 14 after French researchers
reported that a second child in their study of gene therapy had developed
leukemia.

    The children in the French study had a rare immune deficiency syndrome,
X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome, and had few options for
treatment.

   Yesterday the advisory panel said that the F.D.A. might allow clinical trials
of gene therapy in children with the syndrome, called X-Scid, if no other
treatment was available.

   When considering whether to let other halted studies continue, the panel said
the agency should proceed case by case, assess risks and benefits, assure the
careful monitoring of the studies and get the informed consent of patients or
their families.

   Gene therapy, in which a defective gene is replaced, had seemed to work in
the French trial. But scientists knew the process could theoretically lead to
cancer because genes added to a cell's DNA to correct the defective ones could
disrupt other genes, resulting in malignancies.

   It is not known for sure why the children in the French study developed
leukemia, but the F.D.A. considered gene therapy was a probable cause. There
were no reports of cancer from any gene therapy trials in this country.

   In a statement, the agency said it would review the discussions and advice of
the panel, and would "actively consider" requests by researchers to conduct
clinical trials of gene therapy for patients who have fatal or life-threatening
disorders and no other treatment available.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003


                             848 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      March 1, 2003 Saturday, Final / All

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 697 words

HEADLINE: We've come a long way,;
Ohio, with still a way to go

BYLINE: Grant Segall, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   OHIO'S BICENTENNIAL

   COMMENTARY

   We Ohioans can't seem to stop partying.

   Thousands of us will gather today in the old-time capital of Chillicothe to
toast the 200th anniversary of Statehood Day.

   Then we'll fire off salutes around the state for months to come.

   And, frankly, it will all be a little anticlimatic.

   We held the perfect birthday party just three days into our 200th year. In
Arizona, where we reclaimed our old-time leadership of that quintessential
American industry: football.

   It was a typically scrappy Ohio feat.

   It took two overtimes, two last-chance plays and, after Miami's triumphant
fireworks, a penalty flag thrown on Sun Belt time.

   It took a coach from Berea, a roster mostly from Ohio, a few steals from Fort
Lauderdale and Michigan, of all places, and enough fans from home to overcome
Miami's home-climate advantage.

   In other words, nothing new. Ohio has always lived on the edge, in more ways
than one.

   We call ourselves the heartland, but we're really more of a borderland. We're
the easternmost state in the Midwest. We're the southernmost state on the
nation's northern edge. We straddle the Appalachians, the Plains and the old
glacial zone. We get Arctic ice and semitropical steam.

   So we've been the shortest, handiest route for canoeists, canalers, runaway
slaves and cross-country truckers. From the start, we've often joined in the
traffic.

   Moses Cleaveland fled the Flats after scribbling his name tag so fast, the
"a" never quite took.

   Pioneer Lorenzo Carter finally brought back a departing neighbor at rifle
point.

   The Buckeye State supplied the first territorial governor and the leading
chunk of settlers to the future Hawkeye state.

   From Thomas Edison to Eddie Rickenbacker, James Thurber to Toni Morrison,
Clark Gable to Halle Berry, many of our brightest lights have lit out. So have
some of our favorite enterprises, from Standard Oil to the Browns.

   For the first 150 years or so, Ohio's comings far outnumbered its goings. And
most of the newcomers thrived here.

   We tilled. We mined. We smelted. We invented. We made coal and china,
gunpowder and cash registers, Quaker Oats and Etch-a-Sketches.

   We helped to shape a growing nation. We championed charity, labor, business
and progressive government. We produced soldiers of quality and presidents of
quantity, at least. We explored the skies and the heavens.

   Still, we never quite escaped the East's shadow. And we gradually fell under
the West's and the South's. We won decent wages and lost decent jobs.

   Now we're celebrating the bicentennial with a busted budget. We trail
national norms in everything from education to waistlines. Even at 200, though,
we don't deserve to be dragged to the nursing home just yet.

   We still claim the best damn band in the land (Ohio State), the best damn
orchestra (Cleveland's) and, arguably, the best damn restaurant (Cincinnati's
Maisonette, with the nation's longest five-star streak).

   We still make baskets and jams, autos and vacuum cleaners, greeting cards and
dictionaries, Dum Dums and Ivory. We also make germicides, gene therapies, PET
scanners, spaceship calibrators, ecological windshield cleansers and
breath-steered wheelchairs.

   We run global chains like Wendy's, global law firms like Jones Day, and a
global sports agency in the International Management Group. We design holiday
lights for White House trees and vaults for Smithsonian treasures, including the
Hope Diamond and the Declaration of Independence.

   In this young bicentennial year, Ohio has already shown new signs of life. A
Cleveland film has taken Sundance. A fledgling Akron enterprise named LeBron has
swept across the nation.

   And did we mention Ohio State?

   So happy birthday, Ohio, and many more. Who knows what gifts the coming years
might bring.

   Maybe we'll bounce back on polymer, recycling our rubber industry. Maybe on
biotechnology, extending our traditional expertise in sheik surgery. Or maybe on
global warming, luring back the hot hordes from the Broil Belt.

   Unlikely? Sure. As unlikely as winning the national championship after
Miami's fireworks.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   gsegall@plaind.com, 216-999-4187

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003


                             849 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             March 1, 2003 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C07

LENGTH: 916 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY

BODY:

   College Basketball (CC). Duke at St. John's (Channel 9 at noon); Wisconsin at
Minnesota (Channel 9 at 2); North Carolina women at Virginia (ESPN2 at 2);
Connecticut at Pittsburgh (Channel 9 at 4); Maryland at N.C. State (CSN at 8).

   Auto Racing (CC). The IRL Toyota Indy 300 from Homestead, Fla. (Channel 7 at
1); the NASCAR UAW DaimlerChrysler 400 in Las Vegas (Channel 5, 2:30).

   Golf (CC). Final round of the Match Play Championship (Channel 7 at 3).

   NBA Basketball. San Antonio at Houston (Telemundo at 4); Washington at Miami
(Channel 50 at 6).

   NHL Hockey. Carolina at Washington (NewsChannel 8 at 6); Phoenix at Detroit
(ESPN2 at 6); Pittsburgh at Dallas (ESPN, 8:30).

   News4 Viewpoint (CC). Del. Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-D.C.) discusses the D.C.
budget autonomy bill (Channel 4 at 7 a.m.).

   Fox News Sunday (CC). Sen. Joseph Biden (D-Del.) assesses the possibility of
war with Iraq, and Sen. Pat Roberts (R-Kan.) talks about the war on terror
(Channel 5 at 9 a.m.).

   Sunday Morning (CC) looks at the way genetic therapies are revolutionizing
health care, plus a profile of actress Julianne Moore (Channel 9 at 9 a.m.).

   The Chris Matthews Show. Panelists include the Dallas Morning News's Wayne
Slater, co-author of "Bush's Brain" (Channel 4 at 10 a.m.).

   Meet the Press (CC). Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) and Win Without War
director Tom Andrews debate the war, plus former senator Fred Thompson assesses
Iraq (Channel 4, 10:30 a.m.).

   Face the Nation (CC). Former Vermont governor Howard Dean discusses Iraq and
his presidential candidacy; former NATO commander Joseph Ralston looks at Iraq
(Channel 9, 10:30 a.m.).

   This Week With George Stephanopoulos (CC). The topic is Iraq; with French
foreign minister Dominique de Villepin and Sen. John Warner (R-Va.) (Channel 7,
11:30 a.m.).

   Reliable Sources. CBS News's Dan Rather talks about his interview with Saddam
Hussein (CNN, 11:30 a.m.).

   John McLaughlin's One on One. The topic is the state of the District; with
Rep. Tom Davis (R-Va.) and D.C. Watch Executive Director Dorothy Brizill
(Channel 4 at noon; repeats at 9 on NewsChannel 8).

   Late Edition With Wolf Blitzer (CC) interviews Afghan President Hamid Karzai;
Sens. Trent Lott (R-Miss.) and Jay Rockefeller (D-W.Va.) discuss Iraq and North
Korea; Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski look at diplomatic options with
Iraq; former U.N. weapons inspectors David Albright and Bill Tierney and former
acting ambassador to Iraq Joseph Wilson discuss missile destruction; Nobel Peace
Prize winner Elie Wiesel assesses the Middle East; and BET founder and CEO
Robert Johnson discusses the cost of war (CNN at noon).

   Capital Sunday With Kathleen Matthews interviews Weekly Standard Editor
William Kristol on his book "The War Over Iraq" (Channel 7, 12:30).

   Booknotes interviews John McWhorter on "Authentically Black: Essays for the
Black Silent Majority" (C-SPAN at 8 and 11).

   America's Black Forum. A panel discussion of African American media
executives includes MBC Network CEO Willie Gary, Radio One CEO Alfred Liggins
III and Sister 2 Sister publisher Jamie Foster Brown (Channel 9, 1:35 a.m.).

   Dateline (CC) profiles a woman who abducted her son when she feared he was
being abused by his father (Channel 4 at 7).

   60 Minutes (CC) reports on Saddam Hussein's hidden financial assets, the
popularity of SUVs and why India's top engineers would rather work in America
(Channel 9 at 7).

   The Salem Witch Trials (2003) (Channel 9 at 9) (CC) is previewed by Tom
Shales in the Sunday Arts section.

   Ultimate Enemies looks at the war between elephants and lions (National
Geographic Channel at 8).

   Building the Great Pyramid. A computer-enhanced chronicle of the construction
of one of the Seven Wonders of the World (Discovery Channel at 9).

   Six Feet Under (HBO at 9) (CC) is previewed by Tom Shales on Page C1.

   Queer as Folk returns for Season 3 with Brian adjusting to life without
Justin, and Ted and Emmett attempting a relationship (Showtime at 10).

   Pat Sajak Weekend. The "Wheel of Fortune" host headlines his own talk show;
with guests Regis Philbin and Robert Klein (FNC at 9).

   The Michael Essany Show (E!, 10:30) is previewed by John Maynard on this
page.

   Futurama (CC). Fry and Leela develop superpowers (Channel 5 at 7).

   King of the Hill (CC). Peggy helps Minh earn her college degree so that she
can run for the school board (Channel 5, 7:30).

   American Dreams (CC). Helen learns the truth about a classmate who lost her
child (Channel 4 at 8).

   The Simpsons (CC). A beautiful movie star (voiced by Marisa Tomei) visiting
Springfield falls in love with Ned Flanders (Channel 5 at 8).

   My Big Fat Greek Life (CC). Nia discovers that she will inherit her parents'
restaurant when they die; debuting at its regular time (Channel 9 at 8).

   Becker (CC). When Becker does something nice for a neighbor, she goes
overboard in returning the favor; debuting at its new time (Channel 9, 8:30).

   Law & Order: Criminal Intent (CC). The girlfriend of a married judge is
murdered (Channel 4 at 9).

   Malcolm in the Middle (CC). Lois and Malcolm bond during a road trip to her
sister's house (Channel 5 at 9).

   Alias (CC). Sydney questions Vaughn's allegiances when she learns through a
CIA agent (Richard Lewis) that he is under investigation (Channel 7 at 9).

   Boomtown (CC). The detectives search for a murderous trio who are killing
families in their sleep (Channel 4 at 10).

   Dragnet (CC). Smith and Friday search for the son of a deranged man who's on
a rampage to kill his entire family (Channel 7 at 10).

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003


                             850 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             March 1, 2003 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 698 words

HEADLINE: Panel Urges Restricted Use of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    A highly touted experimental genetic therapy that cured nine youngsters of a
deadly immune system disorder but then caused leukemia in two of them should be
severely restricted and allowed only for patients who have no other option, a
Food and Drug Administration advisory committee concluded yesterday.

   The decision represents a serious blow to the field of gene therapy, which
after 12 years of frustration had begun to bask in the glow of its first
successes when it became clear late last year that recent cases of leukemia in
two toddlers were caused by the gene treatments they had received as infants.
The treatment used genetically engineered viruses to deliver new genes into the
children's cells.

   The FDA had asked a panel of experts to look at the scientific details of the
experiment, which was conducted in France, and advise the agency as to whether
similar studies already started or poised to take place in this country should
be allowed to go forward. Some researchers had hoped that close scrutiny would
suggest a way to reduce the risk of leukemia while retaining the treatment's
therapeutic effects.

   Instead, committee members yesterday repeatedly expressed fears that they
would be convening again in six months to discuss new cases of leukemia in some
of the other children who have already been treated for the disease, known as
X-SCID.

   "We need about two more years before I can say how safe this therapy is,"
said committee chairman Daniel Salomon of the Scripps Research Institute in La
Jolla, Calif., referring to the apparent lag time between treatment and onset of
cancer. "Until then, regardless of its incredible benefits, I'm not comfortable
supporting it anymore unless there is no alternative."

   Members of the FDA group -- the biological response modifiers advisory
committee -- had been asked to focus on the narrow question of whether the
agency should lift or modify the suspensions the FDA recently imposed on 30 U.S.
gene therapy experiments that resemble in various ways the French experiment.
But the daylong deliberations frequently digressed into a more general tribunal
on gene therapy.

   "I'm wondering if it should all go back to the lab and, instead of using
people, go back to the mice," said Abbey Meyers, president of the National
Organization for Rare Disorders, a patient advocate on the committee who has for
years expressed frustration with what she has described as a history of gene
therapy patients being misled about the technique's relative risks and benefits.

   Along with several other committee members, Meyers criticized funding
agencies such as the National Institutes of Health for failing to pay for the
expensive long-term studies in monkeys and other long-lived animals that would
be necessary to document delayed risks of the treatments.

   Others, however, reminded the committee that for many patients with incurable
diseases, experimental gene therapies are their only hope for life.

   "The risk-benefit ratio is easy to calculate for them," said Rachel Salzman,
chief scientific officer of the Stop ALD Foundation, who has family members with
adrenoleukodystrophy, the deadly metabolic disease made famous in the movie
"Lorenzo's Oil." "The bottom line is, there's a lot of sick and dying patients
out there that are counting on you," Salzman told the committee.

   Committee member Thomas Murray, a bioethicist with the Hastings Center in
Garrison, N.Y., said, "It's not easy striking the right balance here."

   The committee advised FDA officials not to allow patients into either of two
pending U.S. studies whose design mirrored the French study unless the patients
had no access to, or had already failed to respond to, alternative treatments --
including imperfect but potentially helpful bone marrow transplants.

    It recommended somewhat less stringent criteria for the resumption of the
nation's single gene therapy study aimed at a related immune system disorder,
known as ADA-SCID. And it recommended that the agency allow 27 more distantly
related gene therapy experiments to go forward, as long as prospective
participants are fully informed about the new possible risks and are closely
followed for signs of leukemia.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003


                             851 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 28, 2003 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1754 words

HEADLINE: Dream Unmet 50 Years After DNA Milestone;
Gene Therapy Debacle Casts Pall on Field

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    It was just the kind of success that scientists had been promising for
decades.

   The boys had been born with faulty versions of a key immune-system gene,
leaving them so vulnerable to everyday infections that a common cold could prove
fatal. But when French researchers inserted normal copies of that gene into the
boys' blood cells, the children were instantly cured -- able to play with their
friends instead of living inside sterile bubbles, and ready to go down in
history as the first humans to be cured of a disease by gene therapy.

   Now scientists are scrambling to understand why, in some of the boys, the
treatment has triggered a life-threatening form of leukemia, in which their
renovated white blood cells are multiplying out of control and the boys are
having to undergo chemotherapy to kill the very cells they had so desperately
needed. The problem has brought dozens of gene therapy studies to a halt and has
cast a pall over the struggling research field, which seeks to cure diseases by
giving people new genes.

   In an awkward coincidence, the unfolding debacle will be the highlight of a
Food and Drug Administration meeting today, 50 years to the day after James
Watson and Francis Crick launched the modern age of genetic medicine by
deducing, with the help of a cardboard model, the three-dimensional structure of
DNA.

   Researchers say they have begun to figure out what went wrong in the French
experiment. But more generally, experts said, the setback is representative of
what is sure to be a difficult adolescence for gene-based medicine, and
especially for gene therapy -- the archetypal clinical application of Watson and
Crick's celebrated discovery.

   To be sure, recent advances in genetics promise great improvements in the
diagnosis and treatment of diseases. And genetics has already made big
differences in forensics and criminal justice, and by giving birth to the
burgeoning biotechnology industry. The entire field is to be feted at a series
of events in New York, Washington and Cambridge, England -- where Watson and
Crick did their seminal work -- between now and April 25, the 50th anniversary
of the publication of their results in the journal Nature.

   But genes, it is turning out, are not the simple, modular cassettes that
scientists had envisioned in the early years. They not only act, but they also
listen and react, and they misbehave in the absence of proper oversight and
regulation.

   Scientists, having figured out at last how to give people new genes and turn
those genes on, now face the even more daunting challenge of learning how to
turn them off -- or at least get them to respond as naturally as possible to the
many biochemical signals that normally keep the body in balance.

   "For the first eight or nine years of gene therapy, when gene delivery wasn't
efficient enough to get an effect, we also didn't see side effects," said W.
French Anderson, director of gene therapy at the University of Southern
California, and the scientist who led the first U.S. gene therapy experiment in
1990.

   "But every powerful technology has powerful side effects," Anderson said.
"Now we're getting efficient enough to get therapeutic effects, so naturally
there's going to be side effects."

    The French experiment, under the direction of Alain Fischer at the Necker
Hospital in Paris, involved children with X-linked severe combined immune
deficiency (X-SCID). The disease is generally fatal within the first few years
of life, and the only conventional treatment -- a well-matched bone marrow
transplant -- is dangerous, results in an imperfect cure and is often
unavailable.

   Fischer's approach was to remove some of the boys' faulty white blood cells
and mix them in laboratory dishes with viruses that had been genetically
engineered to contain the gene the boys lacked. The viruses infected the boys'
cells, delivering the new genes to the cells' DNA. Then doctors infused the
repaired cells into the young patients, who ranged in age from 1 month to 12
months.

   The results were spectacular: Nine of the 11 boys were apparently cured. But
in September, about three years after treatment, rampant overgrowth of white
blood cells was diagnosed in one of the boys. Molecular analyses showed that
some of the viruses had dropped their therapeutic payloads in a bad location:
atop another gene, called LMO2, which when disrupted can lead to untrammeled
cell division and cancer.

   At first, scientists hoped the incident was but a bit of bad luck. But in
January the same problem was diagnosed in a second boy in the study. And earlier
this month the French team announced that tests on a third boy's cells show the
same molecular disruption, though the boy has not developed symptoms.

   Now Fischer and others have come to believe that most of the boys treated
with the gene-laden viruses will be found to have the same problem. The odds of
a virus dumping its load on LMO2 are less than one in 100,000 per cell, but as
many as 150 million cells are infected and infused into the young patients, said
Christof von Kalle of Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, who is
conducting much of the analysis for the French team.

   It is still uncertain whether LMO2 disruption by itself is enough to trigger
leukemia, von Kalle and Fischer said in interviews, or whether additional
disruptions are needed to start that process. Also unclear is whether such
disruptions may pose a medical risk in only the youngest of patients, whose
immune systems are still in a rapid stage of development. The two boys in which
leukemia was diagnosed so far were the youngest treated, at 1 month and 3 months
of age.

   Nonetheless, several experts said, the incident indicates the kind of
problems the field is sure to see more of now that scientists have finally begun
to overcome what had been their main problems: an inability to get enough new
genes into cells to make a difference, and an inability to get those new genes
to work.

   "Up until now, gene therapy was always looked at as an efficiency problem,
with not enough cells expressing the gene," von Kalle said. "Now for the first
time we've fallen off the horse on the other side."

   For the FDA, the most pressing problem is to figure out the extent to which
similar experiments might harbor the same risks. The agency has suspended 30
U.S. gene therapy experiments that were using or were about to use genes or
viruses similar to those in the French study. Patients in those studies are now
being told of the newly discovered risk, and researchers have been instructed to
beef up their surveillance for untoward effects.

    Today's meeting will focus largely on the question of which experiments
should be allowed to move forward once added safety measures are put into place.
It may be, for example, that the leukemia risk is significant only when the
experiment involves the X-SCID gene -- whose biological purpose, after all, is
to help white blood cells proliferate. In that case, similar experiments
involving different genes to cure different diseases may get the go-ahead.

   But, scientists said, gene therapy is going to have to do better at mimicking
the body's own complicated means of regulating genes, in terms of when and where
in the body they become active and just how active they ought to be.

   One goal for the field is to wean itself from the retroviruses that were used
in the French experiment. The viruses have been popular because they insert
their genetic payloads directly into cells' DNA, giving the newly delivered
genes a platform from which they can work indefinitely.

   But retroviruses splice those genes at random locations in a cell's DNA, and
as the French study shows, some locations are worse than others. Researchers
have begun to experiment with other gene-delivery vehicles, including other
kinds of viruses, synthetic fat bubbles, and even "naked DNA" that can sometimes
find its way into cells without any help.

   Researchers are also developing gene therapies that include so-called suicide
genes, which would allow doctors to shut down the added gene by giving a patient
a special drug. And they are developing genetic inserts that include not only
the therapeutic gene itself, but also the flanking genetic sequences that help
the gene respond to the body's own signals to turn on or off as needed.

   "There are almost as many gene therapies as there are diseases to be cured,"
Fischer said. "The problems to be solved, efficacy and toxicity, are potentially
extremely different for each."

   The ultimate goal is "homologous recombination," a method by which unhealthy
genes are removed from the body's cells and healthy replacements -- along with
proper regulatory elements -- are inserted precisely in their places. Earlier
this year, scientists at the University of Wisconsin reported the first
successful homologous recombination in laboratory-grown human stem cells, a
first step in the difficult process of making the technology work for patients.

   "We are far from using that at the clinical level," Fischer said. "In the
long term, we can all work on making that dream real."

   More generally, scientists said, the lesson to be gleaned from the French
experiment is that, practically speaking, even the best genetic therapies will
be subject to the same frustrating truth that has long dogged conventional
medicine: Biology is complicated, and any amount of tinkering is bound to bring
surprises.

   Despite all the promises of a perfect new medicine -- of treating diseases at
their molecular cores and building healthy bodies from the inside out -- even
the best genetic therapies will still force doctors and patients to balance
benefits against risks.

   Indeed, said Philip Noguchi of the FDA division that oversees gene therapy,
it may even be that with minor modifications the French treatment for X-SCID
will be deemed acceptable to regulators and parents, even with its risks.

   "What we have here is a difficult disease for which you have extraordinarily
promising results, kids leaving the hospital and leading relatively normal
lives, and you also have adverse events which are serious but which so far
appear to be treatable with chemotherapy," Noguchi said.

   That is not the perfect future that Watson and Crick envisioned when, after
making their historic discovery on Feb. 28, 1953, they repaired to the nearby
Eagle pub and Crick made his now famous declaration: "We've discovered the
secret of life!"

   But it's a future that gives Fischer's boys some hope, which they wouldn't
have had a few years ago.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2003


                             852 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                          February 27, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 07

LENGTH: 780 words

HEADLINE: Ownership of genes at stake in potential lawsuit

BYLINE: By Ken Ernhofer Special to The Christian Science Monitor

DATELINE: TORONTO

HIGHLIGHT:
A Canadian province is challenging an American firm's claim to human genes.

BODY:

   The genetic test that Teacher Nancy Kumer had two years ago may have saved
her life.

   Ms. Kumer says the test likely prevented her from developing breast cancer,
which would have been "a horror." But an international battle is brewing over
who owns the genes used in that test. It's a fight that will determine the
expense and availability of such tests, which in turn could affect thousands of
lives.

   The province of Ontario is effectively daring the Utah-based Myriad Genetics
to take it to court over the firm's claim to the exclusive use of the genes. In
Europe, several dozen hospitals, researchers, and others are already legally
contesting Myriad's patent claim. Such cases could determine who - if anyone -
owns the right to what have been called the building blocks of human life.

   "This is really a landmark case," said Abdallah Daar, an ethicist at the
University of Toronto, who anticipates a Canadian court challenge. "And I would
hope that it will not be resolved on a technicality, but that it will go to a
higher court that will probe the principles behind it and the societal
implications of owning broad patents."

   Based in Salt Lake City, Myriad Genetics has patented mutated parts, or
sequences, of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, and a test to detect those genes, which
indicate an elevated risk of developing breast and ovarian cancer. In a news
release, Myriad's president, Gregory Critchfield, called the test "a powerful
tool in the fight against cancer."

   While presence of the mutations does not inevitably lead to cancer, studies
in last year's New England Journal of Medicine showed that women past
childbearing who tested positive and then had their ovaries removed cut their
risk of ovarian cancer "completely," and reduced their chances of breast cancer
by 53 percent.

   Myriad moved to protect its patents by warning Canadian provinces that they
should cease and desist from using any other test that employs the same genetic
material, and they should pay royalties for unauthorized tests or face legal
action, according to Ontario's health minister Tony Clement.

   However, Mr. Clement called gene patenting "abhorrent" and served notice that
Ontario would fight Myriad. "We do not accept their claim and we are
disregarding that claim," he said.

   In April, Ontario will offer its own test, which uses the same gene in a
different process. The province says its test provides results quicker than
Myriad's and costs two-thirds less than the approximately $ 2,300 that Myriad
charges for its test. Alberta is also offering its own test.

   Myriad did not answer requests for interviews.

   Dr. Daar likens Myriad to an inventor of a mousetrap, claiming he owns any
device that traps mice. "Nobody can own our genes," he says. "They are the
property of us human beings."

   Groups that oppose gene patenting, like the Canadian Cancer Society, say that
as more genetic therapies come into use, gene-patent owners may stop others from
making new, possibly better tests. "It really puts a chilling effect on
research," says Society president Julie White.

   With millions of dollars to be made, biotech companies are hoping to stake
out promising genes. It is yet unclear how many genes have been patented.
Published reports say 20,000, though both Canadian and US patent offices say
that is exaggerated.

   In a ruling in 2000, the US patent office required that for genes to be
patented, the applications must demonstrate "substantial, real-world utility."
Canada's patent manager, the Canadian Intellectual Property Office, also
requires that all patent applications - including genes - demonstrate
"well-founded" utility, according to Dr. Michael Gillen of Canada's Patent
Appeals Board.

   Dr. Gillen argues that gene patents are a new take on old practices. Patents
have been awarded for years for proteins, plant alkaloids, even for certain
drugs - although all occur in nature or in peoples' bodies.

   "Patents are granted because once they're isolated from nature and purified
in some way, they have a practical utility," Gillen says. "For example, the
BRCA1 cancer gene - as an isolated gene - you can put that into a kit and use it
in a test to test for cancer. The gene as it occurs in nature doesn't have that
same utility. That's where the value-added comes, and that's the intellectual
part of the equation and that's why patents are granted."

   BioteCanada, which says it represents 85 percent of Canadian genetic
researchers, defends gene patents. Communications director Cate McCready says
that patents balance the risk and high costs of genetic research with the hope
of financial returns.

   (c) Copyright 2003. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2003


                             853 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  February 26, 2003, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1624 words

HEADLINE: CAREER U-TURN BRINGS EX-COUNSEL BACK TO TKT WHEN ASTRUE LEFT THE
BIOTECH FIRM LAST YEAR, HE HADN'T PLANNED TO RETURN AS LEADING MAN

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   On Jan. 28, with considerable effort, Michael J. Astrue shaved and put on a
tie. It was the first time he had attempted either task in 11 days.

   Astrue, the former general counsel at Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of
Cambridge, hadn't been taking his legendary casual-dress philosophy to an
extreme.  On Jan. 17, he had slipped on the ice while walking from his front
door to his car. His left arm was pinned beneath him and he fractured his elbow.

      But Astrue had a reason to make himself presentable: There was a reception
that afternoon for people who had served on Governor-elect Mitt Romney's
transition team.

   Moreover, just that morning he had received an invitation to attend a board
meeting at TKT's Main Street headquarters. Astrue had resigned from the firm
just five weeks earlier. The directors wanted to hear his advice for righting
TKT, a 15-year-old biotech firm that had just suffered a series of severe
regulatory setbacks that had crushed the near-term prospects for the company's
Replagal drug and in four months slashed TKT's share price by 85 percent.

   Astrue was planning to spend the new year doing research at the Hudson
Institute, a conservative think tank based in Indianapolis, and teaching at the
Boston University School of Law, while he sought an appointment somewhere in the
Bush administration. But he accepted the invitation to meet the directors for
two reasons.

   "When provided with an opportunity to offer my opinions in detail, I usually
take advantage of it," Astrue said.  The 46-year-old also had a hunch TKT's
board wanted more than to just pick his brain. In fact, Dr. Richard F. Selden,
TKT's founder and chief executive, had asked Astrue whether he would consider
the chief executive's job in November, just weeks before he left the company.

   "I knew they might be thinking about trying to bring me back," said Astrue,
who took a taxi and arrived at the company at 2 p.m. Astrue ate a chicken salad
sandwich, and talked for about two hours, after which Rodman W. Moorhead III,
the chairman, asked him, "Would you consider coming back as CEO?"

   Astrue's return to TKT was announced Feb. 11. For the Milton native, it was
another in a series of unexpected career U-turns. In 1985, while serving as a
staff attorney at the Department of Health and Human Services, he was asked to
interview for a position in the White House counsel's office. "I was stunned,"
recalled Astrue, who advised presidents Reagan and Bush, "but when the White
House calls and asks you for your resume, you say yes."

   In just a few years, Astrue has become one of the more influential players in
Massachusetts' biotechnology industry. After serving as associate counsel to the
president, he was general counsel for the Department of Health and Human
Services, overseeing an army of hundreds of lawyers. He later was a partner at
Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo PC of Boston, and served as general
counsel for Biogen, the Cambridge biotech giant, starting in 1993. He left
Biogen for TKT in 2000, and was chairman of the Massachusetts Biotechnology
Council in 2001.

   For Astrue, the return to TKT is more than just another serendipitous career
move. After nearly 20 years spent in supporting roles - overseeing law
departments, advising chief executives, handling patent litigation - Astrue is
finally the leading man. If he achieves success running TKT, it is likely to be
the defining episode of what has already been a high-profile career in the
biotechnology industry.

   "Mike is an incredibly moral guy," said Dr. Burt Adelman, executive vice
president of research and development for Biogen Inc., where Astrue served as
general counsel. "I suspect they got him back because he wasn't going to leave
something he was committed to when they were having a problem. He doesn't walk
away from a fight."

   Astrue's ability to execute may be just as pivotal to TKT. The past two years
have been punishing for the company. In January 2001, a federal court judge in
Boston ruled TKT's version of a top-selling anemia drug infringed on patents
held by the drug's maker, Amgen Inc. of Thousand Oaks, Calif. Even when TKT's
version of the drug, Dynepo, was approved for sale in Europe, the ongoing patent
litigation prevented the company from selling it.

   Last year was even worse. TKT's shares fell 60 percent in a single day when
the company warned its clinical data wouldn't support the approval of its
Replagal treatment for Fabry disease.

   An advisory panel to the US Food and Drug Administration ruled unanimously
Jan. 14 that clinical data didn't support TKT's claims for the drug. Meantime,
the panel recommended approval of a competing drug made by Genzyme Corp. If that
drug is approved first, Genzyme's Fabrazyme may be granted "orphan drug" status,
giving the company an effective monopoly on the market for treating the rare
genetic disease.

   It is abundantly clear that Astrue has his work cut out for him. Next month,
the company will announce a major layoff affecting about 100 employees, or more
than 20 percent of its work force. Major changes are also forthcoming in TKT's
senior management, according to a former TKT executive.

   In a gesture to employees, Astrue said he would forgo his salary for three
months. He also said he asked the board to pay him less than Selden earned last
year, but declined to specify what his compensation will be. In 2001, the most
recent reported year, Selden earned a salary of $400,000 and a bonus of
$150,000, according to company documents.

   Much of TKT's basic research will be discontinued. And, in a major shift, TKT
will look for larger companies with which to collaborate on its proprietary gene
therapy products, which use a patient's own cells to generate unique proteins.
TKT will also seek to forge partnerships with Japanese firms, Astrue said.

   Astrue said one of his prime tasks is to try again to win approval for
Replagal. The company will resubmit pathology data with new analysis to the FDA,
he said. Still, a lot depends on how the agency proceeds, and whether it grants
the coveted orphan drug status to Genzyme's competing drug.

   While the latest setback involving Replagal has dealt the company a serious
blow, it also played a crucial role in Astrue's return. Selden had first asked
Astrue whether he would consider becoming chief executive in a meeting in
Selden's office in November. But the discussion was still too tentative for
Astrue to take it seriously. "He had mentioned it a few times, he was sincere,
but my read on it was that he wasn't ready to leave this company, which he
founded and spent his entire career at," said Astrue.

   Astrue left TKT convinced his future lay in Washington, with an appointment
to some sort of government post. That ambition had been thwarted in 2001.
President Bush was poised to nominate Astrue to head the FDA, and Astrue had
been interviewed by White House officials. But Massachusetts Senator Edward M.
Kennedy and other Senate Democrats blocked the nomination, saying it would be a
conflict of interest for the drug industry's top watchdog to come from the
industry the agency regulates.

   But Selden apparently decided to leave TKT after the FDA's advisory panel
voted against Replagal Jan. 14. The setback to the company would require stiff
personnel cuts and a sharp reduction in basic research to discover early-stage
drug candidates - the type of work that most excited Selden. He spent two weeks
prior to the Jan. 28 meeting lobbying board members in support of hiring Astrue
to replace him, and continued to call Astrue, urging him to return.

   "Because the pipeline was going to be dramatically cut, TKT wasn't my ideal
any more," Selden said. "In January, I explained to Mike that his skill set was
what the company needed. I felt like I was a matchmaker."

   One director, who asked not to be named, said the board hadn't met with
Astrue after he left in early December. But the directors had polled other
senior managers for suggestions on saving TKT. "My takeaway at the Jan. 28
meeting was there was a strong alignment between Mike's view of the path forward
and what a number of the senior managers felt needed to be done. I was struck by
the consistency."

   Another director, also speaking on condition of anonymity, said he felt
Astrue had the skills to lead TKT through its short-term crisis and beyond.
"Three or four items on our agenda are regulatory or legal," said this director,
"but you wouldn't want somebody to run a company around short-term legal issues.
Mike, unusually for a lawyer, brings broad exposure to the commercial world."

   Ultimately, that could be the key to Astrue's return. "Mike is way too smart
to be pigeonholed as a lawyer," said one TKT executive who worked closely with
Astrue. "He's a strategic thinker and a leader, as well as a lawyer. He wants to
prove that he can do it all."

   Selden told the directors he would resign on the afternoon of Feb. 11. The
board met, via teleconference, just afterward, and voted to offer the job to
Astrue. They called him and he agreed. TKT put out a press release at 5:30 p.m.

   Astrue knows there are difficult times ahead, and a significant part of his
plan to revive the company's fortunes involves Replagal.

   But he is determined to succeed, insisting that even if he loses the
competition for orphan drug status to Genzyme it won't necessarily preclude
Replagal's ultimate success.

   "In my course on biotechnology law and policy at BU, I just assigned students
an extra-credit question: Name five of the six ways to get around a competitor's
orphan drug exclusivity," he said.

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.  SIDEBAR: ROCKY ROAD

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, 1. Michael J. Astrue had hoped to gain an appointment
in the Bush administration before he returned as chief executive of TKT. / GLOBE
STAFF PHOTO / JONATHAN WIGGS 2.  Douglas Treco, senior vice president of
research and development for TKT, chatting with Dr. Richard F. Selden, the
biotech firm's founder and former CEO. / GLOBE STAFF FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2003


                             854 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  February 26, 2003 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: PICTURE CAPTION; Pg. A15

HEADLINE: PHIL COSPER

SOURCE: STEPHANIE YAO/The Oregonian

GRAPHIC: Color photo:; Phil Cosper gets a local anesthetic before a genetically
engineered virus is injected into the Skamania, Wash., man's eye Monday. Cosper,
82, is the first gene therapy trial patient at Oregon Health & Science
University.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2003


                             855 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  February 26, 2003 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 219 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL RESEARCH SHOT IN THE DARK

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: An age-related eye problem is the basis for OHSU's first gene
therapy trials

   It only lasted 10 seconds. But Phil Cosper's injection could be The Shot
Heard 'Round The Hill.

   At the Casey Eye Institute on Marquam Hill, the Skamania, Wash., man became
the first patient in any gene therapy trial at Oregon Health & Science
University. On Monday, Dr. Tim Stout injected a genetically modified virus into
Cosper's left eye, which is damaged by age-related macular degeneration, or AMD.

   Roughly 1.7 million U.S. residents have AMD, the main cause of adult
blindness. It hit Cosper, 82, last fall and has darkened the center of his left
eye's field of vision. His right eye is fine.

   In AMD, excess blood vessels grow on the retina, killing nearby light-sensing
cells. Doctors can use lasers to kill the vessels but don't always succeed. The
viral therapy aims to put a gene inside eye cells that will spur them to make a
protein that limits blood vessel growth.

   The test is a phase one trial to assess the medicine's safety, OHSU's Dr.
Michael Klein said. If the therapy is safe, further tests will check how well it
works, he said.

   While the shot could ease Cosper's disease, his left eye already has some
permanent scarring.

   "I count my blessings," Cosper said. "I still have one good eye."

GRAPHIC: 2 Color Photos by STEPHANIE YAO/for The Oregonian

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2003


                             856 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1002 words

HEADLINE: A REVOLUTION AT 50: PERSONAL HEALTH;
Genes May Draw Your Road Map, But You Still Chart Your Course

BYLINE:  By JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   "It's all in the genes." How many times have you heard that? Well, forget it.
It's not true, at least not for a vast majority of serious health problems that
beset people in this and other Western countries.

        True, some very serious, but fortunately rare, diseases are fully
determined by one's genetic makeup. Some, like Huntington's disease, are the
inevitable consequence of inheriting a single dominant abnormal gene from one
parent.

    Others, like sickle cell disease and cystic fibrosis, are the consequence of
inheriting two abnormal recessive genes, one from each parent. It is not yet
possible to forestall the unfortunate effects of such single-gene defects,
though gene therapy may eventually counter their effects, if not reverse them
permanently.

Genetically Predisposed?

   Meanwhile, most of us have to contend with a complex set of genes that may or
may not predispose us to ailments, ranging in seriousness from superficial skin
cancer to premature heart disease. And a genetic predisposition is just that: it
is not destiny, but rather a tendency that can be encouraged or discouraged to
express itself by how we live our lives.

   Some experts estimate that about 30 percent of longevity is determined by
genes; the rest is up to us.

   Even mutations in the cancer-suppressor genes known as BRCA1 and BRCA2 do not
lead inevitably to breast cancer. Rather, they raise the risk of developing this
disease.

   It is now possible to analyze a woman's blood for the presence of a BRCA
mutation, giving her the option of taking extraordinary preventive measures,
including undergoing a double prophylactic mastectomy.

   In the not-too-distant future, we will undoubtedly learn how to identify
similar genetic abnormalities that can influence the risk of developing a
disease like rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis or Parkinson's disease.

   For most of us, though, it is not now possible to determine precisely what
sort of predispositions we may have inherited. But it is possible to get some
good clues. One of the simplest is to know what ailments afflicted your
biological parents, grandparents and siblings. That is why you should always be
asked on a medical questionnaire about your immediate family's medical history
and, if your parents are deceased, the causes and ages of their deaths.

   Another sound approach is to get periodic health checkup. These exams can,
for example, reveal a tendency toward high blood pressure. If unchecked, high
blood pressure can lead to a crippling stroke or elevated levels of serum
cholesterol, which increases risk of heart attack. Likewise, a blood or urine
test may indicate a developing problem with blood sugar metabolism, which, if
not brought under control, could lead to Type 2 diabetes.

   If a parent had colon cancer, regular colonoscopies starting at 40 may reveal
precancerous polyps that can be simply treated to prevent this cancer. And, if a
parent developed serious osteoporosis, periodic checks for bone density starting
at 50 can signal the need for treatments that can head off this debilitating
disease.

Overcoming Predisposition

   On both sides of my family, there are fatal illnesses that probably have
genetic components and that may leave my brother and me at higher than average
risk of dying before our time.

   My father, his father and his father's brother all suffered heart attacks in
their mid-50's. For my great-uncle that first attack was fatal. For my father
and grandfather, it was a second attack at age 71 that ended their lives.

   So far, at 61, I am free of demonstrable heart disease, as is my brother, who
is 57.

   But my brother's health checkups revealed both an elevated blood pressure and
cholesterol level, raising his risk of following in our father's footsteps. He
has made some changes in his diet, and he exercises irregularly, but he has
primarily opted to take medication to keep both his blood pressure and serum
cholesterol within a normal range.

   On the other hand, I have avoided acquiring any serious risk factors for
heart disease. I never smoked, my weight is normal and my blood pressure hovers
around 100 over 60. (The borderline for high blood pressure is 140 over 95.)
Though my total cholesterol level is a little higher than I'd like it to be --
about 210 milligrams per deciliter -- a major contributor to that total is
H.D.L., the so-called good cholesterol that acts as an arterial cleanser. My
H.D.L. level is about 70, which is nearly as good as it can get, even though I
do not take estrogen and only sometimes remember to drink red wine, both of
which can increase H.D.L.'s.

   I also try to keep my cardiac risk at a minimum by exercising daily --
walking briskly for three miles in the morning and swimming between half and
three-quarters of a mile later in the day. Exercise raises H.D.L.'s, reduces
stress and helps to maintain a healthy circulatory system, normal blood pressure
and normal body weight.

   I also eat a mostly healthful diet loaded with vegetables and fruits, along
with whole grains, nuts, fish, chicken breast, lean meat, beans and skim milk.
It is a diet rich in antioxidants, health-protective nutrients and dietary
fiber. Yes, I do indulge in frozen yogurt and ice cream (in controlled
portions), dark chocolate and an occasional cookie or piece of pie.

   As for the other half of my heritage, my mother died of ovarian cancer at 49,
and I had breast cancer at 57. Though I tested negative for a BRCA mutation, my
doctors suggested that I have my ovaries removed just in case there was a
genetic link to my mother's cancer.

   I get annual mammograms, as well as a colonoscopy every five years and bone
density test every three years. To keep my bones healthy, I take calcium citrate
with vitamin D to supplement my dietary intake and I have added strength
training to my exercise routine.

   Will all this keep whatever noxious genes I may harbor at bay and keep me
hale and hearty into my 90's? Only time will tell. But based on currently
available evidence, I'm doing the best I can to reach that goal. You can too.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (David Suter)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2003


                             857 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 6; Science Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 71 words

HEADLINE: A REVOLUTION AT 50;
LENNETTE J. BENJAMIN

BODY:

   She is clinical director and co-founder of the Comprehensive Sickle Cell
Center at Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx.

        Sickle cell disease is one of the most understood genetic diseases. But
gene therapy is still a laboratory experiment. Genetic research on sickle cell
disease has done more to help other diseases than has translated into benefits
for sickle cell patients. To some extent, we have to go back and play catch-up.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Angel Franco/The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2003


                             858 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Science Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 898 words

HEADLINE: A REVOLUTION AT 50;
Deciding When Science Has Gone Astray

BYLINE:  By ROBIN MARANTZ HENIG

BODY:

   Since the double helix discovery 50 years ago, people have beenhaunted by
fears of what scientists might do with their growing genetic knowledge. Some
fears have been shared by the scientists themselves. Some have been a bit
far-fetched.

        Among the scariest prospects have been recombinant DNA research ("gene
splicing"), cross-species genetic engineering (mixing human DNA into animals),
genetically modified crops (known derisively as "Frankenfoods"), genetic
enhancement (inserting supposedly desirable genes into embryos) and germ line
gene therapy (changing the genes in the egg or sperm).

    The most recent concerns involve embryonic stem cell research and human
cloning, which some members of Congress want to regulate or ban.

   When the scientific world first grappled with the potential problems of
genetic technology, the approach was very different.

   "Our experience with recombinant DNA research is the best model," said Dr.
LeRoy Walters, a professor at the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown. "It
showed us that when you have an area of uncertainty, with possible hazard to the
public health, it's possible to regulate the research by having it all come
before an advisory group."

   He was referring to a highly unusual attempt at scientific self-regulation.
In 1974, a group of scientists involved in gene splicing, then a new enterprise,
became concerned about the possible dangers of their work. They wanted to step
back and see how dangerous their research really was.

   A committee of 11 prominent biologists sent a letter to the journal Science
saying that some of their work raised a "concern for the possible unfortunate
consequences of indiscriminate applications." They suggested stopping the
experiments "until attempts have been made to evaluate the hazards." They
wanted, in effect, a moratorium on the DNA research that worried them.

   "I've had people tell me that what we did was the highest form of ethics,"
said Dr. Paul Berg, a professor emeritus at Stanford and the chairman of the
group that proposed the moratorium. "But when you honestly don't know the
implications of your research, what are you supposed to do? Just keep on doing
it? No, you have to stop and ask yourself what the hazards really are."

   The most hazardous research was suspended voluntarily after Science published
the letter. Seven months later, 150 molecular biologists met at the Asilomar
Conference Center in Pacific Grove, Calif., to figure out what to do next. How
risky were these experiments? How could the risk be controlled, without shutting
down the century's most promising research?

   The meeting, now known as the Asilomar conference, ended with recommendations
for containment strategies. The National Institutes of Health created the
Recombinant Advisory Committee, which had to review every grant involving
potentially risky recombinant DNA.

   Most of the fears proved groundless, said Dr. Berg, a Nobel laureate in
chemistry. As a result, he said, the restrictions gradually eased, and within a
few years, most projects did not require prior approval by the advisory
committee, which now oversees gene therapy.

   After Asilomar, scientists never again policed themselves in quite the same
way. External controls dominate the field today. Some restrictions come with
federal grants. Some come from advisory groups, which study thorny issues --
usually ethical rather than scientific -- and occasionally see their advice
turned into federal regulations, especially on research financed with tax
dollars.

   Scientists often welcome this kind of federal guidance. But when the
government refuses to finance certain research, there may be no such
regulations. In those regulatory vacuums, some scientists manage to get private
funds and do as they please.

   Congress has also had a hand in regulating genetic research. The legislative
route is now being taken with one of the most incendiary issues of the DNA era:
human cloning. Four bills are now before Congress. One, introduced this month by
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, with five co-sponsors, would ban
cloning for reproduction but not for research.

   The others would ban all forms of cloning, no matter what the intent; one of
these passed the House Judiciary Committee on Feb. 13. It is expected to come
before the full House this week, although its prospects in the Senate are not
good. Under the bill, the creation of human embryos for stem cell research is
defined as cloning and would be banned.

   The President's Council on Bioethics has proposed a ban on experiments
intended to create baby clones (so-called reproductive cloning) and a four-year
moratorium on cloning experiments involving the lab cultures that are meant to
treat degenerative diseases (sometimes called therapeutic or research cloning).

   But if the ban goes into effect, said Dr. Walters of the Kennedy Institute,
scientists could face criminal penalties for engaging in therapeutic cloning. "A
federal ban at this time would be premature," he said.

   Reproductive cloning, however, is the topic that has captured the public's
imagination -- and been the source of the public's horror. Still, it is a term
widely misunderstood.

   While a clone will have the same DNA as the person being cloned, DNA isn't
everything. Other than the genome, all else about the clone and the donor -- the
egg, the uterus, the parents, the social environment -- will be different.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A DNA model was on display at the headquarters of the Raelian
movement, which believes all life on Earth was created by space aliens through
cloning. (Associated Press)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2003


                             859 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; Pg. 4

HEADLINE: A REVOLUTION AT 50;
Path to the Helix And Beyond

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart:  1865 -- In his study of peas, Gregor Mendel, theorizes about
inheritance factors, the mechanism for passing on traits from one generation to
the next. 1869 -- Johann Friedrich Miescher identifies a weakly acidic substance
in the nuclei of white blood cells. The substance will later be identified as
deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA. 1909 -- Phoebus Levene, an American chemist
studying yeast, discovers deoxyribose -- the D in DNA. In the 1920's, Levene
identifies the chemical bases that are later found to make up the alphabet of
the genome: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G) and thymine (T). 1944 --
Oswald Avery, Maclyn McCarty and Colin MacLeod, at the Rockefeller Institute,
isolate a chemical that seems to transfer information between different strains
of bacteria. It is found to be DNA. But other scientists remain skeptical
because they believe that DNA is too simple a molecule. 1950 -- Erwin Chargaff
at Columbia University determines that in all species there is a 1 to 1 ratio of
the bases A to T and also of G to C. 1953 -- On Feb. 28, James Watson, right,
and Francis Crick determine that DNA is a double helix. They describe how DNA
carries information in its sequence of bases, and how the genetic material is
copied. On April 25 the Watson-Crick paper is published in the journal Nature,
along with articles by Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins reporting the X-ray
data on which the double helix idea is based. 1961 -- Marshall Nirenberg and
colleagues at the National Institutes of Health find that a particular string of
nucleic acid units causes synthesis of a particular protein chain. This is the
first clue to how DNA shapes living things. 1973 -- Paul Berg at Stanford joins
bacterial DNA to viral DNA in the first hybrid DNA molecule. Later, Herbert
Boyer of the University of Californiaat San Francisco and Stanley Cohen of
Stanford invent the recombinant DNA technique, using it to splice toad genes
into bacteria. 1974 -- An image of DNA is included in a television signal
broadcast from Earth into outer space. A schematic of DNA is shown in blue. 1975
-- Concerned about the potential dangers of the recombinant DNA technique, a
group of scientists including Dr. Watson and Dr. Berg organizes a meeting at the
Asilomar conference center in Pacific Grove, Calif. The meeting led to
government supervision of recombinant DNA experiments for many years until the
technique came to be regarded as safe. 1977 -- Fred Sanger invents a method for
sequencing DNA. Later, in automated form, his method is adapted for use in DNA
sequencing machines and becomes the means to map the genomes of humans and other
species. 1982 -- The Food and Drug Administration approves Humulin, a form of
human insulin made in genetically engineered bacteria. It is the first
genetically engineered drug. 1983 -- Kary Mullis at the Cetus Corporation
invents the polymerase chain reaction (P.C.R.) technique, a method for quickly
copying stretches of DNA to produce usable quantities. The technique becomes
central to many DNA applications, including those in medicine, forensic
analysis, paleontology and DNA sequencing. 1985 -- Alec Jeffreys of the
University of Leicester invents DNA fingerprinting, the use of DNA analysis to
match people to biological tissues found at crime scenes. 1987 -- In a case in
Leicestershire, England, DNA clears a 17-year-old boy of rape and murder charges
and confirms the confession of Colin Pitchfork. 1987 -- Commercial availability
of DNA paternity testing. 1990 -- Dr. Watson, first director of the Human Genome
Project at the N.I.H., declares that sequencing of the human genome will start
in October 1990 and be completed by 2005 at a cost of $3 billion. 1990 --
Scientists at N.I.H. unsuccessfully attempt the first federally approved gene
therapy, on a 4-year-old girl with a defective immune system. An earlier attempt
at gene therapy was made in 1980 to correct beta-thalassemia, a form of anemia.
1990 -- The F.D.A. approves the first genetically engineered substance for food:
chymosin, a milk-clotting agent used in making cheese. Four years later, the
agency approves genetically engineered Flavr Savr tomatoes. 1992 -- Barry Scheck
and Peter Neufeld start the Innocence Project at Benjamin N. Cardozo School of
Law in New York. Over the next 11 years, their and others efforts clear more
than 120 convicted people through the application of DNA technology. 1994 -- The
DNA Identification Act authorizes the F.B.I. to create a national DNA database.
It begins operation in 1998. 1995 -- Controversy over events at the crime scene
and handling of DNA and blood evidence flares in the murder trial, below, of
O.J. Simpson. 1995 -- J. Craig Venter sequences the genome of a first
single-celled organism, the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. 1996 --
Researchers in Scotland create the first cloned mammal, Dolly. (Dolly died Feb.
14.) Other kinds of animals are cloned, including in 2002 a house cat named cc.
1998 -- A private company, Celera, headed by Dr. Venter, announces it will beat
the Human Genome Project to a complete sequence of the human genome. 1998 --
Adapting methods worked out in mice, James Thomson and John Gearhart announce
that they have established cultures of human embryonic stem cells, cells that
can grow into any specialized cell. The cultures are made from embryos a few
days old, destroying the embryo. Abortion opponents seek to stop the work. 2000
-- At a White House ceremony, Dr. Venter, left, of Celera, and Dr. Francis
Collins of the Human Genome Project join President Clinton to announce
completion of a a draft sequence of the human genome. 2001 -- In rival
publications, Celera and the Human Genome Project report that the genome appears
to contain about 30,000 genes, far fewer than the prevailing estimate of
100,000. 2001 -- President Bush says federally financed scientists may start
research on existing lines of human embryonic stem cells, although they may not
use cell lines made after Aug. 9, 2001. Photos (pgs. F4, F5)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2003


                             860 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2625 words

HEADLINE: A REVOLUTION AT 50;
DNA Changed the World. Now What?

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Fifty years ago, on Saturday, Feb. 28, 1953, two young scientists walked into
the Eagle, a dingy pub in Cambridge, England, and announced to the lunchtime
crowd that they had discovered the secret of life.

        By divining the chemical structure of DNA, the archive of life, James D.
Watson and Francis Crick had seen how the molecule could encode information in
the copious quantities necessary to program a living cell.

    Years later Dr. Crick's wife, Odile, told him she had not believed him, he
has written. "You were always coming home and saying things like that, so
naturally I thought nothing of it," she said.

   But on that occasion the claim was true, and it set in motion a revolution
that has continued to unfold to this day, much of it guided by the two original
discoverers.

   Research is a slow process, often with years between each eureka, and even
today the DNA revolution remains largely behind laboratory doors, in the form of
biologists' ever intensifying understanding of the mechanisms of life. But a few
powerful inventions -- forensic DNA, a new wave of DNA-based drugs -- have
already had considerable effect, and many researchers believe they are just a
foretaste.

   They expect new medical treatments and diagnostic tests, based on a thorough
understanding of DNA, for cancer, heart disease and other long intractable
maladies. Yet like any powerful technology, DNA will doubtless bring vexing
choices: whether to modify the human genome with inheritable genes that will
eliminate disease and enhance desired qualities, for one.

   And there are outright dangers, like the possibility that DNA techniques will
be used to make novel biological weapons.

   The 50th anniversary of the discovery of DNA's double helix may be more than
just a round number. It comes while both its founders are still alive and
active: Dr. Crick published an article on the nature of consciousness just this
month.

   The human genome, obtained in a very rough draft in 2001, is becoming more
polished. New technologies have been invented for interpreting the genome's
enigmatic archive. Biological laboratories are engaged in a thousandfold
scale-up, from studying one gene at a time to examining whole genomes. And DNA,
after a long gestation, is in the throes of passing from a pure science to an
applied one.

   After figuring out the structure of DNA, Dr. Crick and Dr. Watson realized
that the sequence of units in the DNA must carry the code in some way for the
structure of the proteins that are the working parts of a cell. But they did not
foresee that the entire genomes would one day be decoded.

   "Did we appreciate how important DNA was? Yes we did," Dr. Crick said in an
interview this month from his home in Southern California. "We did see the shape
of the genetic code. But we didn't foresee rapid sequencing."

   Although the text of the genomic message is an eye-glazing march of A's, G's,
C's and T's that then require years of interpretation, the genome era has
already raised biology to a new scale of operations and amplified the tools at
biologists' disposal.

   "The pace of discovery is going unbelievably fast," Dr. Watson said in an
interview last month at his Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island.

The Genome Era
Learning to Read DNA's Full Story

   The Watson-Crick discovery showed that DNA records genetic information in the
form of a four-letter alphabet. But obtaining the text of the message that
evolution has taken some four billion years to compile was no easy task. It was
another 20 years, in the mid-1970's, before one of their Cambridge colleagues,
Dr. Fred Sanger, worked out an ingenious method for determining the order of the
letters in a stretch of DNA.

   But Dr. Sanger's method was manual and could decode long DNA messages only
with great difficulty. Others, chiefly scientists at Applied Biosystems, had to
automate the method and design DNA sequencing machines that could handle
genome-size lengths of DNA. Another essential advance was the PCR technique,
invented by Dr. Kary Mullis, for amplifying defined stretches of DNA into
workable quantities.

   The genome era began on May 25, 1995, when Dr. J. Craig Venter announced that
he had decoded the first genome of a single-celled organism, a bacterium known
as Haemophilus influenzae. Since then about a hundred bacterial, plant and
animal genomes have been decoded, including the C. elegans roundworm, the
Drosophila fruit fly and the mouse -- laboratory organisms of vital interest to
biologists.

   With whole genomes available for study, biologists can at last begin to see
the precise mechanics of natural selection, the process that Darwin intuited
without any knowledge of its physical basis.

   As each new genome is deciphered, the tree of life comes into clearer focus.
Even creatures as far apart as man and mouse have turned out to possess
amazingly similar sets of genes, each with a similar sequence of DNA units. So
far each new genome has turned out to have some novel genes special to its own
species, as well as a core set having to do with the cell's basic operations,
which seem very ancient and probably trace back close to the origin of life.

   This genomic data -- three billion units apiece for animals like mice and
humans -- has presented biologists with a whole new set of challenges. New
devices, called microarrays or expression chips, have been invented for
examining the activity of thousands of genes at a time. A set of special
chemicals, known as an RNAi library, was announced last month for inactivating
each of the genes in the laboratory roundworm.

   A thriving new branch of science, often called computational or "in silico"
biology, has emerged to analyze the genes and other component parts of a genome
and to compare one genome to another. These techniques, developed for handling
many genes at a time, give biologists hope that they can understand the whole
human genome, now thought to contain some 30,000 or so genes.

   "A constellation of things is going on that make this a special time in
biology," said Dr. Thomas Cech, president of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, which finances major biomedical research. "Many of us underestimated
how powerful a tool the genome would be. To be able to ask a question of 30,000
genes at the same time and let the system tell you the answer is incredibly
exciting. You can unveil a process in a single-celled organism and then use
computers to discover by in silico experiments the human counterpart. That in
itself has largely transformed the way a lot of biology is done."

   The ability, gift of the genome sequence, to track thousands of genes at the
same time puts biologists in the position of being able to analyze the living
cell in action as it does its housekeeping or responds to the ceaseless chatter
of signals from its neighbors.

   The genomic era is also bringing about a quantum leap in biologists'
capabilities, drawing almost within contemplation one of biology's ultimate
goals, that of understanding a whole organism in terms of its DNA.

The Impact on Society
Technology's Potential Is Already Evident

   For now, the DNA revolution is largely confined to understanding nature, not
changing it. Yet the few applications that have already appeared leave little
doubt of the technology's potential.

   DNA as a means of individual identification, first invented by Sir Alec
Jeffreys of the University of Leicester in England in 1984, has developed into a
hallmark forensic technique, strong enough to overturn verdicts based on shakier
forms of evidence like eyewitness testimony.

   Applied to stored biological evidence, DNA fingerprinting has proven the
innocence of many convicted inmates. To date the Innocence Project at the
Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, run by Barry C. Scheck and Peter J. Neufeld,
has exonerated 124 people. In Illinois, DNA evidence cleared so many death row
inmates that Gov. George Ryan lost confidence in his state's justice system.
Just before leaving office last month, he commuted all death sentences to prison
terms of life or less.

   DNA testing has jolted the justice system because, properly used, it is an
almost infallible identifier of biological tissue. In Britain, which collects
DNA from everyone convicted of a crime, a growing database has allowed the
police to score many "cold hits," the match of DNA from tissue at a crime scene
to someone not on any list of suspects. The impressive reach of DNA
fingerprinting, both to snare the guilty and clear the innocent, has prompted
suggestions for larger DNA databases, as well as counterarguments from civil
libertarians.

   DNA is also an unrivaled genealogical archive. By examining the DNA of the
living, biologists can reach back and resolve many otherwise inaccessible
questions. DNA evidence has added weight to the oral tradition, dismissed by
almost all historians, that Thomas Jefferson had a second, unacknowledged family
with his slave Sally Hemings. From the DNA of people living today, geneticists
can infer the size of the ancestral human population and track its movements
across the globe as the first modern humans dispersed from Africa.

   DNA has already been used to modify crops, building bacterial genes for
countering insects into corn and cotton, and adding genes from daffodils and
bacteria to help rice make vitamin A. But the artificial mingling of genes from
different species makes some people uncomfortable, and genetically modified
crops have encountered resistance, especially in Europe.

   A new wave of DNA-based drugs is slowly reaching the market, beginning with
genetically engineered forms of insulin and growth hormone and now including
highly ingenious substances, based on a deep genetic knowledge, like Enbrel, for
rheumatoid arthritis, and Gleevec, a startlingly effective treatment for chronic
myelogenous leukemia.

The Next Phase
Disease Genes Proving Elusive

    Waiting in the wings is a new wave of DNA-based diagnostic tests. One is a
test for an errant gene that is mutated early in many cases of colon cancer.
Developed by Dr. Bert Vogelstein of Johns Hopkins University, the test is
applied to a stool sample and, together with other genetic tests, could provide
a cheaper and more acceptable screen for colon cancer than colonoscopy.

   The 30,000 or so genes in the human genome can now be programmed into
microarrays and used to profile the characteristic pattern of gene activity in a
cancerous cell.

   Dr. Todd Golub of the Whitehead Institute Center for Genome Research has
pioneered the use of gene expression chips to distinguish, within a given kind
of cancer, previously unrecognized subtypes that respond differently to
treatment. He hopes the chips will pinpoint both the errant genes special to
particular types of cancer as well as gene changes common to all cancer cells.

   "We are looking for magic bullets that target particular types of cancer but
also for the Achilles' heel that unites many different types of cancer," Dr.
Golub said. The tests, though yet to be approved by the Food and Drug
Administration, show the likely power and scale of genomic era medicine.

   A principal goal of the Human Genome Project was to identify the errant genes
that underlie common diseases, like diabetes, cancer, obesity, schizophrenia and
Alzheimer's. These disease genes have proved highly elusive, perhaps because it
takes several errant genes in combination to cause the disease, and the
contribution from each is hard to detect.

   A remarkable experiment is now under way in Iceland, where a company called
Decode Genetics has constructed a genealogy of much of the population. With it,
Decode can build large pedigrees for patients with each disease of interest. The
company then scans the genomes of related patients, looking for segments of
chromosome they may have inherited from a common ancestor. Within these shared
segments it looks for variant genes that may contribute to the disease.

   The company has identified several disease-causing genes, including one for
schizophrenia, and has inferred the general location of several others.

   From disease gene to drug is a long path, but identifying an errant gene
gives a deep, often novel, insight into the cause of disease and supplies new
targets for drug makers.

The Ethical Frontiers
'Perfecting' Humans, Endangering Them

   Implicit in the understanding of DNA is the possibility of changing it, a
prerogative until now reserved for evolution. Gene therapy, the idea of patching
up tissues by delivering the corrective form of an errant gene, has so far been
a failure. Even when it works, its changes will not outlast the patient.

   But another approach, not yet technically possible or acceptable, is to
change the human genome in a heritable way. Instead of devising costly drugs or
therapies to treat the same diseases in each generation, why not go straight to
the source and fix all known errant genes in the egg or sperm? Germ line genetic
engineering, as it is called, would make permanent fixes to be passed from one
generation to another. Advocates argue that however expensive it might be to
produce each perfect baby, the cost would be a fraction of the lifetime health
care otherwise needed.

   Such proposals arouse serious ethical concerns, from religious objections to
interventions that seem to usurp a creator's role, to biologists' fears that
genetic manipulation will subvert the essence of human nature.

   The DNA revolution is likely to present many such quandaries. It will
increasingly provide the means to repair and improve the machinery of life. But
human ideas for redesign, which might include items like perfect health and
greater longevity, have little in common with evolution's procedure of natural
selection, which thrives on mutation and mortality.

   Like all technology, DNA may have military uses. Though it is hard to improve
on the deadliness of natural scourges, that does not mean it will always be
impossible. "If we manage not to exploit biology for hostile purposes it will be
the first time our species has ever refrained from such exploitation," says Dr.
Matthew Meselson, a founder of molecular biology who has long worried about
biological warfare. "And if we don't refrain, I don't know how to predict what
course it would take. There is only one human species."

   Biologists recognize the depth of public concerns about genetic engineering.
Yet most hope that public can be educated to make what they regard as the right
choices. Dr. Watson was among the group of scientists who warned in 1974 of the
possible dangers of recombinant DNA, the technique that first allowed genes to
be moved from one species to another. At the Asilomar conference the next year
scientists imposed voluntary restrictions on experiments while the possible
hazards were assessed.

   Though Dr. Watson soon decided those dangers were overblown, he still
believes that scientists should talk frankly about the possibilities, good and
bad, of their work.

   "It is far better to tell it as it is and take the risk," he said. "We should
expect a constant concern from society as to where our knowledge is leading and
whether to deploy it. That certainly existed in the past, for instance in the
opposition to automobiles. But once you put someone in an auto you won't get
them on a horse."

   Dr. Watson has recently become an advocate for being open to the idea of germ
line genetic engineering. "Some think there is something wrong about enhancing
people," he said. Dr. Crick, who has worked for the last 25 years on the problem
of consciousness, says he does not expect it will yield to any sudden
breakthrough. "At the origin of life things had to be simple," he said. "But
when you come to consciousness it's probably a very late development in
evolution."

   Both at the beginning of life and at its culmination, DNA has more to tell.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The double helix, as drawn for its debut in the 1953 paper by
James Watson and Francis Crick. (Nature); (Image by Dr. David F. Green,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology)(pg. F1); (Dr. Arthur J. Olson; data by K.
Luger et al.)(pg. F6) Chart: "The Engine of Life"Much has been learned about DNA
since its basic shape was revealed 50 years ago. This computer-generated model
shows the double helix, atom by atom. It also shows the atoms moving slightly,
as they do in the cell. The twin spines of the double helix are linked by pairs
of four chemical bases, adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine, or A, C, G, T.
Sequences of these bases make up genes. The sequence of bases along the chain
carries information. The bases on one chain are complementary to those on the
other, so when the chain divides, each becomes a template for a new chain. This
is how genetic information is duplicated when a cell divides. The outside of the
DNA molecule also contains information for the enzymes that control it. The
enzymes can detect the bases on the inside without unwinding the helix because
the bases are accessible, particularly in the major groove of the DNA spiral,
which alternates with the minor groove. Now scientists are learning what causes
particular genes to be active in cells and how their action is influenced by the
actions of other genes and signals from outside the cell. (pg. F1) Chart: "From
Helix to Human: Decades of Discovery"How to build a human, molecule by molecule:
some of what has been learned about human cell biology in the last 50 years.
Start With a DNA Molecule Strands of deoxyribonucleic acid in the cell nucleus
are chains of nucleotides with three parts: The SUGAR deoxyribose and PHOSPHATE
make up the backbone. The BASES, of which there are four kinds, jut inward on
each strand. They pair up with bases on the facing strand in these two
combinations: Twist a Double HelixThe structure discovered by Watson and Crick
unites the bases in complementary pairs. It can split apart to allow sections of
individual strands, including GENES, to be copied. Make Copies of GenesA section
of the helix unzips and its bases are exposed. A replica of the section, made of
complementary bases, is created in the form of ribonucleic acid, called
MESSENGER RNA. The RNA is exported from the nucleus and travels to
protein-making factories called RIBOSOMES. Organize the DNAThere are about 6
feet of DNA in the nucleus of every cell. To make room for it, the helix is
wound twice around tiny spools called NUCLEOSOMES. The nucleosomes -- about 15
million per cell -- twist into X-shaped CHROMOSOMES. Protect It From
MutationsRepair enzymes travel along the helix, looking for base pairs damaged
by natural events like radiation and chemical decay. To undo mutations, the
enzymes replace the bad segment, using the good strand as the template. DNA
DOUBLE HELIXIn this computergenerated model, one strand of the helix is depicted
as bonds between chemical structures......And the other in terms of the spaces
occupied by atoms. HOW LONG? -- The unwound DNA in one person would stretch
about 600 million miles -- more than 6 times the distance between the Sun and
Earth. Make ProteinsMessenger RNA is translated into cell-building proteins in
ribosomes. TRANSFER RNA'S float in the cytoplasm, one type for each of 20 amino
acids -- the building blocks of proteins. The transfer RNA's have three bases
that match the codes on the messenger RNA. Each code specifies a particular
AMINO ACID (or a signal to stop the process). Adapter enzymes attach the amino
acid to its correct transfer RNA, which is shepherded to the matching messenger
RNA segment, bringing along its amino acid. The previous transfer RNA exits,
leaving its amino acid. More amino acids are attached to the growing protein
chain. These chains of amino acids, typically hundreds to thousands long, form
the proteins that make cells. Assemble New Cells One of the more complicated
tasks cells perform is to divide into two daughter cells. The control mechanism
that governs the CELL CYCLE is kept under strict control in normal cells but is
subverted in cancer cells. Build Different Cell TypesNot all of a humans 30,000
or so genes are active in any one type of cell. The particular combination of
genes used by a cell determines the cell's purpose. In front of each gene is a
length of DNA called a promoter that is recognized by particular proteins called
TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS. The transcription factors recruit other proteins,
including the enzyme that copies genes into messengerRNA. Cells multiply in at
least 260 varieties; billions, working together, make up each human. "The Big
Questions That Remain"What is the role of each of the 30,000 or so genes in the
human genome? The recent mapping of the genetic landscape only hints at the
complexity of humans. Even when scientists know what functions specific genes
perform, their interaction within the larger organism may still be a mystery.
How is a cell's overall operation controlled?The machinery that orders cells to
fulfill their missions is not understood how it works, and what happens when it
goes wrong. How does the brain work?The brain is an enormously complex computer.
Scientists believe its behavior will ultimately be explained in terms of its
individual neurons, but they are far from that goal. How did life get started on
the primitive Earth?Life may be defined as chemicals able to reproduce
themselves. Biologists believe RNA preceded DNA as a living molecule. RNA itself
may not have been the first molecule of life, but scientists do not know how
life was created from the chemicals present on the primitive Earth.
Illustrations (Dr. Thomas E. Cheatham III); (Dr. Gopal Murti/Photo Researchers);
(Volker Steger/Photo Researchers); (Mark Garlick/Photo Researchers); (Mika
Grondahl and Bill Marsh/The New York Times); (Dr. Arthur J. Olson; data by
Pavletich and Pabo); (Arthur J. Olson; by Hosfield et al.) (Sources: Dr. Arthur
J. Olson, The Scripps Research Institute; Dr. Thomas E. Cheatham III, University
of Utah) (Dr. data)(pg. F6)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2003


                             861 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     February 24, 2003 Monday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 3041 words

HEADLINE: MIRACLE MOLECULE;
 Still searching for the secrets of life;
 Careers: The two young men responsible for the DNA breakthrough continued along
different paths for decades after winning the Nobel Prize.;
 Medicine & Science

BYLINE: Timothy B. Wheeler

SOURCE: Sun Staff

BODY:

   The Nobelists

   For most scientists, a Nobel Prize is the capstone of a career.

   But in the 50 years since their breakthrough discovery of the structure of
DNA, James D. Watson and Francis H.C. Crick have continued to pursue the
frontiers of knowledge, albeit along different paths.

   Watson, once the brash whiz kid from Chicago, has become the "dean of DNA,"
as one colleague calls him. Buoyed by his gossipy 1968 bestseller The Double
Helix, he abandoned his laboratory bench for an administrator's desk, pushing
for a cancer cure and a complete map of the human genome.

   He stands today as the most visible figure in the continuing genetics
revolution, though his penchant for speaking his razor-sharp mind has left a
trail of enemies -- and admirers.

   Crick, who was raised in a middle-class English family, remains a researcher
at 86 and co-wrote yet another scientific paper that was published just last
month.

   After the 1953 coup, Crick pushed on to work out the mechanics of DNA before
his restless mind led him to explore more cosmic questions, such as the origins
of life on Earth. For the past two decades, he has searched for the scientific
basis of human consciousness.

   As the world marks the 50th anniversary of the discovery of the double helix
with celebrations this week in New York and this spring in England, Australia
and elsewhere, admirers are honoring Watson's and Crick's lifelong contributions
to science, not merely the discovery that earned them the 1962 Nobel Prize.

   At 74, Watson crisscrosses the country attending scientific meetings and
ceremonies. In rambling lectures and interviews, he extols the promise of
genetic research even as he recalls with self-deprecating humor how he and Crick
made history.

   "I think the biggest opportunity is curing cancer," he said recently while
sipping coffee in his office at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York. "We
really know a lot about that disease."

   Watson is president of Cold Spring Harbor, the former biological field
station on the north shore of Long Island that he took over in 1968 and steered
toward a genetic cure for cancer. He relinquished administrative oversight nine
years ago, but the institution's 350 researchers remain among the most
frequently cited in scientific literature.

   His wispy white hair remains as unruly as it was in his youth, as does his
willingness to say whatever comes to mind.

   "I think it's very important to study intelligence," he said in a recent
lecture, acknowledging the notion's political incorrectness. "Some people are
stupid because of their genes."

   Watson recalls growing up poor on the south side of Chicago, where he
absorbed his parents' philosophical skepticism. "Don't believe anything unless
there is evidence," he says.

   An avid bird-watcher in his youth, he was drawn to molecular biology by a
book on genetics that he read at the University of Chicago -- the same book that
inspired his future partner, Crick.

   As a researcher, Watson never achieved another breakthrough on the level of
the double helix, despite nearly 20 years of lab work. Instead, he evolved into
a scientific talent scout who attracted bright young minds and motivated them.

   But Watson's passion for molecular biology -- and, to some, his arrogance --
got him into scrapes over the years. In the 1950s, while carving out a molecular
biology department at Harvard University, he clashed with Edward O. Wilson, a
Pulitzer Prize-winning author and noted expert on ants.

   "I found him the most unpleasant human being I ever met," Wilson wrote in his
memoir, Naturalist, dubbing Watson the "Caligula of biology."

   Wilson and others, however, came to respect Watson's administrative
abilities.

   "The way he built up Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory was just extraordinary,"
says Dr. Victor A. McKusick, a pioneer of medical genetics at the Johns Hopkins
University.

   Among those impressed by Watson was Carol Greider, who spent 10 years at Cold
Spring Harbor and found a potential clue to the cause of cancer in the ends of
chromosomes, called telomeres.

   "He would walk into my lab on a Saturday and ask me about a paper he had just
read on telomeres," says Greider, now interim director of molecular biology and
genetics at Johns Hopkins. "I was really just flabbergasted the first few times
it happened, that he would follow so closely a field that was not really his
specialty."

   Watson's takeover of Cold Spring Harbor coincided with the successful
conclusion of another obsessive quest -- finding a mate. At 40, he married a
Radcliffe College sophomore named Elizabeth Lewis who was helping in his Harvard
lab. They had two young sons, one of whom suffers from serious learning
disabilities -- fueling Watson's belief in giving parents a chance to fix
genetic flaws in their offspring.

   "We have a son who's never had a chance to succeed, and that's awful, you
know?" he said. "So I speak from a very personal viewpoint that evolution isn't
kind, and we shouldn't let things as they are."

   In the late 1980s, Watson lobbied Congress to fund an ambitious project to
map all 3.2 billion chemical building blocks in human DNA. But he quit the Human
Genome Project in 1992 in a dispute over plans to patent bits of genetic
information that had been developed. Still, many credit his early vision and
leadership of the genome effort, which is nearing conclusion.

   "Watson had more influence than anyone else in strengthening the growth, the
focus of biology," says biographer Victor McElheny.

   Although Watson plans to attend many of the DNA anniversary celebrations, his
one-time partner and old friend Crick is shunning them. Crick videotaped
messages for this week's events in New York, but he declined a request to be
interviewed.

   The quick-witted, booming-voiced Crick, whom Watson describes as a "soul
mate" during the race for the double helix, has curtailed his activities
recently while undergoing treatment for colon cancer.

   As president emeritus of the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La
Jolla, Calif., Crick continues to ponder how the brain works to make people
aware of themselves and their surroundings -- a field until lately considered
more the province of philosophers than scientists.

   In his 1994 book The Astonishing Hypothesis, Crick suggested that "your joys
and sorrows, your memories and your ambitions, your sense of personal identity
and free will, are in fact no more than the behavior of a vast assembly of nerve
cells and their associated molecules."

   Trained as a physicist, Crick ventured into biology after developing mines
for the British Navy during World War II. His outspokenness and hostility toward
religion helped forge his famous partnership with the skeptical Watson.

   Crick remained at the University of Cambridge after the DNA discovery, living
in a house he dubbed the Golden Helix as he pursued DNA's underlying
machinations. But by the mid-1960s, he concluded that the fundamental questions
of genetics had been answered.

   After moving to Southern California in the 1970s, he and fellow Briton Leslie
Orgel developed the eyebrow-raising theory that life on Earth began with
microorganisms from outer space -- probably seeded by an alien spaceship.

   Crick later became a leading theorist in the study of how the brain works.

   Watson thinks that neuroscience is one of the next big scientific frontiers,
one that will keep reseasrchers racing for the rest of this century. Crick finds
the field less developed than genetics was when he dove into research in the
early 1950s.

   "There seems no limit to the problems that now confront us," Crick said in
his videotaped remarks. "I shall not live to see their solutions, but many of
you should survive long enough to see many radically new techniques and striking
discoveries."

   The discovery of DNA's structure 50 years ago this week transformed biology
and medicine. And we are only beginning to fulfill the promise of the genetics
revolution, which will change how we live in countless ways.

   State of the Art

   Agriculture

   People have been genetically modifying plants and livestock for centuries
through selective breeding, but the deciphering of DNA's structure opened the
door to much more radical manipulation. Among the first modified crops to hit
the markets was the Flavr Savr tomato, genetically tweaked to stay ripe longer.
Introduced in 1994, it failed to catch on with consumers because of its bland
taste.

   Farmers embraced genetically modified crops, though, and they now grow more
than three dozen types to save on production and labor costs. The most popular
-- corn, cotton and soybeans -- have been altered to resist insects or
weed-killing chemicals that are sprayed on fields. Two-thirds of the soybeans
planted in the United States two years ago were resistant to herbicides, about
triple the amount of four years earlier. Scientists also have engineered "yellow
rice," a strain rich in vitamin A, to battle malnutrition in developing
countries.

   In 1996, scientists in Scotland cloned a sheep named Dolly from a cell taken
from an adult sheep. The development created a sensation, and opened the
possibility of using genetic manipulation to produce entire flocks of
prize-winning livestock from a single animal. Many consumers, however, remain
leery of "Frankenfoods." Concerns have been raised about the potential for
genetically modified crops to harm butterflies, wild plants and even humans.
Though research has found no health risks, European countries insist on labeling
genetically modified foods, and some developing countries have balked at
accepting relief shipments of modified grain from the United States.

   Biotechnology
Besides producing stronger, more healthful foods, biotechnology has brought
breakthroughs in producing drugs, screening for diseases and cleaning up
environmental contamination.
Dozens of bioengineered drugs have been approved for various medical conditions;
synthetic insulin is used by millions for treating diabetes. DNA manipulation
also has yielded new diagnostic tests for AIDS, hepatitis and other infectious
diseases.
By mixing and matching the DNA of different bacteria, scientists have created
new microorganisms that can clean up oil spills or toxic-waste dumps by
"feeding" on the chemicals.

   DNA fingerprinting

   From the crime scene to the courthouse, the use of DNA as proof of identity
has changed how crimes are investigated and solved, how victims of mass
disasters are recognized, and how paternity disputes are settled.
Developed in 1985 by British geneticist Alec Jeff-reys, the technique is based
on the concept that each person's DNA contains unique patterns and that these
patterns can be used like a biological Social Security number or bar code.
Although a few scientists still debate the reliability of DNA fingerprinting,
most judges and coroners accept its conclusions. From the crash of the space
shuttle Columbia to the attack on the World Trade Center, it has proven
indispensable in identifying the remains of disaster victims.

   Medicine

   As researchers sort through the genetic instructions encoded on DNA, they
have linked about 2,800 medical disorders with particular defects in individual
genes -- including fatal diseases such as cystic fibrosis. They also have
identified genetic glitches that make people prone to more common illnesses such
as heart disease, breast and colon cancer, diabetes and arthritis, though the
causes cannot be traced to specific genes.

   Although scientists have successfully corrected or replaced defective genes
in laboratory animals, efforts to try gene therapy in humans have been
problematic, marked by the death in 1999 of an 18-year-old participant in a gene
therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. Human trials of a promising
treatment for "bubble boy" disease -- a rare disorder in which children are
unable to develop immunity against illness -- were halted this year after two
test subjects developed leukemia. Doctors in Philadel-phia recently won
government approval, though, to try a new treatment for Parkinson's disease that
involves injecting a gene into a person's brain.

   On the Horizon

   Biocomputers

   Will DNA someday be used to break encrypted messages for the military or
scour genetic databases for signs of disease -- the kind of jobs performed by
electronic computers today? That's what the scientists working in the hot field
of DNA computing think.
Think of DNA as nature's version of a supercomputer. The molecule can store huge
amounts of information -- indeed, the recipe for an entire person -- and is
capable of performing millions of calculations at once.
While electronic computers use a binary system of ones and zeroes, DNA computers
hinge on the molecule's four chemical bases and their ability to pair naturally
with one another.
Since the mid-1990s, researchers have found problems suited to DNA's quirky
calculation method -- trivial puzzles in math, logic, even chess. But as
scientists learn to more adeptly manipulate the molecule, they speculate that
even more applications will emerge, although it is doubtful that DNA computers
will ever be doing your taxes.

   Mug shots

   DNA is an important, if limited, crime-fighting tool capable of identifying a
suspect by matching one genetic sample to another. But what if it could tell
police that their suspect was a white male with red hair, blue eyes and a cleft
chin?
It is not yet possible to generate a sketch from a scrap of DNA. But by
comparing the DNA of hundreds of people, scientists have found patterns that are
leading to genetic tests for hair color, eye color and even ethnicity. Other
researchers, meanwhile, are working to find markers for bone structure.
The tests are bound to be controversial. Civil libertarians worry that the
technique will lead to gross invasions of privacy. Some scientists argue that
the strategy is a dead end, that it's impossible to divine a person's appearance
from DNA. But British police have solved crimes with the technique and think it
may become the ultimate eyewitness.

   Designer bugs
Scientists announced last year that they had created the polio virus by
stitching together snippets of DNA obtained through a mail-order supply company.

Experts wonder whether the capability of creating new life forms is not far
behind. Millionaire molecular biologist Craig Venter has embarked on an effort
to build a bug from scratch using Mycoplasma genitalium, a bacterium that lives
in human genital tracts, as a starting point.
Scientists are debating the usefulness of custom-made microbes. Some worry that
terrorists could unleash unstoppable killer bugs. But Venter and others argue
that the science will result in microbes that suck greenhouse gasses from the
atmosphere, excrete hydrogen fuel or destroy toxic waste.
Modified babies?

   Doctors helping parents conceive a child through in-vitro fertilization are
screening embryos for genetic defects, and some fertility clinics offer
prospective parents the opportunity to choose the sex of their baby before the
fertilized embryo is implanted in the mother's womb. A Colorado couple recently
gave birth to a son chosen through genetic screening so he could provide bone
marrow to his older sister, who has a rare genetic disease. Some think, or
worry, that engineering the DNA of offspring for desirable traits is only a
short step further. Nobel laureate James D. Watson, whose co-discovery of DNA's
structure launched the genetics revolution, has asked: "If we could make better
human beings by knowing how to add genes, why shouldn't we?"

   Text by Michael Stroh and Timothy B. Wheeler Graphics by Denise Murray

   The path to the double helix - and beyond

   1865 Experimenting with common garden peas, Austrian monk Gregor Mendel shows
how traits like color and height are passed from one generation to the next.

   1869 Swiss scientist Fredrich Miescher discovers DNA what he calls "nuclein"
-- in human pus from hospital bandages.

   1904 The term genetics is first used in a letter written by biologist William
Bateson, an early proponent of Mendel's ideas.

   1909 Danish botanist Wilhelm Johannsen coins the word gene to describe the
Mendelian units of heredity. The Word derives thom the Greek genos, meaning
"birth".

   1910-1913 Studying genetic mutations in fruit flies, embryologist Thomas Hunt
Morgan shows that genes are carried on chromosomes, a finding that earns him a
Nobel Prize.

   1944 Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty show that DNA not
protein, as many scientist s thought --carries hereditary information.

   1953 On Feb. 28, American biologist James Watson and British physicist
Francis Crick deduce that the three-dimensional structure of DNA is a pair of
intertwined spirals -- a "double helix."

   1961-1963 Crick and other scientists begin to map how DNA's sequence dictates
the creation of certain proteins.

   1968 Hamilton O. Smith and others lay the foundation for modern genetic
engineering by discovering that -restriction enzymes" can slice DNA into
snippets.

   1972 Paul Berg and others splice together DNA fragments from different
organisms, sparking heated debate over the safety of "recombinant DNA."

   1978 Genentech, the first genetic engineering company, develops the first
recombinant DNA drug, human insulin.

   1980 U.S. Supreme Court rules that genetically modified organisms can be
patented. General Electric Co. gets first such patent, for a bacterium designed
to clean up oil spills.

   1981 First "transgenic" creatures created when scientists insert foreign
genes into the DNA of mice and fruit flies.

   1983 First disease gene mapped. Huntington's disease is traced to a mutation
on chromosome 4.

   1990 The Human Genome Project gets under way. Primary goal: to decode all 3.2
billion chemical building blocks of DNA and map the genes.

   1990 First gene therapy, on a 4-year-old girl with inherited Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).

   1994 The Food and Drug Administration approves the first genetically modified
food -- the Flavr Savr tomato, engineered to stay firm longer.

   2000 NIH and Celera Geneomics, a Maryland biotechnology firm, announce
completed drafts of the entire human genome.

   2003 Final human genome to be published in April.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / ILLUSTRATION(S), 1. James D. Watson, 74, has been president
of New York's Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory since 1994. His pursuits have
centered on mapping the human genome.; 2. Francis H.C. Crick, 86, recently
published yet another paper. His studies have included the origins of life and
the scientific basis for human consciousness.; 3. (DNA STRUCTURE SIMULATION); 4.
(FINGERPRINT); 1. Newsday; 2. Associated Press File; 3. - 4. Graphics by Denise
Murray

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2003


                             862 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                    February 24, 2003 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Pg. F04

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: Ask Dr. H / Not all emphysema cases are caused by exposure to smoke

BYLINE: By Mitchell Hecht; Knight Ridder News Service

BODY:

   My mother gradually has become more short of breath for several years. Tests
by a lung specialist indicate she has emphysema. We're all very surprised,
because my mother and father never smoked a day in their lives. Can you explain?

   While it's true that smoking or prolonged exposure to second-hand smoke is
responsible for most emphysema, 10 percent of folks with emphysema never or
rarely came in prolonged contact with smoke.

   How does that happen? We know that the normal healthy lung has a remarkable
balance between enzymes that dissolve white blood cells and bacteria that
accumulate in the lungs and other enzymes that neutralize those enzymes.

   When this balance between the "cleanser" enzymes and the neutralizing enzymes
is disrupted, the lungs lose their ability to protect themselves against their
own destruction. The lung tissue has a system of elastic fibers that allow the
lung to expand and then move air out. Damage to the elastic lung tissue
constitutes emphysema.

   Smoking and prolonged exposure to smoke are the biggest culprits in
disrupting the healthy balance of enzymes. But there are other possible causes:
Exposure to air pollution for many years is one suspected cause. Workplace
exposure to noxious fumes and dust is another.

   The most common cause for emphysema in a person without obvious risk factors
is an inherited defect in the level of the "neutralizing" enzyme known as
"alpha-1 antitrypsin." In sufficient amounts, this enzyme protects lung and
liver tissue. A deficiency results in a premature destruction of the delicate
lung sacs where oxygen/carbon-dioxide gas exchange occurs, and it also may cause
a form of cirrhosis of the liver.

   The onset of this form of emphysema is between 35 and 45 years of age, as
opposed to smoking-related emphysema that develops some 20 to 25 years later. A
clue to a deficiency of alpha-1 antitrypsin as the cause is a family history of
premature emphysema.

   The enzyme's level can be measured through a simple blood test, and it can be
replaced through weekly intravenous infusions. The further along the emphysema
is, the less enzyme replacement will help.

   There are other, far rarer causes for emphysema, including HIV infection,
inherited connective-tissue disease such as Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,
intravenous drug abuse, and years of malnutrition.

   Some resources: The National Emphysema Foundation (http://emphysemafoundation

   org) and the Alpha-1 National Association (1-800-521-3025).

    My 6-month-old niece was recently diagnosed with a rare incurable disease
called Pompe disease. The doctors say that her life expectancy is less than
three years. Can you tell me what this disease is? What causes it? Is there any
hope for a cure?

   Pompe disease is a very rare inherited disease. In the United States, it
occurs in only one in every 100,000 births.

   In order for a child to be born with it, both parents have to be silent
carriers for the disease, each having a gene for it. That is, the parents don't
have the disease, only the gene. If one parent lacks the defective gene, Pompe
disease will not occur.

   Pompe is one of several diseases that stem from a genetically inherited
defect of an enzyme that breaks down animal starch (glycogen) into sugar. Cells
use sugar for energy. When cells break down glycogen into glucose fuel, the
buildup of waste material is normally cleaned up by cell components known as
lysosomes. They're like the vacuum cleaners of every cell, keeping the cell
clean and uncluttered inside. Absence of this enzyme results in excess
glycogen's building up in the cells as waste. Eventually, all that waste kills
the muscle cell. Since the cells in children with Pompe lack the ability to
readily break down glycogen into glucose sugar for energy, the cells are
essentially lacking in fuel.

   The cells that are most notably affected are in the heart, skeletal
(especially limbs), and breathing (diaphragm) muscles. Early on, by the time the
baby is observed to have weak arms and legs, the heart muscle is already
severely damaged and enlarged. Eventually, the heart and muscles used for
breathing weaken to the point where the child can't survive. Since this affects
every muscle cell in the body, it's devastating.

   The most promising research in Pompe disease is using gene therapy to get the
body to produce the missing enzyme.

   Y.T. Chen of Duke University is leading the fight to produce a treatment.
Early identification of a child with Pompe disease is difficult but critical to
saving the child's life. By the time the diagnosis is made, much of the muscle
damage, particularly of the heart, is irreversible.

   The Web site http://www

   Mitchell Hecht is a physician specializing in internal medicine. Send
questions to: Ask Dr. H, Box 767787, Atlanta, Ga. 30076. Due to the volume of
mail, personal replies are not possible.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2003


                             863 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    February 24, 2003 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg.A-6

LENGTH: 1357 words

HEADLINE: 'ASTONISHING REVELATION';
 50 YEARS AGO, TWO BIOLOGISTS BROKE THE CODE TO THE SECRET OF LIFE

BYLINE: MALCOLM RITTER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   Fifty years ago, on a foggy Saturday morning in Cambridge, England, a
24-year-old beanpole of an American scientist sat down with a few white
cardboard cutouts and set off a revolution in biology.

    The cutouts, about the size of teacup saucers, looked basically like an
elementary school geometry project: Some were hexagons, others looked like a
hexagon with a pentagon attached.

    But to James Watson, who'd created them the night before, they represented
fragments of the mysterious molecule that obsessed him and his collaborator
Francis Crick: deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as DNA.

    It wasn't yet clear to scientists whether DNA was the stuff of genes. But
Watson and Crick thought it was, and for about 18 months, off and on, they had
been trying to figure out the three-dimensional structure of the DNA molecule.

    "It seemed to us it had to be the secret of life," Watson recalled recently.
"We thought it was the most important problem to solve if you were a biologist."

    As he worked in the lab at Cambridge University, he knew he had to be close.

    The cardboard cutouts represented the four kinds of "bases" found in the DNA
molecule. Bases are part of the basic building blocks of DNA, and somehow they
had to pair up in a way that would nestle smoothly in the overall structure. But
how?

    It wasn't just a matter of jamming the cardboard polygons together; the real
bases would bond only via hydrogen atoms that Watson portrayed with little
sticks protruding from the cutouts.

    As he switched the shapes around on his desk, he suddenly saw the answer: a
scheme that gave him two identically shaped pairs.

    His first reaction: "It's so beautiful."

    Nowadays, even high school biology students know what Watson and, soon
thereafter, Crick realized on that day:

    The DNA molecule is a double helix, resembling a ladder that's been twisted
along its length. Each "rung" is made up of two bases, paired according to the
rule that jumped out at Watson from his desktop. These bases provide the genetic
code; just as a four-letter alphabet could spell out words, the sequence of the
four kinds of bases along the length of the DNA molecule spells out the
information stored in genes.

    The finding unleashed a torrent of research into DNA that's still going on,
both to understand how it works and to put it to use. Many of today's scientific
headlines -- the deciphering of the DNA of humans and other species, the
transplant-ing of genes into animals and crops to change their traits, the use
of gene therapy to treat disease, the DNA evidence that exonerates people
imprisoned unjustly -- ultimately came from the double helix discovery.

    The 50th anniversary of the finding is being widely celebrated this year by
high-profile scientific journals and conferences in the United States, Europe
and Australia. There's even a black-tie dinner on Friday -- the actual
anniversary -- at New York's Waldorf-Astoria, hosted by several scientific
institutions.

    All in all, it's a heady legacy for a couple of reseachers who knew little
chemistry and never did an experiment to reach their goal. Instead, they used
research from others to guide them in building models that resembled Tinker Toy
creations.

    Watson, a Chicago native who'd abandoned zoology in college after a book got
him excited about genetics, arrived in Cambridge in 1951 at age 23. There he met
Crick, 12 years older, an ebullient physicist by training, who had a booming
laugh. Soon the two men were sharing lunch almost every day; their colleagues
eventually gave them a room together so they could talk without disturbing
anybody else.

    Not only did their interests coincide, Crick wrote later, but they shared "a
certain youthful arrogance, a ruthlessness, and an impatience with sloppy
thinking."

    "Neither of us had a big ego ... we just wanted to get the answer," recalled
Watson, now 74 and president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in Cold
Spring, N.Y.

    In this drive to the goal, he said in an interview, "Francis was brains ...
I was the emotion."

    But both of them could learn from the experimental results of others.
Crucially, they benefited from work by chemist Rosalind Franklin of King's
College in London. She had investigated the shape of DNA molecules by bombarding
them with X-rays and tracking how the rays scattered.

    Franklin found strong evidence of a helix structure. But she died of ovarian
cancer in 1958 at age 37 before she could have shared in the Nobel Prize.

    So why was there a Nobel Prize at all? Why was this discovery such a big
deal?

    "It was an astonishing revelation," says George Washington University
historian Horace Freeland Judson, who is editing a collection of Crick's
scientific papers. "It made brilliantly clear, instantly, how genes worked in
principle."

    What's more, says Yale historian Daniel Kevles, it made a strong case that
DNA was indeed the stuff of genes. In fact, the structure plainly suggested the
answer to one basic question about genes: How do they copy themselves so they
can be inherited?

    When they announced their discovery to the world in April 1953, Watson and
Crick acknowledged that implication with one of the most famous sentences in
scientific literature: "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing
we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the
genetic material."

    It sure does. The pairing scheme that Watson saw on his desktop was shown
within a few years to be key to how genes replicate themselves. The ladder-like
DNA molecule splits lengthwise, cutting each rung in half and exposing each base
to the chemical soup. Then each exposed base pairs off with the same kind of
partner as before. Result: two identical DNA molecules.

    The structure also gave scientists a starting point to attack the other big
question about genes: How do they direct the moment-to-moment production of
proteins in cells?

    Scientists eventually discovered that molecules of a DNA-like substance
called RNA carry instructions from genes to the cell's protein-making machinery.
By the mid-1960s, they'd identified the "words" in the DNA code that ordered
specific building blocks for proteins.

    At the time Watson and Crick revealed their discovery, however, its
significance was largely overlooked.

    "It was like a tree falling in the middle of the forest. It had no impact,"
recalled Alex Rich, who was studying DNA at the California Institute of
Technology when he heard the news, and is now a biophysics professor at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

    "Most places just ignored it," Rich said, in part for lack of interest in
DNA and because of skepticism over what was, after all, just a hypothesis.

    Excitement about the discovery didn't really build up until the late 1950s,
after scientists showed that DNA replicates itself the way Watson and Crick
suggested, and other experiments began to sketch out its involvement in making
proteins.

    The DNA story is far from over. Scientists are still working out the details
of how DNA is replicated so quickly and accurately -- an astonishing feat, since
each human cell contains billions of base pairs lined up along nearly six feet
of DNA, all packed into a nucleus only one-twentieth the width of a human hair.

    Scientists are also exploring the use of DNA as a building material for
making vanishingly tiny devices and powerful computers.

    Crick, now 86, is president emeritus at the Salk Institute for Biological
Studies in San Diego and has turned to exploring the biology of consciousness.

    Watson, who served as an early leader of the massive government project to
map all the human genes, says the biggest questions nowadays in molecular
biology -- the field he and Crick helped found -- lie in the brain.

    "How are instincts inherited? ... How is information stored in the brain,
whether it's your memory of a face or some sort of instinctive act? How does the
brain tell the lion to kill?

    "No one knows enough about the organization of the brain to come up with an
answer," Watson said. "Brain research doesn't yet have its double helix."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: 2002 photo; James Watson
 PHOTO: : 1989 photo; Francis Crick
 PHOTO: James D. Watson Collection: James Watson, right, and Francis Crick at
Cambridge University in the 1950s.
 INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: N. Rapp R. Morris/Associated Press: National Human
Genome Research Institute: (Seeing the structure of DNA)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2003


                             864 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    February 24, 2003 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg.A-6

LENGTH: 1357 words

HEADLINE: 'ASTONISHING REVELATION';
 50 YEARS AGO, TWO BIOLOGISTS BROKE THE CODE TO THE SECRET OF LIFE

BYLINE: MALCOLM RITTER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   Fifty years ago, on a foggy Saturday morning in Cambridge, England, a
24-year-old beanpole of an American scientist sat down with a few white
cardboard cutouts and set off a revolution in biology.

    The cutouts, about the size of teacup saucers, looked basically like an
elementary school geometry project: Some were hexagons, others looked like a
hexagon with a pentagon attached.

    But to James Watson, who'd created them the night before, they represented
fragments of the mysterious molecule that obsessed him and his collaborator
Francis Crick: deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as DNA.

    It wasn't yet clear to scientists whether DNA was the stuff of genes. But
Watson and Crick thought it was, and for about 18 months, off and on, they had
been trying to figure out the three-dimensional structure of the DNA molecule.

    "It seemed to us it had to be the secret of life," Watson recalled recently.
"We thought it was the most important problem to solve if you were a biologist."

    As he worked in the lab at Cambridge University, he knew he had to be close.

    The cardboard cutouts represented the four kinds of "bases" found in the DNA
molecule. Bases are part of the basic building blocks of DNA, and somehow they
had to pair up in a way that would nestle smoothly in the overall structure. But
how?

    It wasn't just a matter of jamming the cardboard polygons together; the real
bases would bond only via hydrogen atoms that Watson portrayed with little
sticks protruding from the cutouts.

    As he switched the shapes around on his desk, he suddenly saw the answer: a
scheme that gave him two identically shaped pairs.

    His first reaction: "It's so beautiful."

    Nowadays, even high school biology students know what Watson and, soon
thereafter, Crick realized on that day:

    The DNA molecule is a double helix, resembling a ladder that's been twisted
along its length. Each "rung" is made up of two bases, paired according to the
rule that jumped out at Watson from his desktop. These bases provide the genetic
code; just as a four-letter alphabet could spell out words, the sequence of the
four kinds of bases along the length of the DNA molecule spells out the
information stored in genes.

    The finding unleashed a torrent of research into DNA that's still going on,
both to understand how it works and to put it to use. Many of today's scientific
headlines -- the deciphering of the DNA of humans and other species, the
transplant-ing of genes into animals and crops to change their traits, the use
of gene therapy to treat disease, the DNA evidence that exonerates people
imprisoned unjustly -- ultimately came from the double helix discovery.

    The 50th anniversary of the finding is being widely celebrated this year by
high-profile scientific journals and conferences in the United States, Europe
and Australia. There's even a black-tie dinner on Friday -- the actual
anniversary -- at New York's Waldorf-Astoria, hosted by several scientific
institutions.

    All in all, it's a heady legacy for a couple of reseachers who knew little
chemistry and never did an experiment to reach their goal. Instead, they used
research from others to guide them in building models that resembled Tinker Toy
creations.

    Watson, a Chicago native who'd abandoned zoology in college after a book got
him excited about genetics, arrived in Cambridge in 1951 at age 23. There he met
Crick, 12 years older, an ebullient physicist by training, who had a booming
laugh. Soon the two men were sharing lunch almost every day; their colleagues
eventually gave them a room together so they could talk without disturbing
anybody else.

    Not only did their interests coincide, Crick wrote later, but they shared "a
certain youthful arrogance, a ruthlessness, and an impatience with sloppy
thinking."

    "Neither of us had a big ego ... we just wanted to get the answer," recalled
Watson, now 74 and president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in Cold
Spring, N.Y.

    In this drive to the goal, he said in an interview, "Francis was brains ...
I was the emotion."

    But both of them could learn from the experimental results of others.
Crucially, they benefited from work by chemist Rosalind Franklin of King's
College in London. She had investigated the shape of DNA molecules by bombarding
them with X-rays and tracking how the rays scattered.

    Franklin found strong evidence of a helix structure. But she died of ovarian
cancer in 1958 at age 37 before she could have shared in the Nobel Prize.

    So why was there a Nobel Prize at all? Why was this discovery such a big
deal?

    "It was an astonishing revelation," says George Washington University
historian Horace Freeland Judson, who is editing a collection of Crick's
scientific papers. "It made brilliantly clear, instantly, how genes worked in
principle."

    What's more, says Yale historian Daniel Kevles, it made a strong case that
DNA was indeed the stuff of genes. In fact, the structure plainly suggested the
answer to one basic question about genes: How do they copy themselves so they
can be inherited?

    When they announced their discovery to the world in April 1953, Watson and
Crick acknowledged that implication with one of the most famous sentences in
scientific literature: "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing
we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the
genetic material."

    It sure does. The pairing scheme that Watson saw on his desktop was shown
within a few years to be key to how genes replicate themselves. The ladder-like
DNA molecule splits lengthwise, cutting each rung in half and exposing each base
to the chemical soup. Then each exposed base pairs off with the same kind of
partner as before. Result: two identical DNA molecules.

    The structure also gave scientists a starting point to attack the other big
question about genes: How do they direct the moment-to-moment production of
proteins in cells?

    Scientists eventually discovered that molecules of a DNA-like substance
called RNA carry instructions from genes to the cell's protein-making machinery.
By the mid-1960s, they'd identified the "words" in the DNA code that ordered
specific building blocks for proteins.

    At the time Watson and Crick revealed their discovery, however, its
significance was largely overlooked.

    "It was like a tree falling in the middle of the forest. It had no impact,"
recalled Alex Rich, who was studying DNA at the California Institute of
Technology when he heard the news, and is now a biophysics professor at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

    "Most places just ignored it," Rich said, in part for lack of interest in
DNA and because of skepticism over what was, after all, just a hypothesis.

    Excitement about the discovery didn't really build up until the late 1950s,
after scientists showed that DNA replicates itself the way Watson and Crick
suggested, and other experiments began to sketch out its involvement in making
proteins.

    The DNA story is far from over. Scientists are still working out the details
of how DNA is replicated so quickly and accurately -- an astonishing feat, since
each human cell contains billions of base pairs lined up along nearly six feet
of DNA, all packed into a nucleus only one-twentieth the width of a human hair.

    Scientists are also exploring the use of DNA as a building material for
making vanishingly tiny devices and powerful computers.

    Crick, now 86, is president emeritus at the Salk Institute for Biological
Studies in San Diego and has turned to exploring the biology of consciousness.

    Watson, who served as an early leader of the massive government project to
map all the human genes, says the biggest questions nowadays in molecular
biology -- the field he and Crick helped found -- lie in the brain.

    "How are instincts inherited? ... How is information stored in the brain,
whether it's your memory of a face or some sort of instinctive act? How does the
brain tell the lion to kill?

    "No one knows enough about the organization of the brain to come up with an
answer," Watson said. "Brain research doesn't yet have its double helix."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: 2002 photo; James Watson
 PHOTO: : 1989 photo; Francis Crick
 PHOTO: James D. Watson Collection: James Watson, right, and Francis Crick at
Cambridge University in the 1950s.
 INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: N. Rapp R. Morris/Associated Press: National Human
Genome Research Institute: (Seeing the structure of DNA)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2003


                             865 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 24, 2003, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1427 words

HEADLINE: Double helix unlocked key to life

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

BODY:
'Francis and I were real soul mates' Fifty years ago this week, two brash young
scientists in an obscure lab at the University of Cambridge in England unraveled
the structure of DNA, the elegant living thread that is the genetic basis of
inheritance and evolution.

   The discovery of the double helix by James Watson, 25, and Francis Crick, 36,
on Feb. 28, 1953, unveiled what Crick called "the secret of life."

   DNA is the molecule that makes and maintains all life. It enables life to
re-create itself. It contains the blueprints and the toolbox for understanding
how humans work. Even now, researchers are exploiting these tools to turn
medicine from an uncertain science in which they treat the symptoms of disease
to one in which they attempt to find out and fix precisely what is wrong.


   "What we're learning is totally redefining medicine as I learned it," says
Donald Lindberg, director of the National Library of Medicine.

   How much DNA does it take to make, operate and maintain a human? The human
body has 10 trillion cells. Each one contains a strand of DNA that, uncoiled, is
2 yards long. If you were to place each of the 10 trillion strands end to end,
they would span the solar system. "It's absolutely remarkable that humans get
made," says Rick Young, a geneticist at MIT's Whitehead Institute.

   Understanding DNA paved the way to gene therapy, DNA fingerprinting, a cloned
sheep named Dolly, stem-cell research, genetically engineered crops, research
into human origins and evolution and DNA-based medicines.

   Understanding DNA also enabled scientists to decode the entire human genome,
the genetic blueprint that distinguishes a man from a mouse. That milestone is
scheduled to be announced in April, two years after President Clinton feted two
groups of rival scientists -- one funded by a consortium of governments, the
other by Celera, a private company -- who jointly announced in 2001 the
completion of a rough draft.

   If all goes as planned, researchers will announce the completion of the Human
Genome Project on April 14, 11 days shy of the 50th anniversary of the
publication of the DNA double helix in the British journal Nature, which noted
that DNA "has novel features which are of considerable biologic interest."

   For proof, Watson and Crick constructed a metal model of the now-famous
double helix, showing its graceful intertwined spirals and the chemicals that
hold them together. Tall as a man and jury-rigged from the precisely engineered
lab equivalent of Tinker Toys, the model gracefully answers so many questions
about how life re-creates itself that even rivals pronounced it beautiful.

   "It was the most important scientific paper of the century," says Francis
Collins, who replaced Watson as director of the National Human Genome Research
Institute, which launched the $ 3 billion Human Genome Project.

   Outside a narrow circle of geneticists, few took note of the historic
discovery. No major newspaper or magazine in 1953 gave much space to the
finding. Coverage would lag until 1962, when Nobel prizes were awarded to
Watson, Crick and Maurice Wilkins, who refined a technique for X-raying DNA.
Even then, the eminent scientist who presented the awards told reporters that
the work had "no immediate practical application."

   It would take half a century and a flurry of follow-up discoveries to lay the
cornerstones of a new foundation for the practice of medicine.

   As far as the science has come, it still has far to go. Scientists who have
sequenced the human genome say 95% remains a scientific black hole. Only a
handful of DNA-based medicines are on the market, and others are still in the
early stages of research.

   Fifty years after Watson and Crick, the work is just beginning.

   "It has taken a long time for the pot to boil," says Anthony White, CEO of
Applied Biosystems, the parent company that sponsored Celera's $ 100 million
effort to sequence the human genome. "It's starting now."

    Spellbinding story

   On a Saturday morning recently in the village of Cold Spring Harbor on Long
Island, N.Y., an aging but still brash James Watson began the first of three
lectures he was to give that day on the race to solve the structure of DNA.

   No longer a gangly youngster with a vertical nest of hair, Watson, 75, is
balding, his hair and eyebrows wild as ever. Now director of the famed Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Watson is still untamed, the shock jock of world-class
science who is known for sometimes outrageous assertions. But he has a
spellbinding story to tell.

   "I wanted to know where life came from," Watson says. "Francis and I were
real soul mates, united in wanting to explain life by means of molecules."

   The story is famous worldwide, partly through Watson's book about the
discovery, The Double Helix, which was published in 1968 by Athenaeum after it
was rejected as too controversial by Harvard University Press. A new book, DNA:
Secret of Life, is due in the spring.

   Michael Gilman, senior vice president of research at Biogen in Cambridge,
Mass., one of the world's first biotech companies, worked under Watson at Cold
Spring Harbor. In 1953, he notes, relatively few people were working seriously
on DNA.

   Now, from the window in his corner office, Gilman can point at half a dozen
genetic research centers within walking distance of his office: MIT's Whitehead
Institute, Whitehead's Human Genome Sequencing Center, the rival biotech firms
Genzyme and Amgen. Harvard is almost next door.

   The National Institutes of Health sponsors $ 1.5 billion in research in the
area annually. The San Francisco Bay Area, the Washington, D.C., metro area,
Atlanta and Research Triangle Park, N.C., also have biotech centers, as do
Canada, England, Japan and China.

   The biotech revolution stemmed from another set of discoveries in the '70s.
Researchers found they could accurately snip out genes and slip them into the
DNA of another organism so that it would make proteins Mother Nature never
intended to make.

   Untold applications await

   Next to Gilman's office is a brick building housing five 2,000-liter tanks.
Inside the tanks are billions of Chinese hamster ovary cells, reprogrammed to
make therapeutic human proteins on an industrial scale. In Research Triangle
Park, Biogen has six 15,000-liter tanks.

   Biotechnology means that insulin no longer must be extracted from pigs or
growth hormone from human cadavers, which were sometimes tainted with prions,
the proteins that cause the dementia-causing disease Creutzfeldt-Jacob syndrome.
Clotting factors used to treat hemophilia are no longer drawn from human plasma,
and they no longer transmit HIV.

   In the world of genetics, biotechnology is old news. What's new is the amount
of data being mined from the human genome -- and the computing revolution
enables scientists to analyze it, figuring out the functions of crucial genes
and their links to human illness. "It's beyond even the brightest scientist's
ability to assimilate all this new information," MIT's Young says.

   Gene sequencing has gone industrial. GenBank, the genome project's repository
of genetic sequences, now has 30 billion units of genetic code. The total is
doubling every 14 months.

   "Who's responsible for this explosion of information?" asks Eric Lander, head
of the Whitehead Institute's Human Genome Sequencing Center. "The DNA molecule
itself, because it packs so much information that it unleashed all the forces of
science, economics and competition" among researchers and drug firms seeking to
mine DNA for scientific breakthroughs.

   The genetic and computer revolutions have merged in even a more concrete way:
the DNA microarray, a marriage of DNA with the silicon chip. Invented by a
research team at Stanford University and brought to market by companies such as
Affymetrix, DNA chips now may contain half a million synthetic pieces of DNA,
adding up to 10,000 genes.

   Using DNA chips, researchers can study which genes are turned on and which
are turned off in normal and abnormal cells. Studying these patterns of gene
expression, scientists can figure out where a tumor cell has gone wrong.
Someday, doctors hope to use that information to diagnose illnesses before
symptoms appear and treat them on a molecular level.

   Even Watson marvels at how the double helix has changed the world. "We didn't
envision any consequence," he says, "except knowledge."

   ---

   Contributing: Susan O'Brian

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Miriam Chua, Cold Springs Harbor Lab; PHOTO, Color, Mark
Lieberman, Salk Institute, via AP; PHOTO, B/W, Pierre Perrin, Corbis Sygma;
Genius at work: Francis Crick, left, and James Watson discovered DNA's
distinctive double helix on Feb. 28, 1953. The anniversary will be celebrated
worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2003


                             866 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 24, 2003, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 803 words

HEADLINE: Elusive gene therapy forges on

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:
The concept for gene therapy is elegantly and deceptively simple: Replace a
defective gene with a healthy one and cure a disease.

   But this relatively young prodigy of the genetic revolution that began 50
years ago has been a source of both hope and heartache for scientists.

   Hope because of its promise for treating everything from Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's disease to baldness, obesity, AIDS, diabetes, heart disease and
cancer.

   Heartache because after more than a decade of human studies, gene therapy has
proven to be stubborn, elusive and at times catastrophically disappointing.


   Even so, this remains one of the most dynamic areas of genetic research and
could yet live up to its potential. Since the National Institutes of Health
conducted the first gene therapy procedure in 1990, more than 4,000 patients
have been treated worldwide in about 500 studies.

   And scientists have recently expanded the range of gene therapy to turn cells
into drug factories by adding genes that make specific substances, such as
insulin for diabetes.

   Gene therapy is similar to the space program in difficulty and danger, says
Inder Verma, gene therapy pioneer at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif. Just
as NASA must meet the challenges of reaching outer space, gene therapy
researchers must journey to the inner space of a human cell.

   "The advantage the space program has is (engineers) know the principles of
how to travel in outer space, but we do not know the principles of the entities
we are dealing with," Verma says. "To travel into the inner space of a cell, you
have to enter an outer and inner membrane of the cell wall, then move through a
morass of cytoplasm (cellular fluid) and past hundreds of organelles
(specialized cellular parts), then through an outer membrane of the nucleus and
an inner membrane, then finally into the genome."

   Transporting genes into this inner space remains the most significant
challenge, says Joseph Glorioso, president of the American Society of Gene
Therapy. The space shuttles of gene therapy are viruses, which thanks to a
billion years of evolution possess the perfect molecular machinery for
delivering DNA directly into the nucleus of a cell through infection. To
transform a virus into a shuttle for therapy, scientists remove the parts that
cause disease and keep the infection hardware.

   The problem is that the human immune system attacks viruses, including
harmless ones modified for therapy. "I can't see any areas of human health where
gene therapy cannot make a contribution," Verma says. "But the question comes
down to how to put genes back into a cell."

   The early excitement over gene therapy changed to frustration as scientists
discovered that their therapies were being wiped out by their patients' immune
system responses to the viruses. Usually patients suffered only a mild fever and
chills as their immune systems jumped into gear. But after nine years of trying
to outwit the immune system, gene therapy's equivalent of the space shuttle
Challenger disaster occurred on Sept. 18, 1999.

   Scientists at the University of Pennsylvania injected very high doses of
gene-laden viruses to overwhelm a patient's immune response. The patient,
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, died from an immune response similar to toxic shock
syndrome.

   The death sent researchers back to the drawing board, and the lessons learned
resulted in significant changes in the way research is conducted, Glorioso says.
Soon after, the field claimed its first unequivocal successes with experiments
that began in 2000 that fully restored the immune systems of nine of 11 boys
with severe immune system deficiencies.

   Then came the equivalent of the Columbia disaster.

   Gene therapy scientists had feared that the genes delivered into a person's
cells might land in the wrong spot in the genetic code and accidentally activate
genes that lead to cancer. The scenario was considered unlikely. But within two
years of the successes in the boys, two of them developed a form of leukemia
because the gene therapy had activated a cancer-causing gene.

   "It was really a surprise and a disappointment, and it caused the medical and
scientific community to launch an all-out effort to understand the basis of this
event and to begin to think about ways to circumvent the problem," Glorioso
says.

   He says that despite the setbacks, the field has made steady progress. The
field is remarkably young when compared with the 30 years commonly required to
develop other medical treatments, such as organ transplantation.

   "We have come such a long way since 1990, and it has been a worldwide effort
involving thousands of scientists," Glorioso says. "We will begin to see the
fruits of that effort in about five years."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Peter Dejong, AP; PHOTO, B/W, AP; Tragic ending: Jesse
Gelsinger died in an experimental gene therapy study on Sept. 18, 1999. Success
story: Wilco Conradi, who is nearly 3, visits the monkeys at the Artis Zoo in
Amsterdam. Wilco was among the first to receive experimental gene therapy for
his defective immune system and now is able to lead a normal life.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2003


                             867 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2003 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                            February 23, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL

LENGTH: 2088 words

HEADLINE: Special services for medical care abound in cities Growth of
specialization keeps pace with region's expansion, experts say

BYLINE: BY TRACIE DUNGAN ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   SPRINGDALE - The availability of medical specialty services in Northwest
Arkansas has increased adequately as the area's population has grown,
particularly for an area its size that lacks a teaching hospital, observers say.

   Recognizing a nationwide shortage of physicians who specialize in the care of
the elderly, medical providers in Northwest Arkansas have increased geriatric
services in the last few years along with cardiology care and other specialties.

   Continued attention to older adults will be needed as the population
continues to grow, as will services that focus more on the area's Hispanic
residents, some believe.

   Like the rest of Arkansas, its Northwest corner is facing a gap in mental
health-care services.

   Overall, those who monitor health care say the region has responded well to
its growing needs.

   For an area that has been viewed as relatively isolated, Washington and
Benton counties have managed to develop just about every kind of medical
specialty in roughly the last decade, said the Arkansas Medical Society's Lynn
Zeno.

   "They can meet the needs from neonatal intensive care through cardiac care
and geriatric care," said Zeno, the group's governmental affairs director. "They
cover the waterfront from birth to death."

   The Arkansas Hospital Association's Paul Cunningham agrees, saying he's
noticed dramatic growth in specialty services in the area during the past 10
years.

   "That whole corridor up there - from Fayetteville to Springdale to Rogers and
Bentonville - they probably have as many specialties as any other metropolitan
area of that size in the country," said Cunningham, who serves his association
as senior vice president.

   As Zeno put it: "The growth has pretty much mirrored the growth of the area."

   Cunningham was among medical observers who point to the opening of Northwest
Arkansas Radiation Therapy Institute in Springdale in October 1985 as a turning
point for the region.

   Before NARTI's existence, many patients needing radiation therapy traveled to
Little Rock's Central Arkansas Radiation Therapy Institute for treatment,
Cunningham noted.

   The two-county area has become the regional heart care center for a
multicounty area that includes Carroll and Madison counties as well as counties
in southern Missouri and eastern Oklahoma, Zeno noted.

   This time last year area cardiologists and others told the Arkansas
Democrat-Gazette they were concerned there was too much heart-care coverage.
Their fear concerned whether the area could adequately support four open heart
surgery programs.

   The state's only teaching hospital, the University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, is based in Little Rock but serves all of Arkansas, officials there
said.

   UAMS spokesman Leslie Taylor noted that its Multiple Myeloma Institute -
myeloma is a rare form of bone cancer - is the only such center in the world and
its Arkansas Cancer Research Center is the only one in the state. But she
emphasized that Northwest Arkansas couldn't be expected to house some
specialties, such as transplant surgery, that require a nearby teaching hospital
and/or a large metropolitan population base.

   "We have some specialized care here - this doesn't mean you have substandard
care in Northwest Arkansas," Taylor said.

   "We are the only academic medical care center in the state, but we belong to
the state of Arkansas," she said, adding that UAMS trains more than 80 percent
of the state's doctors. Doctors in the state refer patients to the UAMS campus
when highly specialized care is required.

   "In other words, it's a partnership with the physicians in the communities
outside of Arkansas," Taylor said.

   UAMS operates seven Area Health Education Centers in the state, including one
in Fayetteville. The others are located in Pine Bluff, El Dorado, Texarkana,
Fort Smith, Jonesboro and Helena.

   The centers began in the 1970s as a way to train physicians, especially those
devoted to family care, said UAMS Chancellor I. Dodd Wilson.

   Closer to its home base, the medical school is well known for its Donald W.
Reynolds Center on Aging and its Harvey and Bernice Jones Eye Institute.

   The medical center has strong ties to Arkansas Children's Hospital as well.
The vast majority of children treated there are cared for by UAMS faculty,
Wilson said. And there is nothing else in Arkansas comparable to the Children's
Hospital burn unit, which treats children and adults, he noted.

   Wilson doesn't foresee an increased UAMS presence in Northwest Arkansas,
however, because of the medical school's mission.

   "We have a very big research component: That's what really helps you change
the world," he said.

   UAMS' 46 different residencies in various specialties of medicine require a
sufficient population base for the doctors to treat the patients in each
specialty well and for the medical students to learn, he said.

   "We use our medical care as a means to an end," Wilson said. "We have enough
patients where we are now."

   The medical center also maintains a strong presence in Northwest Arkansas
through a long list of clinics and services, the chancellor said.

   In April 2002, UAMS' Reynolds Center on Aging and its Northwest Arkansas
education center partnered with Northwest Health System of Washington and Benton
counties in opening the Schmieding Center for Senior Health and Education in
Springdale.

   Lawrence H. Schmieding donated some $15 million for the center's creation.
His inspiration: the difficulty he had finding caregivers to help his gravely
ill brother, who wished to continue living at home.

   UAMS eventually plans to have six more such satellite centers for senior
health and education around the state, officials said, with the help of $2
million annually in tobacco settlement funds earmarked for the Arkansas Aging
Initiative.

   Northwest Health System also provides senior health centers in Bella Vista,
Bentonville and Fayetteville, said Tami Hutchison, the system's senior vice
president of development. Of the area's three medical systems, Northwest Health
is only one offering such centers, she added.

   The system dove into the care of older adults beginning in 1996, when it
opened the first senior center at Bates Medical Center, system spokesman Terri
Kirkland said. That center moved to its current Bella Vista site in 1998 and
plans to open a new one in the fall.

   Three years ago, the system added a center in Springdale and in 2002 it added
locations in Fayetteville and Bentonville, Hutchison said.

   Northwest Health is the only area system with fellowshiptrained geriatrician
physicians, Hutchison said. The system had three such specialists in August 2001
and is now recruiting its ninth.

   "That's not just a unique level of commitment for Northwest Arkansas, that's
a unique level of commitment nationally," Hutchison said.

   Many local older adults are still cared for by primary care physicians, but a
geriatric specialist typically spends four to five times more time with the
patient, she said.

   On that first visit, the patient may walk in with a grocery sack full of
medications so the specialist can take inventory and evaluate whether a better,
more efficient or less costly drug regimen is needed, Hutchison said. The senior
centers also offer social workers, provide space for family caregivers and offer
lower exam tables "instead of making older adults jump up to an exam table," she
said.

   After completing a residency in internal medicine or family medicine, the
geriatrician completes one to two years of specialty training.

   At Mercy Health System of Northwest Arkansas, Eric Pianalto has seen the
medical clinics division grow by about 25 doctors during his six years there.
Pianalto, the clinics division's chief administrative officer, said that once
the division's need for primary care physicians was met, it began to focus more
on attracting subspecialties, particularly cardiology care. Officials also
worked with independent clinics throughout the area to recruit specialists in
orthopedics, anesthesiology and cardiovascular surgery that are not part of
Mercy's clinics.

   Mercy's 12 clinics in Rogers, Bentonville, Bella Vista, Lowell and Pea Ridge
today have about 65 physicians, he said.

   It's a given that adding specialties can be costly when it comes to adding
new lab equipment, but even things like adding computer support for the new
specialty or for incoming doctors can be complicated and labor-intensive, said
Becky Magee, vice president and chief information technology officer for
Washington Regional Medical Center.

   Tailoring new computers for newly recruited doctors can require a lead time
ranging from 60 days to six months, depending on the specialty and on the
specialist.

   Magee will interview the physicians to find out how they treat patients and
what kinds of paperwork, lab results and other kinds of documentation they need
to see during the course of treatment, and at what stage of treatment they
prefer to see it. The cost for such computer automation depends on whether the
hospital is adding doctors to an existing specialty or adding a new specialty
altogether.

   "If it's a tool we have, it's not going to cost anything to set it up for a
physician," she said, except employee time.

   "If it's a new specialty we as a hospital have never supported before ...
expenses can be a quarter million dollars up," Magee said.

   Computerized equipment actually needed for lab work might cost anywhere from
$35,000 to $50,000, she said, although higher end items such as CAT scans - or
computerized assisted tomography - can run about $1 million. "We as a hospital
work collaboratively with the specialist physician always: They are the director
over that patient's care," Magee said, adding that Washington Regional is the
only notfor-profit, privately owned hospital in Northwest Arkansas.

   "We look to their leadership for the care that's needed, and that also goes
for the equipment," she said. "We at the hospital do not dictate to a doctor
what they end up with."

   More specialties provide not just better patient care, but more opportunities
for medical research.

   Washington Regional has for years partnered with other entities in medical
research, and one of its research arms eventually spun off into the independent,
nonprofit Arkansas Institute for Research and Education, also known as AIRE.

   Before 1994, the medical research institute was part of the hospital, said
AIRE's executive director, Anne Courtney-Eighmy. For the next eight years, her
agency worked with but apart from Washington Regional in partnering with other
health systems and the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville campus, on
research initiatives.

   In 2002, the research institute was officially founded, Courtney-Eighmy said.

   Using an initial grant of $3 million from Pat and Willard Walker, AIRE has
worked with Washington Regional and the Walker Family Heart and Vascular
Institute.

   The work has included a heart attack study, in which AIRE conducts clinical
trials using willing heart patients. The study involves partnerships with area
cardiologists, Northwest Health System and Washington Regional Medical System.

   AIRE's partnerships with the Fayetteville campus have included a "joint core
data lab" that designs and collects data for original research studies, the
pairing of academic investigators with clinical investigators from area
hospitals and clinics, and a 1998 "Pre-Hospital Heart Attack Treatment Study"
that involved the use of clot-busting drugs and primary angioplasty in the
ambulance.

   "Once a heart attack starts, literally every minute heart cells are dying,"
Courtney-Eighmy said. By introducing treatment before the patient arrived at the
hospital, UA, Central EMS, Washington Regional and AIRE were able to collect
enough data to present findings twice at international heart conferences. Other
AIRE partners include the Fayetteville Area Health Education Center, North
Carolina's Duke University and the Cleveland Clinic, she said.

   Courtney-Eighmy is particularly excited about her institute's work at
Washington Regional with an experimental form of gene therapy known as coronary
artery angiogenesis.

   In another five or so years, the therapy could benefit heart patients
ineligible for traditional bypass surgery because of risky medical conditions or
previous bypasses. Northwest Arkansas is one of the few places in the country
offering this experimental treatment, Courtney-Eighmy said.

   The procedure allows physicians to grow new heart vessels - spidery little
veins around a patient's heart blockage.

   "It's kind of like grow your own bypass," she said.

   This article was published 2/23/2003

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2005


                             868 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    February 21, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 786 words

BODY:

   Richard Stockton scored 70 points the other night in a game against the
College of New Jersey, a stupendous performance diminished perhaps significantly
by the fact that Richard Stockton is the name of a school rather than of a
person.

    I mean I know a Dick Stockton, but I doubt they've named a college after
him.

    In the aforementioned contest, Stockton's 70 were not enough as the Dicks
fell to the College of New Jersey's Fighting Carcinogens, 73-70, but it was just
part of yet another instance in which I got all excited poring over the college
basketball scores for all the wrong reasons.

    A guy named Morris Brown didn't really score 58 against Alabama A&M, no one
named Gustavius Adolphus had 73 against Bethel, no George Mason skied for 55
against North Carolina-Wilmington, just as it was impossible that a guy named
William Penn got 88 against Grand View.

    No one is even named William Penn. But there it is in agate type, William
Penn 88, Grand View 84. The Viewers just could not solve him.

    You wouldn't be terribly off track to think of this as perhaps the silliest
and most pathetic opening to any column you've read since my previous one two
weeks ago, but I swear there's nothing I can do about it. I'm addicted to
college basketball scores, which is not to say I have much interest in the sport
itself, just the scores, and it's been a very hopped-up week.

    Yesterday and the day before, I read, line by line in the Post-Gazette and
the New York Times, 301 college basketball scores. That's right, I'm blaming the
suppliers for pushing this junk on me. Now I can't stop.

    What are all these college basketball scores doing in the papers in the
first place? When I worked the sports desk (Grant was president), if someone
called and said, "I have the score of the Teikyo Post-Felician game," you would
hang up. Hard. But there it is in the PG yesterday, right between the
Susquehanna-Moravian fray and the Temple-Rhode Island dustup: Teikyo-Post 67,
Felician 63.

    Who is that for? You think somebody out there had Felician plus-5? Aside
from Pete Rose. Seventy-five percent of the results in these reliably prolific
columns of college basketball scores represent events for which only the
participants and the very odd cheerleader have any interest whatsoever.

    Transylvania 70, Anderson 68.

    What am I to conclude from that? Other than that the Bloodsuckers won
another squeaker?

    The problem is that the college basketball scores come in a little package
that no one ever conscientiously examines, just as so many elements of the media
culture seem to come in packages marked, DO NOT TOUCH, and more importantly, DO
NOT EXERCISE ANY NEWS JUDGMENT ON THIS PRODUCT UNDER PENALTY OF LAW!

    Yesterday, video of rescue workers saving a dog from a New Jersey ice floe
made almost all the network morning shows. Why? Because it was captured and
packaged in some professionally produced video. Again, if someone called this
desk and said, "Hey, some guys just pulled a dog out of the Passaic River and
... "Click.

    Not news. Not news at all. Not even terribly interesting non-news. The same
applies to the woman in Texas convicted last week of killing her husband by
running him over with her Mercedes. That was news, but barely, and for only two
reasons. There was video, and the make of the car carries some kind of phantom
urgent cache. Had she lived in a trailer park 100 miles from the nearest camera
and run him down with an ' 89 Taurus wagon, we would have never heard of her,
even if she had phoned the networks.

    Defiance 85, Bluffton 72.

    Yeah, the Insolents always seem to outlast the Bluffers.

    Truman State 79, Missouri-Rolla 58.

    A good night for the Buck Stoppers. And what of this:

    Johnson State 80, Lyndon State 76?

    Is there a Richard State vs. Nixon State game?

    But if you plow through these results as often as I do, for reasons I can't
control, you find yourself looking for meaning, probing for wisdom, and
sometimes, if you're lucky, you just might nod off.

    In this week's lists of scores, something actually seems to make sense. It
has to do with water. Look at these two scores and see if you anticipate the
emerging pattern:

    Maine Farmington 65, Maine Maritime 49.

    Cedarville 91, Rio Grande 57.

    One more hint:

    Flagler 81, Palm Beach Atlantic 60.

    Is it me or does it seem like schools at or near the water line are reliably
bad? OK, it's me. But what about:

    Mount St. Mary's 106, New York Maritime 68?

    Vermont 71, New Hampshire (and it's 16 miles of coastline) 43?

    And don't give me Coast Guard 72, Worcester Tech 65. Well sure. The Coast
Guard better be able to handle itself. I hope so. And by the way:

    Hope 90, Olivet 73.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2003


                             869 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                          February 19, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: FINANCIAL; i-ZINE SCENE; Pg. 74

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Gene pooling: Women combine skills in research project

BYLINE: Sandra Guy

BODY:


   Four Chicago area researchers have discovered a way to insert the right genes
into the right spot within a cell--a potentially huge step forward in gene
therapy.

   Their ultimate goal is to offer hope to people with cancer, neurological
diseases and other diseases that are caused by several malfunctioning genes. The
researchers believe they have found a way to replace the bad genes with the good
ones with laser-like precision.

   The project is a collaboration among four women--two bio-science researchers
and two chemists.

   The chemists wanted to get titanium dioxide--the kind of material used in hip
replacements--to bind with DNA. They turned to the bio-medical scientists for
help in understanding the nuances of DNA, and the scientists quickly started
suggesting ways of applying the targeted technique to gene therapy.

   Rather than simply shooting titanium into a targeted part of a cell, the
researchers took it a step further: They decided to use nanocrystals--particles
a few billionths of a meter in diameter--to attach different kinds of genes onto
the titanium and shoot them into specific targets inside the cell.

   Each nanocrystal is attached with a short strand of DNA that matches a
patient's defective gene sequence. Once the nanoparticle binds with the unwanted
genetic material in a cell, the nanoparticle could be broken apart by light or
X-rays, thus snipping out the problematic DNA.

   "We call it a Swiss army knife because, unlike today's drugs, we can inject
10 kinds of good genes all at once, and target them in extremely specific or
extremely broad ways," said Gayle Woloschak, a cancer researcher at the Feinberg
School of Medicine of Northwestern University in Chicago.

   She spearheaded the project in collaboration with Tatjana Paunesku, a
research assistant professor in Feinberg's radiology department; Marion
Thurnauer, a senior chemist and director of the chemistry division at Argonne
National Laboratory; and Tijana Rajh, an Argonne chemist.

   Their breakthrough is touted in an article, "Crystal Therapy," in the
February issue of Technology Review magazine.

   Though the science sounds like fiction, the researchers hope to start testing
their project on lab animals within six months.

   "Nanoscience is just getting exciting now," said Woloschak. "We jumped on it
at an early stage, and that helped."

   Woloschak's enthusiasm would seem odd to anyone who knew her when she was in
high school in Youngstown, Ohio. She hated science.

   After she entered college as an intended philosophy major, she had to take a
basic biology class. Much to her surprise, she loved it.

   "The cool part was that you could ask a question and generate an answer
yourself," she said. "I found that really interesting."

   As she pursued her new career in biomedical research, she became part of a
minority. There were only two female graduate students and two female faculty
members at the Medical College of Ohio in Toledo in the late 1970s.

   The field is much more hospitable to women now, but it is still rare to find
four women working on nanocrystal research.

   "We actually used to joke, 'How many projects started with four women?'"
Woloschak said.

GRAPHIC: Jim Frost, Four women collaborated on researching a gene therapy
procedure. Left to right: Tatjana Paunesku, Gayle Woloschak, Marion Thurnauer
and Tijana Rajh.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2003


                             870 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           February 18, 2003 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA METRO; Part 2; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 656 words

HEADLINE: Commentary;
Gene Therapy Has Vast Potential Despite Setbacks; Push On With Human Trials

BYLINE: Eithan Galun, Dr. Eithan Galun is the director of the Goldyne Savad
Gene, Therapy Institute at Hadassah Medical Organization in Jerusalem.

BODY:

   The recent news that two boys in France have been diagnosed with a
leukemia-like disease after undergoing gene therapy for "bubble baby" syndrome
has sent shock waves through the scientific community. In the United States, the
Food and Drug Administration halted certain gene-therapy trials.

   For those of us outside the U.S. who are engaged in gene therapy research,
the shadow of the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger from gene therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania, plus this latest news, has brought us to a fork in
the road as we take stock of the powerful tools we are learning to manipulate.

   A look backward can sometimes show us which path leads forward. The first
chemotherapeutic drug was discovered by accident more than 60 years ago when an
explosion at a chemical warfare plant in the port of Naples exposed sailors to
high doses of nitrogen mustard. The sailors later developed bone marrow tumors
as a result of the chemical's effect of enhancing cell growth. Later, it was
discovered that lower doses of such agents had the opposite effect and could be
used to stem the rapid growth of tumor cells. By the early 1940s, we saw their
first applications in cancer therapy in the U.S. Initially, patients experienced
tumor remission, which caused great excitement. This was followed by deep
disappointment, however, when tumor growth recurred and all the patients died.

   Fortunately, the strength of the human scientific spirit prevailed, and this
initial setback did not halt drug development but instead stimulated further
research into improved chemotherapeutic agents, which eventually were tested in
human cancer patients.

   If fear caused by the initial failures of chemotherapeutic agents had halted
further research and clinical trials, there would be no therapy today for
cancer, one of the most common causes of death worldwide. Similarly, if we had
given up after early unsuccessful attempts at transplantation, patients with
blood disorders or end-stage liver, kidney or heart disease who benefit from
bone marrow or organ transplantation would have no chance for survival today.

   Though it may represent a leap of faith and science to try out in humans what
is initially observed in a test tube or in lab animals, human clinical trials
are the only way to narrow the gap. We now are in the infancy of genetic therapy
. These treatments are as mysterious, yet ultimately as promising, as early
chemotherapy and organ transplantation.

   Researchers believe that many diseases -- cancer and infectious, metabolic,
genetic and even psychiatric disorders -- might be treated by the appropriate
gene therapy protocol. Thousands of patients already have been treated for a
wide array of diseases in hundreds of human gene-therapy trials. Yet there has
been only one death directly attributable to genetic therapy.

   Unfortunately, the two infants in France were born with a rare genetic
immunodeficiency and would have died during their first year of life without
gene therapy. They developed a malignant disease attributable to an error in the
insertion of the gene given to cure the immunodeficiency.

   We must see the big picture: These unfortunate patients were two of 10
children in the trial. While this technical failure is tragic for the patients
and their families, eight other immunodeficient children treated in the same way
are healthy and have a good chance of a normal life.

   Gene therapy has huge potential and needs public support. By banning certain
procedures, the FDA is misguidedly attempting to protect the public from a
treatment whose absence may be more harmful than its practice.

   The history of recent drug development teaches us that, more often than not,
there are impediments along the road to medical achievements. Humanity will gain
much from taking the new therapeutic avenues opening up through genetic therapy.
Some rewards are down the path, just after the fork. Others will come into view
much later.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2003


                             871 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    February 17, 2003 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg.D-3 TRADING

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: 'NONSENSICAL NINE': STOCKS TO SELL SHORT OR AVOID

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   I wouldn't touch these nine stocks with gloves on. I call them the
Nonsensical Nine. Last year's nine were down 42 percent from Feb. 6, 2002, when
my column was published, through Feb. 4, 2003.

    I use the Nonsensical Nine for ideas on stocks to sell short. A short sale
is a bet that a stock will decline. The short seller borrows stock and
immediately sells it, banking the proceeds in a special account. Later he must
buy shares to replace the borrowed ones. If the stock falls in the meantime, he
profits.

    If you don't engage in short selling, you may wish to use the Nonsensical
Nine as a warning list. If you own any of the stocks on it, I suggest you
re-evaluate your rationale and make sure you truly believe in it.

    Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. was the biggest loser last year, down 86
percent. Over the same span, the Standard & Poor's 500 Index fell 20 percent.

    The previous year's Nonsensical Nine list, the first one I compiled, fell 37
percent while the S&P was declining 16 percent.

    In each of the past two years, eight of the nine stocks have fallen.

    The nine stocks I warn you against this year are Robert Half International
Inc., Affymetrix, Inc., Consol Energy Inc., Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc.,
Neurocrine Biosciences Inc., Scios Inc., Maytag Corp., Yum! Brands Inc. and Del
Monte Foods Co.

    How did I come up with these names? I simply set a few basic standards and
let Bloomberg stock screening software do most of the work.

    I start with a group of all U.S. stocks that have a market value of $1
billion or more and sell for at least three times book value (corporate net
worth). This year that gives me a field of 323 stocks.

    From that field, I use the Bloomberg software to finger the three stocks
with the highest price-earnings ratio, the three with the highest price-sales
ratio and the three with the highest ratio of debt to stockholders' equity.

    This year the highest P-E ratio in the field, 1,514, belongs to Robert Half
International (RHI). The Menlo Park, Calif., company provides both temporary and
permanent staffing.

    You could argue that Robert Half's high P-E ratio is a fluke. Earnings fell
to a penny a share in 2002 after hitting $1 a share two years earlier. Based on
its 2000 earnings, Half's stock isn't expensive at $14.79.

    Unfortunately, I think the company's current earning power is closer to a
penny than to a buck. For 2003, analysts are guessing 19 cents a share.

    The second-highest P-E, 189, belongs to Affymetrix (AFFX), a stock that I
currently am short. From everything I've heard, Affymetrix makes excellent
instruments for medical laboratories. Its stock, however, seems overvalued to me
at 189 times earnings, 11 times book value and 5 times revenue.

    The third-highest P-E belongs to Consol Energy (CNX), a coal and natural gas
producer that I used to own when it was much cheaper. Today the stock sells for
112 times earnings, and the company has debt equal to 433 percent of equity. I
like the top people at Consol, and I don't hate the stock, but I wouldn't buy it
at current quotes.

    Turning to another standard valuation measure, the price-sales ratio, we
turn up three candidates, all medical or biotech stocks -- Amylin
Pharmaceuticals, Neurocrine Biosciences and Scios. I am currently short all
three.

    Amylin (AMLN) is a development stage pharmaceutical company focused on
metabolic disorders, especially diabetes. Amylin has a stock-market value of
$1.5 billion even though revenue is running at a $6 million clip (annualizing
the latest quarter). The price-sales ratio is 955.

    Neurocrine Biosciences (NBIX), based in San Diego, is attempting to develop
treatments for a wide variety of diseases including Alzheimer's disease,
depression, anxiety, stroke, brain tumors, diabetes and multiple sclerosis. Last
year its revenue totaled $18 million, yet the stock market values the company at
almost $1.2 billion.

    Scios (SCIO), which I have been short for a while, sells for 19 times
revenue. It is a biotech company whose main product treats congestive heart
failure.

    For the final three names, we look at stocks with the highest ratios of debt
to equity. (I exclude financial companies from this part of the analysis.)

    Maytag (MPG) heads this part of the list, with debt about 26 times equity.
Maytag also was on last year's list, for the same reason. In the past 12 months
it fell 19 percent, which was in line with the overall market.

    Yum! Brands (YUM) is the next most heavily indebted, with debt about 22
times equity. A junk-food junkie, I am fond of Yum's restaurants, Kentucky Fried
Chicken, Taco Bell and Pizza Hut. But I have little appetite for the stock
because I think high debt robs companies of strategic flexibility.

    Del Monte Foods (DLM) comes in third on my debt list, with debt around 19
times equity. Of all the stocks on the list, this is the one I would be most
prone to buy, as the stock is cheap. The debt load, however, does worry me.

    Some of these nine stocks will probably rise during the next 12 months. As a
group, though, I predict they will tumble. Huge valuations or unusually high
debt are substantial obstacles to overcome.?


NOTES:
John Dorfman is a columnist for Bloomberg News and is president of Dorfman
Investments in Boston. The opinions expressed are his own. His firm or its
clients may own or trade investments discussed in this column. Contact him at
jdorfman@bloomberg.net or Dorfman Investments, 101 Federal St., Suite 1900,
Boston, MA 02110.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2003


                             872 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 16, 2003, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: GLOBE SOUTH; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: GLOBE SOUTH 1;
ENDING THE PAPER CHASE DOCTORS FIND COMPUTERIZED CURE FOR RECORDS DILEMMA

BYLINE: By Madeline B. Gaughran, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   COHASSET - Something is odd in this doctors' office.

   The waiting room is conventional, with plenty of magazines to read. The
receptionist and nurses are friendly and busy.  But the exam rooms are all
outfitted with computers and there are no plastic holders on the doors for
patients' charts.  In fact, there aren't any charts. Aside from a box of
business cards and some forms for new patients, there isn't any paper to be
seen.

      South Shore Orthopedic Associates is on the edge of what many say will one
day be standard practice in medical offices nationwide. It uses electronic
medical records, or EMRs. Every encounter with every patient, every prescription
issued, every signed consent form is logged, collected, and stored
electronically.

   Recent federal legislation requiring doctors to safeguard the confidentiality
of patient records is slowly motivating doctors to abandon paper trails and
replace them with EMRs. Unlike paper charts, EMR software can prevent
unauthorized staff from accessing patient information, and it can record who has
accessed or entered patient data.  EMRs can be accessed from satellite offices,
hospitals, or doctors' homes.

   Bill Munier, president of Wang Healthcare Information Systems Inc., which
developed the software used in South Shore Orthopedic's Cohasset office, cites
the technology of information systems as one of the most significant
developments in medical care today.

   It may not be gene therapy, said Munier, but "this affects every patient with
every diagnosis."

   The software, called Physicians' Workstation, evolved from a Department of
Defense contract with Wang about 10 years ago, Munier said. Wang implemented the
system for the Air Force. Military physicians needed to access soldiers' medical
records from different bases and remote locations.

   Ideally, EMRs will allow doctors and other medical staff to spend more time
with patients and less time with paper work. Some area doctors say they see 15
to 60 patient each day.

   But the initial investment is significant, according to Marcia Peterson, a
partner at SOS Center, Inc., an application service provider. SOS has introduced
EMRs at several area offices.  The software and process of converting an office
to it can cost $10,000 to $15,000 per doctor, and it can take a long time to
scan or transcribe charts onto the new database, according to Peterson.

   For example, at Scituate Pediatrics - which began converting to the system
last summer - new computer monitors were needed to accommodate the Wang program,
hardware had to be upgraded, software had to be installed, and the staff
(including four doctors and four nurse practitioners) had to be trained.

   The Scituate office, led by Dr. David Morin, is serving as the pilot
conversion project for Physicians Strategies, a physicians' service organization
for 35 area doctors. (Morin is medical director for Physicians Strategies.   It
will take another year to fully convert Scituate's office, which has over 10,000
patients, said Jack Bradbury, CEO of Physicians' Strategies.

   The group may not see a return on its investment for a few years, but already
patients are benefiting, Bradbury said.  "We see our return when a patient goes
to a satellite [office] and has his whole chart brought up on the computer," he
said.

   "There is a time investment, especially for the doctors," said Gail McKenna,
office manager for South Shore Orthopedics. "But now we can't imagine us without
it. You can just spend more time servicing the patient and less time worrying
about the chart."

   "Before, we were always looking for something," said Kathy Abruzese, a
registered nurse who years ago began her career as a self-described "paper
queen," filing medical records. "It was a pain in the neck, carrying around 40
charts or so all the time," she said. "Now everything is right in front of you."

   Many people who work in the medical industry say doctors in private practice
are change-phobic. Despite the apparent advantages, EMRs are still rarely seen
in local practices.

   "Physicians don't transition well. They got beepers, but they seemed to stop
there," said Bradbury of Physicians' Strategies. Younger doctors may be easier
to convince.

   At South Shore Orthopedic, Dr. Glen Seidman, 39, is pleased with the
conversion.

   "It makes us a faster and more advanced organization," Seidman said. "It
serves both the patient and the physicians with ready access as well as
protecting privacy. It is the trend for the future for most if not all doctors'
offices. I'm very interested in using it and I don't want to be left behind."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Office manager Gail McKenna checks a patient's record in an exam
room at Cohasset's South Shore Orthopedic Associates, which has switched to a
computer-based system. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / JOHN TLUMACKI

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2003


                             873 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    February 16, 2003, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1314 words

HEADLINE: DNA double helix marks 50th anniversary ;
Cardboard cutouts and a flash of insight ignited a revolution in biological
research

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: MALCOLM RITTER

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK - Fifty years ago this month, on a foggy Saturday morning in
Cambridge, England, a 24-year-old American scientist sat down with a few white
cardboard cutouts and set off a revolution in biology.

   The cutouts, about the size of teacup saucers, looked like an elementary
school geometry project: Some were hexagons, others looked like a hexagon with a
pentagon attached.

   But to James Watson, who'd created them the night before, they represented
fragments of the mysterious molecule that obsessed him and his collaborator
Francis Crick: deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as DNA.

   It wasn't yet clear to scientists whether DNA was the stuff of genes. But
Watson and Crick thought it was, and for about 18 months, off and on, they had
been trying to figure out the three-dimensional structure of the DNA molecule.

   "It seemed to us it had to be the secret of life," Watson recalled recently.
"We thought it was the most important problem to solve if you were a biologist."

   As he worked in the lab at Cambridge University, he knew he had to be close.

   The cardboard cutouts represented the four kinds of "bases" found in the DNA
molecule. Bases are part of the basic building blocks of DNA, and somehow they
had to pair up in a way that would nestle smoothly in the overall structure. But
how?

   It wasn't just a matter of jamming the cardboard polygons together; the real
bases would bond only via hydrogen atoms that Watson portrayed with little
sticks protruding from the cutouts.

   As he switched the shapes around on his desk, he suddenly saw the answer: a
scheme that gave him two identically shaped pairs.

   His first reaction: "It's so beautiful."

   Nowadays, even high school biology students know what Watson and, soon
thereafter, Crick realized on that day:

   The DNA molecule is a double helix, resembling a ladder that's been twisted
along its length. Each "rung" is made up of two bases, paired according to the
rule that jumped out at Watson from his desktop. These bases provide the genetic
code; just as a four-letter alphabet could spell out words, the sequence of the
four kinds of bases along the length of the DNA molecule spells out the
information stored in genes.

   The finding unleashed a torrent of research into DNA that's still going on,
both to understand how it works and to put it to use. Many of today's scientific
headlines - the deciphering of the DNA of humans and other species, the
transplanting of genes into animals and crops to change their traits, the use of
gene therapy to treat disease, the DNA evidence that exonerates people
imprisoned unjustly - ultimately came from the double helix discovery.

   The 50th anniversary of the finding is being widely celebrated this year by
high-profile scientific journals and conferences in the United States, Europe
and Australia. There's even a black-tie dinner on Feb. 28 - the actual
anniversary date - at New York's Waldorf-Astoria, hosted by several scientific
institutions.

   Beyond the laboratory walls, the anniversary has inspired at least three new
books. There's probably a good market: Watson's own 1968 account of the
discovery, The Double Helix, was a million-seller translated into more than 15
languages.

   And there are special art exhibits celebrating the discovery, because the
double helix has become an icon. Salvador Dali used it long before the 1962
Nobel Prize recognized the achievement. New York's Museum of Modern Art sells a
double helix bracelet. The undulating shape shows up in corporate logos,
sculptures and a British millennium stamp.

   All in all, it's a heady legacy for a couple of researchers who knew little
chemistry and never did an experiment to reach their goal. Instead, they used
research from others to guide them in building models that resembled Tinker Toy
creations.

   Watson, a Chicago native who'd abandoned zoology in college after a book got
him excited about genetics, arrived in Cambridge in 1951 at age 23. There he met
Crick, 12 years older, a physicist by training. Soon the two men were sharing
lunch almost every day; their colleagues eventually gave them a room together so
they could talk without disturbing anybody else.

   "It was intellectual love at first sight," says Victor McElheny, author of
the new book, Watson and DNA: Making a Scientific Revolution.

   As they pondered the riddle of DNA, they challenged each other. They could be
each other's worst critic, but in a polite way, McElheny said.

   "Neither of us had a big ego . . .  we just wanted to get the answer,"
recalled Watson, now 74 and president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in
Cold Spring, N.Y.

   Crucially, they benefited from work by chemist Rosalind Franklin of King's
College in London. She had investigated the shape of DNA molecules by bombarding
them with X-rays and tracking how the rays scattered. She found strong evidence
of a helix structure - results that Watson said made his jaw drop and his pulse
race during one visit to London.

   But Franklin died of ovarian cancer in 1958 at age 37, before she could have
shared in the Nobel Prize.

   So why was there a Nobel Prize at all? Why was this discovery such a big
deal?

   "It was an astonishing revelation," says George Washington University
historian Horace Freeland Judson, who is editing a collection of Crick's
scientific papers. "It made brilliantly clear, instantly, how genes worked in
principle."

   What's more, says Yale historian Daniel Kevles, it made a strong case that
DNA was indeed the stuff of genes, and it opened up huge avenues of research. In
fact, the structure plainly suggested the answer to one basic question about
genes: How do they copy themselves so they can be inherited?

   When they announced their discovery to the world in April 1953, Watson and
Crick acknowledged that implication with one of the most famous sentences in
scientific literature: "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing
we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the
genetic material."

   It sure does. The pairing scheme that Watson saw on his desktop was shown
within a few years to be key to how genes replicate themselves. The ladder-like
DNA molecule splits lengthwise, cutting each rung in half and exposing each base
to the chemical soup. Then each exposed base pairs off with the same kind of
partner as before. Result: two identical DNA molecules.

   The structure also gave scientists a starting point to attack the other big
question about genes: How do they direct the moment-to-moment production of
proteins in cells?

   Scientists eventually discovered that molecules of a DNA-like substance
called RNA carry instructions from genes to the cell's protein-making machinery.
By the mid-1960s, they'd identified the "words" in the DNA code that ordered
specific building blocks for proteins.

   At the time Watson and Crick revealed their discovery, however, its
significance was largely overlooked.

   "It was like a tree falling in the middle of the forest. It had no impact,"
recalled Alex Rich, who was studying DNA at the California Institute of
Technology when he heard the news, and is now a biophysics professor at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   Excitement about the discovery didn't really build up until the late 1950s,
after scientists showed that DNA replicates itself the way Watson and Crick
suggested, and other experiments began to sketch out its involvement in making
proteins.

   The DNA story is far from over. Scientists are still working out the details
of how DNA is replicated so quickly and accurately - an astonishing feat, since
each human cell contains billions of base pairs lined up along nearly six feet
of DNA, all packed into a nucleus only one-twentieth the width of a human hair.

   Scientists also are exploring the use of DNA as a building material for
making vanishingly tiny devices and powerful computers.


GRAPHIC: Photos: 1-2 James Watson, above, and Francis Crick, right, with a
double-helix model in the background, discovered DNA's structure in 1953. (p.
12); Associated Press photos

TYPE: Biography

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2003


                             874 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            February 16, 2003 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Part R; Features Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1395 words

HEADLINE: Death, be not allowed;
Life, Liberty and the Defense of Dignity: The Challenge for Bioethics, Leon R.
Kass, Encounter Books: 300 pp., $26.95

BYLINE: Andrew Stark, Andrew Stark, professor of strategic management and
political, science at the University of Toronto, is the author of "Conflict of,
Interest in American Public Life."

BODY:

   A year and a half ago, when President Bush named Leon R. Kass to chair the
President's Council on Bioethics, a national advisory council created to explore
the moral implications of human cloning, stem cell research and similar
scientific advances, the reaction was mixed. In spite of his reputation and
original intellect, Kass, a biomedical ethicist and professor at the University
of Chicago, had frequently spoken out on the perils of modern medical advances.
Given Kass' capacity to influence public policy, we should want to inquire into
his reasoning, and "Life, Liberty and the Defense of Dignity" helps us do so.

   Kass is writing at a revolutionary moment. Since time immemorial, man has
desired increased personal longevity and has done as much as he can to
perpetuate his DNA by creating descendants. Now, however, thanks to cloning, it
may soon be possible for an individual to perpetuate his DNA on his own, without
descendants. And thanks to breakthroughs in cellular, hormonal and genetic
therapies, it looks increasingly likely that our descendants -- although not we
ourselves -- could realize that dream of heightened, perhaps unlimited,
longevity.

   Much of the attention that Kass garnered over the last year focused on the
council's decision to recommend a ban on "reproductive" cloning. But lurking
around the council's deliberations and central to Kass' preoccupations in "Life,
Liberty and the Defense of Dignity" are concerns about "the desirability," as
Kass writes, "of gaining a cure for death."

   A radical question and a cosmic one, but in Kass' locution, it is a little
slippery. A more cautious query, as he acknowledges, would encompass not death's
total demise but simply an increase -- if a dramatic one -- in our longevity.
Yet let us grant Kass that we're talking about a cure for death, especially
because no such cure would ever be compulsory, only available, and in effect
would simply give individuals control over their own life spans. In "Life,
Liberty and the Defense of Death," Kass sets out to show that such a cure --
indeed, any extension in the current human life span -- would be a bad thing.

   To his credit, Kass refuses to make his task easy for himself. He in no way
relies on religious arguments that death is the gateway to eternal life, knowing
that they have lost their sway in a secular age. He assumes that any new elixirs
of life won't be open to criticism on equity grounds because they'll be publicly
provided for all. He grants, for purposes of discussion, that increased
longevity won't raise difficulties for the labor market, pensions or family
structure; that in time these social institutions will adapt. And for the most
part, he seems willing to allow that new life-extending therapies, once
perfected, will keep us not only alive but also in good health, free from the
decrepitude that currently afflicts our later years. (True, Kass at one point
goes so far as to slip in a good word for senility, arthritis and other
depredations of age because without them, "[w]e could no longer comfort the
widow by pointing out that her husband was delivered from his suffering." But,
of course, if pain is good because it removes death's sting, and death is good
because it brings pain's agonies to an end, we would still be better off without
both of them. This argument is so unready for prime time that we hear from it no
further.)

   Instead, Kass voices a deeper philosophical objection to dramatically
boosting our longevity, even if extending our life spans brings no inequality,
instability or infirmity. With dramatically increased longevity, we would
apparently face a dilemma. On the one hand, as day follows day without end, we
would sooner or later lose "interest and engagement" until life became a boring
trial. Even now, Kass says, at "some point, most of us turn and say to our
intimates" in Peggy Lee style, "Is that all there is?" On the other hand, as the
philosopher Bernard Williams noted 30 years ago in thinking along the same
lines, there is one thing we could do to avoid this fate of eternal boredom. We
could remake ourselves at regular intervals, radically altering our values and
relationships and perhaps erasing our memories, so that -- as Kass puts it -- we
would be able to experience "aspiration, hope, freshness, boldness and openness
... anew." The problem, though, is that then we would be essentially different
people, not the same ones living forever. In which case we might as well keep
the status quo, with longevity limited by death and with renewal, such as it is,
occurring through procreation.

   This may be the most thoughtful nonreligious defense of death available. But
it runs into a problem. Ironically, although religion may have lost its capacity
to console us for our limited lives, it can still counsel us on our potentially
unlimited longevity.

   Kass worries that if we persist too long as the same person, then we are
doomed to boredom. And yet beliefs ranging from the medieval Christian notion of
apatheia to Buddhist techniques for ego death to ancient Stoic philosophies
offer ways of converting natural times of boredom or emptiness into a calm
disengagement from the world: a periodic and virtuous "disinterest in ephemeral
goods," as Michael L. Raposa describes it in his book on the topic, "Boredom and
the Religious Imagination." All approaches furnish rich means, as Kass'
University of Chicago colleague Wendy Doniger has observed, of introducing times
of "temporary death" into life, allowing a person to withdraw -- to take an
extended time out if necessary -- to come back to the world refreshed. In fact,
periods of boredom and world-weariness came to be viewed as wholly bad things
only in the 20th century; in most of Western thought, literary scholar Patricia
Meyer Spacks shows in her 1995 book "Boredom," they have been welcomed as a kind
of "suspended attention" that allows for "semi-conscious brooding" and "makes a
space for creativity."

   As for the idea that if we are to avoid boredom, our only alternative is to
periodically remake ourselves so profoundly that we will no longer be the same
person -- and so may as well have died anyway -- religious thought again falls
along different lines. Christian notions of being born again while maintaining
one's core identity, Hindu ideas of a person's being reincarnated while
retaining his individual essence and platonic conceptions of renewal within an
individual life offer rich and subtle religious resources for reconciling
personal rebirth with longevity, for enabling fundamental change within
persistent identity.

   In short, Kass is of the view that the status quo -- longevity limited by
death and renewal through procreation -- is the only path to take. But for
millenniums, religious thinkers have meditated on ways of weaving periods of
death into life and reconciling renewal with longevity. Certainly, Kass draws on
religious and philosophical thought in arguing his point, and he does so with
great erudition. But by and large he finds what he is looking for, and not the
many strands that argue against him.

   At one point, Kass writes that unlimited longevity is such a bad idea that
although it "might be what we say" we want, it couldn't be "what we finally
mean." In so saying, he gives us leave to turn the question around on him: If it
is so difficult to plausibly articulate what's wrong with immortality -- and
Kass acknowledges that his pro-death argument goes against even his own deep
natural desires -- then perhaps what he is saying isn't what he finally means.

   What psychological turmoil will erupt when the members of an entire
generation -- one in the not-too-distant future -- come to realize that they may
die just as science is on the verge of finding cures for the diseases, including
the aging process, that will kill them? Many have written of the bitterness
older AIDS sufferers felt in the mid-'90s when it looked as if protease
inhibitors, discovered a little too late for them, would cure patients whose
illnesses were not yet so far advanced. The possibility that a whole generation
might harbor such feelings may well be something that council members want to
forestall until we have greater moral clarity. It's an issue worth debating, and
there's no better forum for a debate to begin than in the council; no better
person to lead it than Leon Kass.

GRAPHIC:  PHOTOGRAPHER: Boris Kulikov For The Times

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2003


                             875 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 16, 2003, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-13

LENGTH: 1542 words

HEADLINE: Discovery of DNA structure reverberates today; Cutouts, insight led to
scientific find 50 years ago

BYLINE: Malcolm Ritter; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 NEW YORK -- Fifty years ago this month, on a foggy Saturday morning in
Cambridge, England, a 24-year-old beanpole of an American scientist sat down
with a few white cardboard cutouts and set off a revolution in biology.

   The cutouts, about the size of teacup saucers, looked basically like an
elementary school geometry project: Some were hexagons, others looked like a
hexagon with a pentagon attached.

   But to James Watson, who'd created them the night before, they represented
fragments of the mysterious molecule that obsessed him and his collaborator
Francis Crick: deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as DNA.

   It wasn't yet clear to scientists whether DNA was the stuff of genes.  But
Watson and Crick thought it was, and for about 18 months, off and on, they had
been trying to figure out the three-dimensional structure of the DNA molecule.

   "It seemed to us it had to be the secret of life," Watson recalled recently.
"We thought it was the most important problem to solve if you were a biologist."

   As he worked in the lab at Cambridge University, he knew he had to be close.

   The cardboard cutouts represented the four kinds of "bases" found in the DNA
molecule.  Bases are part of the basic building blocks of DNA, and somehow they
had to pair up in a way that would nestle smoothly in the overall structure.
But how?

   It wasn't just a matter of jamming the cardboard polygons together; the real
bases would bond only via hydrogen atoms that Watson portrayed with little
sticks protruding from the cutouts.

   As he switched the shapes around on his desk, he suddenly saw the answer: a
scheme that gave him two identically shaped pairs.

   His first reaction: "It's so beautiful."

   Nowadays, even high school biology students know what Watson and, soon
thereafter, Crick realized on that day:

   The DNA molecule is a double helix, resembling a ladder that's been twisted
along its length.  Each "rung" is made up of two bases, paired according to the
rule that jumped out at Watson from his desktop.  These bases provide the
genetic code; just as a four-letter alphabet could spell out words, the sequence
of the four kinds of bases along the length of the DNA molecule spells out the
information stored in genes.

   The finding unleashed a torrent of research into DNA that's still going on,
both to understand how it works and to put it to use.  Many of today's
scientific headlines -- the deciphering of the DNA of humans and other species,
the transplanting of genes into animals and crops to change their traits, the
use of gene therapy to treat disease, the DNA evidence that exonerates people
imprisoned unjustly -- came from the double helix discovery.

   The 50th anniversary of the finding is being widely celebrated this year by
high-profile scientific journals and conferences in the United States, Europe
and Australia.  There's even a black-tie dinner on Feb. 28 -- the actual
anniversary date -- at New York's Waldorf-Astoria, hosted by several scientific
institutions.

   Beyond the laboratory walls, the anniversary has inspired at least three new
books.  There's probably a good market: Watson's own 1968 account of the
discovery, "The Double Helix," was a million-seller translated into more than 15
languages.

   And there are special art exhibits celebrating the discovery because the
double helix has become an icon.  Salvador Dali used it long before the 1962
Nobel Prize recognized the achievement.  New York's Museum of Modern Art sells a
double helix bracelet.  The undulating shape shows up in corporate logos,
sculptures and a British millennium stamp.

   All in all, it's a heady legacy for a couple of researchers who knew little
chemistry and never did an experiment to reach their goal.  Instead, they used
research from others to guide them in building models that resembled Tinker Toy
creations.

   Watson, a Chicago native who'd abandoned zoology in college after a book got
him excited about genetics, arrived in Cambridge in 1951 at age 23. There he met
Crick, 12 years older, an ebullient physicist by training with a booming laugh.
Soon the two men were sharing lunch almost every day; their colleagues
eventually gave them a room together so they could talk without disturbing
anybody else.

   "It was intellectual love at first sight," said Victor McElheny, author of
the new book, "Watson and DNA: Making a Scientific Revolution."

   Not only did their interests coincide, Crick wrote later, but they shared "a
certain youthful arrogance, a ruthlessness, and an impatience with sloppy
thinking."

   As they pondered the riddle of DNA, they challenged each other.  They could
be each other's worst critic, but in a polite way, McElheny said.

   "Neither of us had a big ego . . . we just wanted to get the answer,"
recalled Watson, now 74 and president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in
Cold Spring, N.Y.

   In this drive to the goal, he said in an interview, "Francis was brains. . .
. I was the emotion."

   But both of them could learn from the experimental results of others.
Crucially, they benefited from work by chemist Rosalind Franklin of King's
College in London.  She had investigated the shape of DNA molecules by
bombarding them with X-rays and tracking how the rays scattered.  She found
strong evidence of a helix structure -- results that Watson said made his jaw
drop and his pulse race during one visit to London.

   But Franklin died of ovarian cancer in 1958 at age 37, before she could have
shared in the Nobel Prize.

   So why was there a Nobel Prize at all?  Why was this discovery such a big
deal?

   "It was an astonishing revelation," said George Washington University
historian Horace Freeland Judson, who is editing a collection of Crick's
scientific papers.  "It made brilliantly clear, instantly, how genes worked in
principle."

   What's more, said Yale historian Daniel Kevles, it made a strong case that
DNA was indeed the stuff of genes, and it opened up huge avenues of research.
In fact, the structure plainly suggested the answer to one basic question about
genes: How do they copy themselves so they can be inherited?

   When they announced their discovery to the world in April 1953, Watson and
Crick acknowledged that implication with one of the most famous sentences in
scientific literature: "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing
we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the
genetic material."

   It sure does.  The pairing scheme that Watson saw on his desktop was shown
within a few years to be key to how genes replicate themselves.  The ladder-like
DNA molecule splits lengthwise, cutting each rung in half and exposing each base
to the chemical soup.  Then each exposed base pairs off with the same kind of
partner as before.  Result: two identical DNA molecules.

   The structure also gave scientists a starting point to attack the other big
question about genes: How do they direct the moment-to-moment production of
proteins in cells?

   Scientists eventually discovered that molecules of a DNA-like substance
called RNA carry instructions from genes to the cell's protein-making machinery.
By the mid-1960s, they'd identified the "words" in the DNA code that ordered
specific building blocks for proteins.

   At the time Watson and Crick revealed their discovery, however, its
significance was largely overlooked.

   "It was like a tree falling in the middle of the forest.  It had no impact,"
recalled Alex Rich, who was studying DNA at the California Institute of
Technology when he heard the news, and is now a biophysics professor at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   "Most places just ignored it," Rich said, in part for lack of interest in DNA
and because of skepticism over what was, after all, just a hypothesis.

   Excitement about the discovery didn't really build up until the late 1950s,
after scientists showed that DNA replicates itself the way Watson and Crick
suggested, and other experiments began to sketch out its involvement in making
proteins.

   The DNA story is far from over.  Scientists are still working out the details
of how DNA is replicated so quickly and accurately -- an astonishing feat, since
each human cell contains billions of base pairs lined up along nearly six feet
of DNA, all packed into a nucleus only one-twentieth the width of a human hair.

   Scientists also are exploring the use of DNA as a building material for
making vanishingly tiny devices and powerful computers.

   Crick, now 86, is president emeritus and a professor at the Salk Institute
for Biological Studies in San Diego.  He has turned to exploring the biology of
consciousness.  He and a collaborator published a commentary on that topic just
this month.

   Watson, who served as an early leader of the massive government project to
map all the human genes, says the biggest questions nowadays in molecular
biology -- the field he and Crick helped found -- lie in the brain.

   "How are instincts inherited? . . . How is information stored in the brain,
whether it's your memory of a face or some sort of instinctive act?  How does
the brain tell the lion to kill?

   "No one knows enough about the organization of the brain to come up with an
answer," Watson said.  "Brain research doesn't yet have its double helix."


GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 1. Marc Liberman, Salk Institute / Associated Press file photo
2. Sarah Brezinksy / Associated Press file photo; 1. Francis Crick co-discovered
the structure of DNA in 1953. A model of its double helix is shown behind him.
2. James Watson was in his 20s when he helped discover DNA's structure.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2003


                             876 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              February 16, 2003 Sunday Five Star Late Lift Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 2473 words

HEADLINE: DEATH PROMPTS SCRUTINY OF RESEARCH RISKS;
 GIRL'S PARENTS SAY WASHINGTON U. DIDN'T ADEQUATELY WARN THEM ABOUT SIDE EFFECTS

BYLINE: Sara Shipley Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   When John and Oksana Rogers learned that their 4-year-old daughter, Daniella,
had cancer, they knew she might die.

   But they hardly expected that the medicine that was supposed to save her
would instead take her life.

   "It wasn't the cancer that killed her. It was the treatment," Oksana Rogers
said.

   The chemotherapy drugs Daniella received at St. Louis Children's Hospital as
part of a clinical trial caused the blood in the small vessels of her liver to
clot like curdled milk. Three other children died of the same side effect before
the study's sponsor, Children's Oncology Group of Arcadia, Calif., and the
National Cancer Institute temporarily suspended the trial last year.

   Now a federal public health agency has ruled that Washington University
Medical School, a local participant in the trial, should have done a better job
of warning patients about complications from the potentially fatal liver
disease.

   The Office of Human Research Protection, an arm of the U.S. Health and Human
Services Department, determined last month that the medical school should have
spelled out the risk of veno-occlusive disease of the liver, a rare but
well-known reaction to commonly used cancer-fighting drugs. The disease occurred
in about 1 out of 20 patients in the trial. Four of the 360 children enrolled
died of it.

   The agency's finding carries no sanctions or fines. Washington University now
warns remaining participants in the cancer trial specifically about the disease.

   Washington University wouldn't allow the Post-Dispatch to interview its
doctors about Daniella's case because the Rogers family has threatened to sue.
However, the university released several statements and documents that defend
its actions.

   "Washington University School of Medicine takes extremely seriously its
commitment to add to medical knowledge through clinical trials that are always
conducted with patients' safety and best interests as the highest priority," the
school said in a written statement. "We express our sincere regret and heartfelt
sympathy to the Rogers family for their tragic loss."

   Daniella's case is one of the latest to raise questions about the massive
clinical research industry, and to provoke debate about how far r esearchers
must go to make sure subjects understand the risks.

   The number of clinical trials has increased tenfold in the past 25 years,
according to the federal Food and Drug Administration. The National Institutes
of Health provided $7.2 billion in public funding last year for clinical
research, a figure expected to rise 11 percent this year. Major private
pharmaceutical companies spent $30 billion last year on research and
development, with at least 20 percent of that amount spent on human research,
industry figures show.

   Dr. David Lepay, head of the FDA's Office of Good Clinical Practices, said
his agency's inspectors find far fewer problems now than they did 25 years ago,
when perhaps 20 percent of trials failed to meet key regulations. Now, the
number of violators is around 2 percent, he said.

   But as the field grows, and scrutiny increases, serious problems have
surfaced:

   * In 2001, Johns Hopkins University temporarily lost its government funding
after admitting it was responsible for the death of a healthy volunteer in an
asthma experiment.

   * In 1999, the FDA shut down a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania after an 18-year-old subject died. The agency charged that
investigators violated federal regulations and failed to adequately protect the
lives of patients.

   Washington University's School of Medicine, which ranks fourth in federal
research funding nationwide, has never been charged by federal agencies with
such a serious violation. The medical school received more than $302 million in
NIH funding in fiscal year 2002, following behind Johns Hopkins, the University
of Pennsylvania, and the University of California at San Francisco, spokeswoman
Joni Westerhouse said.

   Westerhouse said the medical school is involved in about 3,000 clinical
trials, and it receives only two to three complaints per year from patients.
Calls go to the Human Studies Committee, which is charged with ensuring that the
research is safe and ethical.

   Officials at the Washington University medical school say they informed the
Rogers family about the risks inherent in chemotherapy, which uses highly toxic
chemicals that kill healthy cells along with cancer cells.

   Westerhouse also provided a letter dated Sept. 3, 2002, from the FDA stating
that the agency found "no significant deviations" from federal regulations in
its investigation of Daniella's case. Both the FDA and the Office of Human
Research Protection conducted investigations because of complaints filed by the
Rogers family.

   John Rogers said he felt vindicated by the finding of the Office of Human
Research Protection that the university failed to fully inform trial
participants about the risks of veno-occlusive disease. "It makes us feel a
little bit better that the government acknowledged they (Washington University)
didn't do the right thing," he said. "But it doesn't bring Daniella back."

   "The best treatment option"

   Since their daughter died last spring, John and Oksana Rogers have become
activists. They set up a Web site, www.daniellarogers.org, which documents their
allegations. The family says that Daniella might have lived had Washington
University properly informed the couple of the risks and monitored more closely
for symptoms of the disease. The university denies responsibility for the girl's
death.

   Daniella's memory fills the family home in Florissant. On a recent visit,
framed photos showed the little girl, bald from chemotherapy, smiling and
wearing a parade of hats. A small Christmas tree held her ornaments. Her
bedroom, much the way she left it, contained a shrine where Oksana's mother, a
Russian immigrant, prays every morning.

   The Rogers family first noticed a lump in Daniella's shoulder in the fall of
2001, during a visit to see Oksana's family in Russia. When the family returned
from the trip, doctors at Washington University took a biopsy of the mass and
pronounced it to be nonmalignant, John Rogers said. When the lump continued to
grow, doctors removed it last February. That's when the family was told that it
was a malignant form of cancer.

   Daniella had rhabdomyosarcoma, a tumor of the skeletal muscles that makes up
about 7 percent of childhood cancer cases. Doctors told the family that, with
treatment, Daniella had about a 70 percent chance of survival. Her parents were
hopeful.

   John Rogers wanted the best care for the couple's first and only child. He
was familiar with clinical research because of his work at the Barnes Retina
Institute as a medical photographer.

   When Dr. David Wilson said they could join a cancer trial, the Rogers family
jumped at the chance. John Rogers said he assumed Daniella would get the most
attention that way.

   "We had just found out our daughter had cancer. Most parents are desperate at
that point, and willing to do anything, and being presented with this being the
best treatment option, we're like, 'Yeah, let's do it,'" John Rogers said.

   The family did seek a second opinion from another area doctor. After being
reassured that Daniella's treatment would be the best available, the family
signed up.

   John and Oksana Rogers signed a document that explains what the patient and
her guardians need to know about the research. Called an informed consent
document, it is required by federal law to disclose risks and inform patients of
their rights.

   Most of the nine-page document contains legal disclaimers, signature pages
and schedule information. About two and a half pages are devoted to charts
explaining the "risks and discomforts that may be associated with this
research." Possible side effects for radiation and six drugs used in the study
are listed briefly, including one line that says simply: "liver damage."

   In the control group

   On Feb. 28, 2002, Daniella began therapy in a nationwide study comparing the
standard chemotherapy treatment for rhabdomyosarcoma with a newer drug
combination.

   She was in the control group, which received the regular treatment - a
combination of the drugs vincristine, actinomycin-D and cyclophosphamide, or
VAC, dubbed by Washington University as the "gold standard" for decades.

   Subjects in the experimental group received VAC alternating with another
group of drugs. In a previous study, published in 1997, an estimated 3.1 percent
of patients receiving the VAC regimen developed liver disease, but no one had
died of it.

   The family and Washington University agree about these basic facts of what
happened in the two-month course of treatment:

   Daniella responded normally to the drugs until the week of April 24. On that
Tuesday, her chest catheter bled abnormally. On Wednesday, she got a transfusion
of platelets and red blood cells. On Thursday, she got more platelets and
another dose of chemotherapy medicine.

   Early Friday morning, Daniella threw up blood. Upon arrival at Children's
Hospital emergency room, doctors found her listless with a distended abdomen.

   Tests confirmed that Daniella had veno-occlusive disease. There is no cure,
although patients sometimes recover. Despite aggressive care, Daniella's liver
and kidneys shut down, her brain swelled, her breathing slowed and her heart
faltered. Daniella died a week after admission, on May 3.

   Other deaths reported

   John Rogers said he never even heard of veno-occlusive disease before his
daughter was diagnosed with it. He was outraged when he found out that two other
children in the same study had already died of it before Daniella became ill.

   According to Washington University, its doctors didn't know anyone had died
either. The national sponsor of the study, Children's Oncology Group, had
detected 15 cases, including two deaths, from the liver disease as of last
February. After an internal review, the group posted the report to its Web site
two months later, on April 23 - just a day before Daniella's steep decline
began.

   Children's Oncology Group recommended continuing the study as planned while
closely monitoring the incidence of the liver disease, according to Washington
University.

   The university said Daniella's doctor hadn't seen the Web site before she got
sick. But even if he had, it wouldn't have changed the outcome, the university
said.

   The medical school's doctors were well-informed about the disease, monitored
for it, made a timely diagnosis of symptoms and began supportive care within a
reasonable amount of time, Washington University said.

   "Although tragic, the patient's death did not result from any lack of
awareness or vigilance" on the part of the medical school, according to a letter
dated Aug. 1, 2002, from Dr. Philip Ludbrook, chairman of the Washington
University Medical Center Human Studies Committee, to the Office of Human
Research Protection.

   Within a few months of Daniella's death, another patient in the trial died of
veno-occlusive disease. Children's Oncology Group and the National Cancer
Institute suspended the study in August.

   Washington University argues that the drugs Daniella received were the same
she would have gotten anywhere, whether in a study or not.

   But John Rogers believes that the dose she received was much higher than it
should have been. According to his calculations, based on the manufacturer's
package insert, she got up to twice as much as she should have, and over a
shorter time period.

   Dr. Gregory Reaman, chairman of Children's Oncology Group, said in an
interview that the dosage outlined in the original protocol was only "modestly"
higher than that used in past studies and "well within the standards we've used
for many years." He also said the drugs were given in one day, rather than over
a five-day period, to make it more convenient for patients.

   When the trial later resumed, the dosage was decreased, especially for
younger children, to address the liver toxicity problem, Reaman said.

   Another change: The risk and symptoms of veno-occlusive disease were added to
the model informed consent document. Washington University expanded its own
consent form in May, at the Rogers family's request, and adopted the more
extensive model wording in July.

   "Needs to be crystal clear"

   Why didn't Washington University spell out the risks earlier? According to
Washington University's letter, it was because the university didn't want to
confuse parents with medical jargon.

   The university strives to use simple, understandable wording in its informed
consent documents, according to Ludbrook's letter. He cited a national committee
that recommends that "documents be written at an eighth-grade or lower reading
level."

   To John Rogers, that's unacceptable. "If you have to put everything in
eighth-grade terminology, that leaves out a lot, and that's wrong," he said.

   Dr. Arthur Caplan, a nationally recognized medical ethicist at the University
of Pennsylvania, said informed consent documents should be simple to read. But
that doesn't mean they should omit details that parents would want to know, he
said.

   Whether the risk of death is one in a hundred or one in a thousand, the
patient has the right to be informed, he said. "It has to be very specifically
spelled out, and it needs to be crystal clear," Caplan said. "In a sense, you
can't overinform."

   Caplan added that parents of sick children often suffer from what he calls
"therapeutic misconception" - they only want to hear good news, and they don't
really absorb bad news. They see a clinical trial as personal therapy, when
really it's just an experiment.

   "I think it's harder to accept deaths from treatment than from a disease," he
said. "Disease is an act of God, while treatment can be controlled."

   Ronald Munson, a bioethicist at the University of Missouri at St. Louis who
also serves on Washington University's Human Studies Committee, said it's normal
for the parents of a child who died to question everything, even
well-intentioned doctors.

   Should the university have explained the risk of this specific disease?

   Should the sponsor have informed Washington University of the other deaths
sooner?

   Even if the parents knew the risk, would they have chosen to go forward?
There are few other treatment options available, and they all carry risks.

   "I think it's important to keep in mind all these matters. Yes, there's a
risk of using the drug, but there may be a bigger risk in not using it," he
said.

   John Rogers said he accepts the risks of research; he just believes parents
should know exactly what they're getting into.

   "(Researchers) need to tell parents there are other options, and tell the
parents the side effects and the risks of treatment," he said.

NOTES:
Reporter Sara Shipley:; E-mail: sshipley@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 314-340-8215

CORRECTION:
Correction published Wednesday, February 19, 2003 - Daniella Rogers, a patient
in a children's cancer trial conducted by Washington University, was 20 months
old when she died. This story reported her age incorrectly in some editions.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, PHOTO; (1) Color PHOTO by ANDREA SCOTT / POST-DISPATCH -
Oksana and John Rogers talk about their daughter, Daniella, at their home in
Florissant. Daniella, 4, died in April, two months after beginning therapy in a
study comparing the standard chemotherapy treatment for her cancer with a newer
drug combination. The drugs from the standard treatment caused her liver to
fail.  GRAPHIC (2) Graphic / Illustration by POST-DISPATCH w/ text:; The risks
of clinical research: How much do subjects need to know? (Graphic only sent
seperately.) ;

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2003


                             877 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              February 16, 2003 Sunday Five Star Late Lift Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 2473 words

HEADLINE: DEATH PROMPTS SCRUTINY OF RESEARCH RISKS;
 GIRL'S PARENTS SAY WASHINGTON U. DIDN'T ADEQUATELY WARN THEM ABOUT SIDE EFFECTS

BYLINE: Sara Shipley Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   When John and Oksana Rogers learned that their 4-year-old daughter, Daniella,
had cancer, they knew she might die.

   But they hardly expected that the medicine that was supposed to save her
would instead take her life.

   "It wasn't the cancer that killed her. It was the treatment," Oksana Rogers
said.

   The chemotherapy drugs Daniella received at St. Louis Children's Hospital as
part of a clinical trial caused the blood in the small vessels of her liver to
clot like curdled milk. Three other children died of the same side effect before
the study's sponsor, Children's Oncology Group of Arcadia, Calif., and the
National Cancer Institute temporarily suspended the trial last year.

   Now a federal public health agency has ruled that Washington University
Medical School, a local participant in the trial, should have done a better job
of warning patients about complications from the potentially fatal liver
disease.

   The Office of Human Research Protection, an arm of the U.S. Health and Human
Services Department, determined last month that the medical school should have
spelled out the risk of veno-occlusive disease of the liver, a rare but
well-known reaction to commonly used cancer-fighting drugs. The disease occurred
in about 1 out of 20 patients in the trial. Four of the 360 children enrolled
died of it.

   The agency's finding carries no sanctions or fines. Washington University now
warns remaining participants in the cancer trial specifically about the disease.

   Washington University wouldn't allow the Post-Dispatch to interview its
doctors about Daniella's case because the Rogers family has threatened to sue.
However, the university released several statements and documents that defend
its actions.

   "Washington University School of Medicine takes extremely seriously its
commitment to add to medical knowledge through clinical trials that are always
conducted with patients' safety and best interests as the highest priority," the
school said in a written statement. "We express our sincere regret and heartfelt
sympathy to the Rogers family for their tragic loss."

   Daniella's case is one of the latest to raise questions about the massive
clinical research industry, and to provoke debate about how far r esearchers
must go to make sure subjects understand the risks.

   The number of clinical trials has increased tenfold in the past 25 years,
according to the federal Food and Drug Administration. The National Institutes
of Health provided $7.2 billion in public funding last year for clinical
research, a figure expected to rise 11 percent this year. Major private
pharmaceutical companies spent $30 billion last year on research and
development, with at least 20 percent of that amount spent on human research,
industry figures show.

   Dr. David Lepay, head of the FDA's Office of Good Clinical Practices, said
his agency's inspectors find far fewer problems now than they did 25 years ago,
when perhaps 20 percent of trials failed to meet key regulations. Now, the
number of violators is around 2 percent, he said.

   But as the field grows, and scrutiny increases, serious problems have
surfaced:

   * In 2001, Johns Hopkins University temporarily lost its government funding
after admitting it was responsible for the death of a healthy volunteer in an
asthma experiment.

   * In 1999, the FDA shut down a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania after an 18-year-old subject died. The agency charged that
investigators violated federal regulations and failed to adequately protect the
lives of patients.

   Washington University's School of Medicine, which ranks fourth in federal
research funding nationwide, has never been charged by federal agencies with
such a serious violation. The medical school received more than $302 million in
NIH funding in fiscal year 2002, following behind Johns Hopkins, the University
of Pennsylvania, and the University of California at San Francisco, spokeswoman
Joni Westerhouse said.

   Westerhouse said the medical school is involved in about 3,000 clinical
trials, and it receives only two to three complaints per year from patients.
Calls go to the Human Studies Committee, which is charged with ensuring that the
research is safe and ethical.

   Officials at the Washington University medical school say they informed the
Rogers family about the risks inherent in chemotherapy, which uses highly toxic
chemicals that kill healthy cells along with cancer cells.

   Westerhouse also provided a letter dated Sept. 3, 2002, from the FDA stating
that the agency found "no significant deviations" from federal regulations in
its investigation of Daniella's case. Both the FDA and the Office of Human
Research Protection conducted investigations because of complaints filed by the
Rogers family.

   John Rogers said he felt vindicated by the finding of the Office of Human
Research Protection that the university failed to fully inform trial
participants about the risks of veno-occlusive disease. "It makes us feel a
little bit better that the government acknowledged they (Washington University)
didn't do the right thing," he said. "But it doesn't bring Daniella back."

   "The best treatment option"

   Since their daughter died last spring, John and Oksana Rogers have become
activists. They set up a Web site, www.daniellarogers.org, which documents their
allegations. The family says that Daniella might have lived had Washington
University properly informed the couple of the risks and monitored more closely
for symptoms of the disease. The university denies responsibility for the girl's
death.

   Daniella's memory fills the family home in Florissant. On a recent visit,
framed photos showed the little girl, bald from chemotherapy, smiling and
wearing a parade of hats. A small Christmas tree held her ornaments. Her
bedroom, much the way she left it, contained a shrine where Oksana's mother, a
Russian immigrant, prays every morning.

   The Rogers family first noticed a lump in Daniella's shoulder in the fall of
2001, during a visit to see Oksana's family in Russia. When the family returned
from the trip, doctors at Washington University took a biopsy of the mass and
pronounced it to be nonmalignant, John Rogers said. When the lump continued to
grow, doctors removed it last February. That's when the family was told that it
was a malignant form of cancer.

   Daniella had rhabdomyosarcoma, a tumor of the skeletal muscles that makes up
about 7 percent of childhood cancer cases. Doctors told the family that, with
treatment, Daniella had about a 70 percent chance of survival. Her parents were
hopeful.

   John Rogers wanted the best care for the couple's first and only child. He
was familiar with clinical research because of his work at the Barnes Retina
Institute as a medical photographer.

   When Dr. David Wilson said they could join a cancer trial, the Rogers family
jumped at the chance. John Rogers said he assumed Daniella would get the most
attention that way.

   "We had just found out our daughter had cancer. Most parents are desperate at
that point, and willing to do anything, and being presented with this being the
best treatment option, we're like, 'Yeah, let's do it,'" John Rogers said.

   The family did seek a second opinion from another area doctor. After being
reassured that Daniella's treatment would be the best available, the family
signed up.

   John and Oksana Rogers signed a document that explains what the patient and
her guardians need to know about the research. Called an informed consent
document, it is required by federal law to disclose risks and inform patients of
their rights.

   Most of the nine-page document contains legal disclaimers, signature pages
and schedule information. About two and a half pages are devoted to charts
explaining the "risks and discomforts that may be associated with this
research." Possible side effects for radiation and six drugs used in the study
are listed briefly, including one line that says simply: "liver damage."

   In the control group

   On Feb. 28, 2002, Daniella began therapy in a nationwide study comparing the
standard chemotherapy treatment for rhabdomyosarcoma with a newer drug
combination.

   She was in the control group, which received the regular treatment - a
combination of the drugs vincristine, actinomycin-D and cyclophosphamide, or
VAC, dubbed by Washington University as the "gold standard" for decades.

   Subjects in the experimental group received VAC alternating with another
group of drugs. In a previous study, published in 1997, an estimated 3.1 percent
of patients receiving the VAC regimen developed liver disease, but no one had
died of it.

   The family and Washington University agree about these basic facts of what
happened in the two-month course of treatment:

   Daniella responded normally to the drugs until the week of April 24. On that
Tuesday, her chest catheter bled abnormally. On Wednesday, she got a transfusion
of platelets and red blood cells. On Thursday, she got more platelets and
another dose of chemotherapy medicine.

   Early Friday morning, Daniella threw up blood. Upon arrival at Children's
Hospital emergency room, doctors found her listless with a distended abdomen.

   Tests confirmed that Daniella had veno-occlusive disease. There is no cure,
although patients sometimes recover. Despite aggressive care, Daniella's liver
and kidneys shut down, her brain swelled, her breathing slowed and her heart
faltered. Daniella died a week after admission, on May 3.

   Other deaths reported

   John Rogers said he never even heard of veno-occlusive disease before his
daughter was diagnosed with it. He was outraged when he found out that two other
children in the same study had already died of it before Daniella became ill.

   According to Washington University, its doctors didn't know anyone had died
either. The national sponsor of the study, Children's Oncology Group, had
detected 15 cases, including two deaths, from the liver disease as of last
February. After an internal review, the group posted the report to its Web site
two months later, on April 23 - just a day before Daniella's steep decline
began.

   Children's Oncology Group recommended continuing the study as planned while
closely monitoring the incidence of the liver disease, according to Washington
University.

   The university said Daniella's doctor hadn't seen the Web site before she got
sick. But even if he had, it wouldn't have changed the outcome, the university
said.

   The medical school's doctors were well-informed about the disease, monitored
for it, made a timely diagnosis of symptoms and began supportive care within a
reasonable amount of time, Washington University said.

   "Although tragic, the patient's death did not result from any lack of
awareness or vigilance" on the part of the medical school, according to a letter
dated Aug. 1, 2002, from Dr. Philip Ludbrook, chairman of the Washington
University Medical Center Human Studies Committee, to the Office of Human
Research Protection.

   Within a few months of Daniella's death, another patient in the trial died of
veno-occlusive disease. Children's Oncology Group and the National Cancer
Institute suspended the study in August.

   Washington University argues that the drugs Daniella received were the same
she would have gotten anywhere, whether in a study or not.

   But John Rogers believes that the dose she received was much higher than it
should have been. According to his calculations, based on the manufacturer's
package insert, she got up to twice as much as she should have, and over a
shorter time period.

   Dr. Gregory Reaman, chairman of Children's Oncology Group, said in an
interview that the dosage outlined in the original protocol was only "modestly"
higher than that used in past studies and "well within the standards we've used
for many years." He also said the drugs were given in one day, rather than over
a five-day period, to make it more convenient for patients.

   When the trial later resumed, the dosage was decreased, especially for
younger children, to address the liver toxicity problem, Reaman said.

   Another change: The risk and symptoms of veno-occlusive disease were added to
the model informed consent document. Washington University expanded its own
consent form in May, at the Rogers family's request, and adopted the more
extensive model wording in July.

   "Needs to be crystal clear"

   Why didn't Washington University spell out the risks earlier? According to
Washington University's letter, it was because the university didn't want to
confuse parents with medical jargon.

   The university strives to use simple, understandable wording in its informed
consent documents, according to Ludbrook's letter. He cited a national committee
that recommends that "documents be written at an eighth-grade or lower reading
level."

   To John Rogers, that's unacceptable. "If you have to put everything in
eighth-grade terminology, that leaves out a lot, and that's wrong," he said.

   Dr. Arthur Caplan, a nationally recognized medical ethicist at the University
of Pennsylvania, said informed consent documents should be simple to read. But
that doesn't mean they should omit details that parents would want to know, he
said.

   Whether the risk of death is one in a hundred or one in a thousand, the
patient has the right to be informed, he said. "It has to be very specifically
spelled out, and it needs to be crystal clear," Caplan said. "In a sense, you
can't overinform."

   Caplan added that parents of sick children often suffer from what he calls
"therapeutic misconception" - they only want to hear good news, and they don't
really absorb bad news. They see a clinical trial as personal therapy, when
really it's just an experiment.

   "I think it's harder to accept deaths from treatment than from a disease," he
said. "Disease is an act of God, while treatment can be controlled."

   Ronald Munson, a bioethicist at the University of Missouri at St. Louis who
also serves on Washington University's Human Studies Committee, said it's normal
for the parents of a child who died to question everything, even
well-intentioned doctors.

   Should the university have explained the risk of this specific disease?

   Should the sponsor have informed Washington University of the other deaths
sooner?

   Even if the parents knew the risk, would they have chosen to go forward?
There are few other treatment options available, and they all carry risks.

   "I think it's important to keep in mind all these matters. Yes, there's a
risk of using the drug, but there may be a bigger risk in not using it," he
said.

   John Rogers said he accepts the risks of research; he just believes parents
should know exactly what they're getting into.

   "(Researchers) need to tell parents there are other options, and tell the
parents the side effects and the risks of treatment," he said.

NOTES:
Reporter Sara Shipley:; E-mail: sshipley@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 314-340-8215

CORRECTION:
Correction published Wednesday, February 19, 2003 - Daniella Rogers, a patient
in a children's cancer trial conducted by Washington University, was 20 months
old when she died. This story reported her age incorrectly in some editions.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, PHOTO; (1) Color PHOTO by ANDREA SCOTT / POST-DISPATCH -
Oksana and John Rogers talk about their daughter, Daniella, at their home in
Florissant. Daniella, 4, died in April, two months after beginning therapy in a
study comparing the standard chemotherapy treatment for her cancer with a newer
drug combination. The drugs from the standard treatment caused her liver to
fail.  GRAPHIC (2) Graphic / Chart by POST-DISPATCH - The risks of; clinical
research: How much do subjects need to know?; ; The Office of Human Research
Protection recently told; Washington University School of Medicine that it
"failed to; include an adequate description of the reasonably foreseeable;
risks" when it told research subjects about the hazards they; faced in a
children's cancer trial. The federal agency said; Washington University should
have warned subjects about a; potentially fatal liver disease that eventually
killed four; patients. The original and revised informed consent documents; are
shown below.; ; ORIGINAL DOCUMENT; Signed by John and Oksana Rogers before their
daughter; Daniella enrolled in the trial.; "There are certain risks and
discomforts that may be; associated with this research. They include: Liver
damage"; ; ACTINOMYCIN D;
.............  COMMON                OCCASIONAL     RARE;;
IMMEDIATE       Nausea and vomiting
Local;.................................................  ulceration if;
.................................................  drug escapes;
.................................................  the vein; ;
WITHIN 2-3 WKS:  Low blood count,        Anemia     Bleeding;..............
risk of infection,; ..............  mouth sores, hair loss; ;
DELAYED:                                 Enhanced
Liver;....................................... toxicity damage;
....................................... of radiotherapy; ; LATE:; ; ; REVISED
DOCUMENT; After Daniella's death from liver failure, Washington University;
revised the consent form at her parents' request, and later; adopted other
changes that spell out the risk of the; disease in more detail:; ; "There are
certain risks and discomforts that may be associated; with this research. They
include: Both the disease and the; treatment are associated with potentially
life-threatening or; fatal complications and side-effects. There is also the
risk; of very uncommon or previously unknown side effects.; Chemotherapy agents
are drugs that, in addition to killing; tumor cells, can damage normal tissue.
These drugs, however,; have been in use long enough so that severe problems can;
usually be avoided. Side effects are usually reversible; when medication is
stopped but occasionally can persist; and cause serious complications or death.
In addition, when; chemotherapy drugs are combined the side effects can be;
increased. Therapy with vincristine, actinomycin-D and; cyclophosphamide as
given on this protocol has been associated; with a small risk of the development
of a potentially; life-threatening condition called veno-occlusive disease of;
the liver (VOD). VOD is characterized by elevation of liver; enzymes, yellow
skin (jaundice), tenderness in the abdomen; where the liver is located, and
weight gain or swelling.; There is not an effective treatment for VOD at this
time.; If VOD develops, the chemotherapy that you receive may; be changed."; ;
ACTINOMYCIN-D:;
.................... COMMON              OCCASIONAL
RARE;.................... Happens to          Happens to 5-20  Happens to
;.................... 21-100 children     children out of  (less
than);.................... out of every 100    every 100         5
children;......................................................    out of
;......................................................    every 100;;
IMMEDIATE:;
Within 1-2 days of    Nausea, vomiting,;receiving drug if      damage to the
skin;the medication leaks; from a vein; ;
PROMPT:                Decrease in the     Diarrhea, mouth  Damage to;Within 2-3

            number of red       sores (L),       the liver;weeks, prior to
       and white blood     destruction      (L);the next              cells and
platelets of blood;...................  made in the bone    platelets
from;...................  marrow, hair loss, antibody formation;
...................  reduced function    (L), return of;...................  of
the immune       skin changes;...................  system, sensitivity that
previous;
...................  of the skin to      radiation;...................
sunlight and        treatments may;...................  increased risk
have caused;...................  of sunburn; ; (L) Toxicity may also occur later

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2003


                             878 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 15, 2003, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 69 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF / THE REGION;
UK COURT TO HEAR APPEAL

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   Amgen Inc.'s appeal in a patent dispute with rival Transkaryotic Therapies
Inc. over anemia drugs will be heard by the UK House of Lords, Transkaryotic
said. The House of Lords, Britain's highest court, will review a decision that
Transkaryotic's Dynepo drug does not infringe on a patent covering Amgen's $2
billion Epogen treatment. It also will hear Transkaryotic's argument that the
patent is invalid.


LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2003


                             879 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 15, 2003, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: FDA CHIEF HEARS PITCH FOR REFORM BIOTECH EXECUTIVES IN THE STATE MEET
NEW COMMISSIONER

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Leaders of Massachusetts' biotechnology and medical device industries met
yesterday with Dr. Mark McClellan, the new Food and Drug Administration
commissioner, to lay out their wish lists after a period of intense
dissatisfaction with the nation's top drug watchdog.

   Chief executives and other leaders peppered McClellan with questions, ranging
from the mechanics of merging two of the administration's drug review bureaus to
setting new rules for reviewing treatments for rare diseases. They emerged two
hours later, with smiles and promises to work together during a critical time in
the evolution of the biotech industry.

      "He was accessible," said Janice Bourque, president of the Massachusetts
Biotechnology Council. "He said, 'We have dialogue with industry, and that
dialogue is important to me.' He'll pay attention to the details."

   Henri Termeer, chairman and chief executive of Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge,
said, "Being able to look the commissioner in the eye when you ask him a
question is a tremendous opportunity."

   The FDA did not allow outsiders into the meeting, but the industry came with
a long agenda of items it raised with the commissioner.

   They included:

   * The ongoing reorganization of the two FDA groups responsible for evaluating
drugs and biologic treatments.

   The biotech council raised questions about continuing staff turnover at the
review center; the treatment of pending applications during the reorganization;
and ensuring the combined entities have sufficient resources.

   * Evaluation of drugs that challenge the "orphan drug" status, and
exclusivity, of an existing treatment.

   The council wants to know how much better a drug must be for the FDA to
approve it as a competitor to a remedy with "orphan drug" status.

   * FDA's frequent requirement of so-called Phase IV studies to answer
questions after treatments are approved for marketing. The council said such
"post-approval" requirements have "reached the limits of sustainability."

   "We had a very interesting dialogue about science-based ideas to help the FDA
carry out its mission more effectively," said McClellan, 39, who earned his
medical degree at Harvard Medical School and served a residency at Brigham &
Women's Hospital.

   Such meetings between the incoming FDA commissioner and the leaders of
Massachusetts' biotech industry have become regular occurrences, in part because
of the influence of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, who
had chaired the committee which approves nominees for the job. Last year, when
the Democrats controlled the Senate, Kennedy blocked the nomination of Michael
Astrue, who had been a leading contender for the post.

   Astrue, who has since become chief executive of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
of Cambridge, said he had met McClellan before: McClellan, a former health-care
adviser to President Bush, interviewed Astrue when he was being considered for
the FDA post. Astrue said he came away impressed yesterday.

   "He was pleasant, low-key, and a good listener," said Astrue. "But when there
was a disagreement, he wasn't afraid to acknowledge it. The industry doesn't
feel there's a huge, burning issue that needs to be solved. What he was hearing
from us is that we want to see the agency be better managed." Jeffrey Krasner
can be reached at krasner@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, FDA Commissioner Mark McClellan (right) appeared yesterday at a
forum at Harvard University with Senator Edward M. Kennedy / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO /
JANET KNOTT

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2003


                             880 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           February 15, 2003 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1624 words

HEADLINE: Lawmakers rip 'ugly' budget;
Health care and social services take big hits in Foster proposal

BYLINE: By Robert Travis Scott; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- In what lawmakers labeled the "St. Valentine's Day State
Budget Massacre," the governor's office Friday proposed a $16 billion spending
plan for the coming fiscal year fraught with contradictions and highlighted by
massive cuts proposed in health care and social services for the poor.

   Sharply ridiculed by Democrats and Republicans alike, the budget calls for a
five-year Medicaid overhaul, creation of a program to cover people without
health insurance, and the closure of several mental health hospitals and other
facilities. But legislators and administration officials were quick to point out
that many of those steps probably won't happen next year, if ever, even though
the budget assumes they will.

   "There is no pretty one-year solution," said Commissioner of Administration
Mark Drennen, who made the presentation Friday morning to a joint legislative
committee that oversees the budget. "It's ugly."

   That left members of the committee in an uproar; they had hoped for a better
starting point with fewer loose ends as they head toward the start of the
general session March 31.

   "This budget presentation at this point is at best a departure," said House
Appropriations Chairman Jerry Luke LeBlanc, D-Lafayette. "A departure to what,
I'm not sure."

   Drennen said the tight budget was prepared in a rush over the past month and
serves only as a starting point for discussion. Although the state's general
fund next year is expected to bring in a few million more dollars, the state
will be locked into higher spending on various programs mandated by state law.
Also, federal money for the state is expected to shrink. In all, next year's
overall budget is projected to be $500 million smaller than this year's.

'Pie-in-the-sky' plans

   Lawmakers uniformly criticized Drennen's presentation for lacking specifics
and including revenue without even the promise of a check in the mail.

   Drennen, for example, listed revenue of $200 million in new Medicaid dollars
from the federal government, but the state is only at the stage of searching for
a consultant to advise how to get the money from Washington.

   "We're putting up $200 million to a contingency, pie-in-the-sky hope," said
Sen. Tom Schedler, R-Slidell.

   Drennen also included $74 million in federal Medicaid revenue that would
result from bills yet to be passed in Congress.

   "How can we budget based on what they may or may not do in Congress?" asked
Sen. John Hainkel, R-New Orleans. He suggested the state would have as much luck
buying $25,000 in lottery tickets.

   Drennen said Louisiana has poor health-care services and high health-care
costs, mainly because when residents are poor and uninsured, they are most
likely to get care only when illness becomes acute, when the care is most
expensive and the odds of getting better are the worst. Also, he said, state
spending continues to support a health-care system that treats sickness more
than prevents it and relies on institutional care more than community-based
services.

   So the administration is calling for a major overhaul of the state health
system that would redirect money to preventive health care, provide coverage for
the uninsured and "rethink the Charity Hospital system."

   David Hood, secretary of the Department of Health and Hospitals, called the
solution a mixture of "improvements and devastation."

   He said 50 percent of the uninsured people in the state have jobs but either
cannot afford to pay the portion of the insurance premium not paid by their
employer or the employer provides no coverage. He said the state next year can
implement a program for the working uninsured that would rely on money from
employees, employers and the state. Such a program would help people get care
before they become very sick and, in the long run, it would save the state
health costs, he said.

   That means DHH would focus cuts on institutions such as hospitals, nursing
homes, centers that serve people with disabilities and to mental health
hospitals.

   "If enacted, this plan will result in the closure of several mental health
hospitals and other facilities and will eliminate or greatly reduce funding to
Medicaid programs," Hood said.

   Southeast Louisiana Hospital in Mandeville, the New Orleans Adolescent
Hospital and the Metropolitan Developmental Center in Belle Chasse would be
among those to close, Hood said.

   But Drennen conceded that those closures realistically could not happen by
July 1, when the next fiscal year begins, and he said just that because they are
listed for closure in the budget doesn't mean he expects they will be shut down.
However, he said, if lawmakers keep them open, they will have to find money
somewhere else in the budget to operate them.

   When preparing the budget, Gov. Foster asked DHH to find $1.4 billion in
cuts, an overpowering request for an agency with a $5.5 billion budget. DHH came
back with a proposal to take $241 million less from the general fund, to find
$274 million in new Medicaid money from the federal government and to implement
the program giving coverage to the uninsured. The plan foresees $800 million in
budget savings next year.

   The problem, lawmakers said, is that those programs will be difficult or
impossible to implement in time to realize savings in next year's budget.

   "We have a much greater problem than what we are seeing with this
presentation," said Senate Finance Chairman Jay Dardenne, R-Baton Rouge.

   The Department of Social Services would get a cut of nearly 19 percent, or
$214.7 million, for a total budget of $939.6 million. That includes $79 million
less federal money for the Office of Family Support, which provides a variety of
services to the poor. Most of the specific programs cut will be worked out in
the next month.

Education spending upped

   On the other side of the ledger, as promised by Foster, education would get a
boost under his budget. The Department of Education budget would grow by $44.4
million, to $3.7 billion, including nearly $20 million more in support of
Foster's accountability program.

   Higher education spending would grow 4 percent, or $77.8 million, even with
$5.3 million less expected from the federal government. Under the state TOPS
program, which pays college tuition for all students with average or better
grades, part of the budget increase would go to pay for tuition increases at
state colleges.

   The state would invest $5 million of additional money in community colleges
to cover growing enrollments at the schools.

   Additional financing is requested for gene therapy and cancer research
programs in New Orleans.

   The Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center and Health Care
Services division, with programs at several sites around the state including
Charity Hospital in New Orleans, is slated for a 74 percent boost to $37.1
million, partly because of the rising cost of caring for state prisoners.

   Overall, the Department of Economic Development would have 17 percent less
money next year but no reductions in core operations or staff. That is partly
because several one-time expenditures this year, such as $1 million paid toward
the NCAA Men's Final Four basketball tournament this spring, won't be repeated.
The state also will complete its obligation to the University of New Orleans
Technology Center this year with a final $3 million payment.

   The economic development budget would pay for major job initiatives in the
New Orleans area.

   Under the budget, the state would invest $8.4 million toward the shipbuilding
industry. Most of that money would support a Center of Shipbuilding Technology
to be operated by various institutions within the state's community and
technical college system. But a substantial amount would be directed to the
Northrop Grumman Ship Systems yard in Avondale, including $3.5 million to help
the company upgrade with new equipment, information technology and
infrastructure. The yard would also receive money for customized training.

   The state next year would put $3.4 million into enhancement of the National
Finance Center, a federal check-processing and personnel-support center in
eastern New Orleans that is scheduled to be expanded and possibly moved to a new
location in the city.

   While most health-care and social service agencies are in line to take a big
hit, some departments are scheduled for a raise.

   The Department of Corrections budget would grow less than 1 percent to $522.2
million. Public Safety Services would see its budget grow 3 percent, to $291.9
million. The Wildlife and Fisheries budget would increase 4 percent, to $83.2
million.

   "Looks like we're trying to take care of animals and criminals more than the
poor people of this state," said Rep. Jack Smith, D-Patterson.

   Among agencies on the chopping block, the Culture, Recreation and Tourism
budget would fall 8 percent, to $64.5 million. The Department of Agriculture and
Forestry budget would be cut $12.1 million, or 11 percent.

   The budget for the Department of Transportation and Development, financed
largely by dedicated taxes, would fall less than 1 percent, to $394.9 million.

   Smith said the budget proposal is the worst he has seen in his 12 years in
office. Part of the problem is the sagging economy, he said. But his foremost
concern is that the "smoke-and-mirrors" budget is so filled with problems that
it is a worthless starting point.

   "We can almost throw it in the trash can, because it's not going to look
anything like this when we're done," Smith said.

   . . . . . . .

Robert Travis Scott can be reached at rscott@timespicayune.com or (225)
342-4197.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2003


                             881 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    February 14, 2003 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1144 words

HEADLINE: OHSU BIDS TO DEVELOP CENTER FOR BIODEFENSE

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: In a move that could create hundreds of jobs, scientists seek grants
to study bioterrorism agents and other diseases

   After years of slowly building its abilities to study germs and infectious
disease, Oregon Health & Science University on Thursday made its play for the
big time: a $200 million push to become the key Northwest center working against
bioterrorism diseases and other emerging infections.

   The move includes a plan to build one of the country's few top-security
biological labs in Hillsboro. Only three such U.S. labs exist, where scientists
study the deadliest diseases known to man, including smallpox and the ebola
virus.

   Two OHSU scientists also unveiled the Pacific Rim Biodefense Center, a
consortium they formed with Oregon State University and other schools that wants
to become a center for finding vaccines against germs such as the West Nile
virus and hantavirus.

   To fund its plans, OHSU applied to the National Institutes of Health for
three separate grants -- one for the scientific center, one for the top-security
lab and another to build slightly lower-security labs. Combined, they would pour
more than $200 million in new funding into OHSU over several years and,
university officials said, create hundreds of jobs for research assistants,
construction workers and many others. The government should say by September
whether OHSU wins any of the grants.

   "These awards will give us the credit that we're due, and really put us on
the national map," said Magdalene So, chairwoman of OHSU's microbiology
department. "It will establish Oregon's pre-eminence in research on infectious
diseases."

   So and other OHSU leaders have spent years working to hire gifted scientists
interested in studying the secrets of how viruses and bacteria live, die and
infect people. The school's expanding work on such infections spurred OHSU to
open the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute on its West Campus in Hillsboro two
years ago.

   "Over the past 10 years, the university has been recruiting some of the best
immunologists, virologists and bacteriologists in the nation," said Jay Nelson,
who directs the vaccine institute. "The intent is to develop a regional center
that would have unique expertise in the development of vaccines."

   Nelson and So applied to make the Pacific Rim center one of a handful of
"Regional Centers of Excellence for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Disease"
that the NIH will create this year. Winning that NIH grant, worth tens of
millions of dollars over five years, would let the school hire even more top
scientists and significantly expand its research, focusing on finding new and
better vaccines.

   OHSU Provost Lesley Hallick followed with two more grant requests, asking the
NIH to fund new lab space at the campus. One would make OHSU home to one of
eight or more "regional biocontainment labs" the NIH wants to build, to spread
labs that can respond to biological threats across the country.

   The larger grant, worth well over $100 million, would bring Hillsboro one of
two new national "biosafety level 4" labs -- the highest level of security. That
lab must have four separate layers of protections built in. All waste must be
treated inside the lab, and all air and water must be purified before it leaves
the building. The level 4 lab would include space to treat patients, a place the
government would use in case of a serious local outbreak or bioterrorist attack,
Nelson said.

   Hallick said OHSU must win the grant to be named a regional center for
studying biodefense and emerging disease if it has any serious chance of getting
funds for the two new labs. Several researchers at OHSU drove the efforts to
create the Pacific Rim center and apply for that grant, which spurred the
university to later add its bids for the buildings, spokesman Jim Newman said.

   The NIH asked for the grants after Congress gave it new money to expand the
nation's ability to respond to bioterrorism, especially after the 2001
anthrax-by-mail attacks. It's not clear how many research institutes are
competing for the limited number of awards, but Hallick said many top
universities are likely to seek money. The University of Washington, which
declined to join OHSU's center, applied to be a regional center but did not
apply for the Level 4 lab, spokesman Walter Neary said.

   Hallick said OHSU has several facilities, including the vaccine institute and
nearby Oregon National Primate Research Center, that should help its chances for
winning a grant. So added that, through carefully targeted hiring, OHSU is
"uniquely positioned to answer a lot of the questions" the NIH wants studied.

   Nelson said partners in the Pacific Rim center were carefully picked for
their expertise, such as Oregon State's knowledge of animal diseases, or the
University of Hawaii's studies of dengue fever, a tropical infection that
recently resurfaced there after decades of dormancy. Other center members are
the University of Nevada, Reno, the University of Idaho, Princeton University
and Pacific Northwest National Lab in Richland, Wash.

   Even if none of the grants comes through, Nelson said the Pacific Rim center
will remain. Several OHSU scientists are already working on research that is
part of the center's mission.

   "We're going to be primarily looking at diseases that naturally occur in the
environment," Nelson said. Those include tularemia, tuberculosis, dengue fever
and the diseases caused by hantavirus and West Nile virus, he said. The center
will also look at LCMV, a mouse virus endemic to Oregon that is related to the
African Lassa virus, which can cause deadly fevers.

   In addition to identifying new targets for possible vaccines, the Portland
researchers are focused on studying why certain people are more susceptible to
some diseases or have problems taking vaccines. People with weakened immune
systems aren't supposed to get a smallpox vaccine, for instance, because they
may have severe reactions. It's vital to figure out whether there are safe ways
to vaccinate such people, said Dr. Janko Nikolich-Zugich, an OHSU scientist
involved in the center.

   Nikolich-Zugich will study three populations especially susceptible to some
diseases -- the elderly, people taking steroid drugs and people under chronic
stress. He plans to examine the West Nile virus and vaccinia, a virus related to
smallpox that is used to vaccinate people against smallpox.

   Nikolich-Zugich said he plans to start his studies in mice, then examine
infection and vaccines in primates. Winning the grants to expand lab space would
be important for advancing such research, he said. And getting a level 4 lab
would allow the researchers to handle certain strains and amounts of diseases
that they couldn't work with in a level 3 lab. The three U.S. level 4 labs are
in Georgia, Maryland and Texas.

GRAPHIC: Photo - by Fredrick D. Joe/The Oregonian

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2003


                             882 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    February 14, 2003 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: PICTURE CAPTION; Pg. A11

HEADLINE: AS SCOTT HANSEN PASSES BY

SOURCE: FREDRICK D. JOE/The Oregonian

GRAPHIC: BW photo: ; As Scott Hansen passes by, Tiffany Gromlich studies a
culture of SIV, the monkey version of the virus that causes AIDS, in a secure
lab at the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute on Oregon Health & Science
University's Hillsboro campus. On Thursday, OHSU said it has applied to build a
more secure lab next door that could study the world's deadliest germs.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2003


                             883 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           February 13, 2003 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA METRO; Part 2; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 744 words

HEADLINE: Commentary;
The Weapons of Mass Creation;
Are we ready for genetically enhanced 'designer people'? If so, who will make
the titanic decisions involved?

BYLINE: Caroline S. Wagner

BODY:

   Without providing a shred of evidence, the Raelian cult made headlines with
sensational claims of creating cloned babies. Far less attention is being paid
to well-documented advances that will soon give us the power to create people
with chosen genetic qualities, thus altering the course of human evolution.

   Although human genetic manipulation, which focuses on altering select genes
-- sometimes called reprogenetics -- is still in early stages of research,
scientists report few obstacles to eventual success.

   "I am absolutely convinced that we will have both an expansion of pre-embryo
genetic diagnosis as well as genetic enhancement of embryos," Lee Silver, a
Princeton University biologist and genetic expert and author of "Remaking Eden,"
says. "We have already perfected this in animals."

   The power to change the future of the human race is, in some ways, more
frightening than the weapons of mass destruction we hear so much about today.

   It is a weapon of mass creation.

   For now, gene alteration is focusing on genetic therapy, which has the
laudable goal of stopping deadly genetic diseases such as Tay-Sachs and
Huntington's. This research has growing support because it can save children
from enormous suffering and early death.

   But success here will lead to the ability not only to eliminate disease but
also to alter genes that determine other human traits. Many loving parents,
desiring only the best for their children, will want to use genetic manipulation
to make them smarter, more creative, more attractive or more ath- letic.

   But should scientists and parents, no matter how well intentioned, be allowed
to manipulate genes as they see fit? Or should the power to alter the genetic
heritage of the human race be the subject of oversight by our elected leaders,
by citizen councils or by international institutions such as the United Nations?

   Altering the random genetic combinations that make us who we are might seem
worthwhile to individual families, but it could be disastrous for society. For
example, many couples in Asia believe having a son is a justifiable family goal,
in part because sons will do more to support them in old age.

   Some achieve this by using genetic testing and selective abortions to produce
boys. The Global Health Council reports that this has resulted in significant
gender imbalances in many nations: China has 118 boys per 100 girls under age 5,
South Korea has 117 to 100 and Taiwan has 110 to 100.

   Growing numbers of what demographer Nicholas Eberstadt, in a December Foreign
Affairs article, calls "unmarriageable males" have little hope of finding wives,
leading to a range of social problems.

   Now fast-forward several decades. Imagine your neighbors genetically
enhancing their children's physical attractiveness and brainpower.

   Wouldn't it be hard to resist the opportunity to offer your children the same
competitive advantages -- or at least a level playing field?

   The option to alter the genes that enhance desirable characteristics will
almost surely be available, at least initially, only to the wealthy, creating
what Silver calls the "GenRich." They will use technology to ensure that their
children have significantly more advantages than the random mix of the gene
pool, widening the gap between rich and poor.

   What then becomes of the notion that we are all created equal? The temptation
of the genetically enhanced to anoint themselves leaders and protectors of their
"less equal" fellow citizens could prove to be overwhelming.

   And if scientists in one nation are genetically altering unborn children,
wouldn't it be hard for other nations to resist joining in a "genetic arms race"
to develop a new generation better able to compete in the global economy -- or
in war?

   Might some future dictator even try to genetically alter some people to
become particularly obedient and compliant or especially aggressive and warlike?

   This is not impossible. Remember that many medical procedures that are
routine today -- in vitro fertilization or "test tube babies," for example --
were considered science fiction just a few decades ago.

   We are standing at the gateway of a brave new world of genetic manipulation
that could, in this century, create designer people.

   Before we step through, we should look ahead, determine the consequences of
the paths we can take and ask who gets to decide.

   *

   Caroline S. Wagner holds research positions at Rand Europe and the University
of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2003


                             884 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                February 13, 2003 Thursday STREET FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1269 words

HEADLINE: AREA COULD GET TOP-SECURITY LAB, PLAY KEY ROLE IN BIOTERROR RESPONSE

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: An OHSU-led team of universities is applying for three federal
grants that are worth hundreds of millions of dollars

   A team of Western universities, led by Oregon Health & Science University, is
seeking to win hundreds of millions of federal bioterrorism-preparedness dollars
to create a big new vaccine-research center in Portland.

   The effort could mean Portland would be a focus of responding to any regional
bioterror attack. And it could include building one of the nation's few
top-security biological research labs in Hillsboro.

   This morning, OHSU unveiled the Pacific Rim Biodefense Center, a research
consortium that aims to find new vaccines for some of the world's most worrisome
diseases.

   Research will focus on diseases that terrorists might use in an attack on the
United States, such as tularemia and the plague, as well as on infections
emerging naturally in the country, such as West Nile virus and hantavirus
pulmonary syndrome.

   The center includes researchers from OHSU, Oregon State University and four
other universities, as well as the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in
Richland, Wash.

   The group has applied for a grant, seeking to be one of four to six "regional
centers of excellence" the National Institutes of Health plans to fund this
year. The NIH will name up to four centers that will share $40 million this
year, and it could get funding for four more years. The institute could name
more regional centers in the future.

   Alongside the research grant, OHSU has applied for two separate grants to
build new labs for research into very infectious diseases.

   One grant would expand labs in Hillsboro and on Marquam Hill that are
biosafety level 3 -- the second-most secure kind of lab. That would make OHSU
home to one of eight to 12 "regional biocontainment labs" the government plans
to build. The NIH has $100 million to divide between those labs over 2003 and
2004.

   The other proposal would make Hillsboro home to one of the one or two new
national biocontainment labs the government wants to build.

   Those labs will be biosafety level 4, the highest level of security and the
only labs allowed to deal with the world's deadliest organisms, such as
smallpox.

   Now the only level 4 labs in the nation are a Centers for Disease Control lab
in Atlanta, an Army lab in Maryland and a smaller Texas lab that focuses on
animal diseases. The NIH will spend $275 million on one or two new labs over the
next two years.

   OHSU is proposing to put the top-security lab on its West Campus in
Hillsboro, the site of the university's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute and
the Oregon National Primate Center, Provost Lesley Hallick said.

   Hallick, who coordinated the work on the three grant applications, said the
key is to be named a regional center of excellence for immunology research. If
the Pacific Rim group doesn't win that, the NIH "certainly wouldn't give" OHSU
the facilities-improvement grant, she said.

   The government's efforts to found new regional and national centers grew from
the 2001 anthrax-by-mail terrorist attacks, which killed five people. That made
U.S. officials realize that the nation was vulnerable to many infectious
diseases and that its top-security human-health labs are all in the East, said
Jay Nelson, who directs OHSU's vaccine institute and is co-director of the
Pacific Rim center.

   The revived focus followed a period of relative disinterest in infectious
diseases, when "everybody assumed there were so many antibiotics around that
infectious disease is going to be a very small part" of biological research,
said Magdalene So, chair of OHSU's Molecular Microbiology and Immunology
Department.

   "We really need to do more research and development on infectious diseases,"
said So, who will co-direct the Pacific Rim center. At the center, she added,
"Our main focus will be to design and develop better vaccines or . . . vaccines
for diseases that have no vaccine at the moment."

   Nelson said the OHSU-led program will start working on research even if it
doesn't win any grants this year and just apply for future awards.

   "We're going to be primarily looking at diseases that naturally occur in the
environment," Nelson said. Those include tularemia, tuberculosis, Dengue fever
and the diseases caused by hantavirus and West Nile virus, he said. The center
will also look at LCMV, a mouse virus endemic to Oregon that is related to the
African Lassa virus, which can cause deadly fevers.

   The researchers said they feel OHSU is well-poised to win the federal grants
because it has many researchers working on vaccine-related questions. Hallick
said OHSU is home to the country's oldest primate center, which would be
involved in vaccine research. The university also has been working hard to
improve its faculty and research strength in immunology, she said. The recently
created vaccine and gene institute is a concrete example of that, she said.

   One focus of the Pacific Rim center would be studying why certain people,
such as the elderly or people on steroids, have weaker immune responses to some
diseases, So said. She said OHSU has several researchers who have been studying
those questions for years.

   The university's partners all add unique experience, Nelson said. Oregon
State has experts in animal disease and pathology, he said, and the Richland
national lab has some of the world's most advanced systems for identifying genes
and proteins. Other partners include the University of Hawaii at Manoa; the
University of Nevada, Reno; the University of Idaho and Princeton University.

   The consortium had talked with the University of Washington about joining,
but that university has submitted its own, separate grant application to be a
regional center of excellence, spokesman Walter Neary said. The Seattle
university did not apply for the level 4 lab, he said.

   Hallick said that the grant to expand OHSU's biosafety level 3 labs would
help expand the amount of research space at OHSU, which would allow for the
regional center to do much of its work, she said. OHSU wouldn't have to have the
biosafety level 4 facility to win a regional grant, but that level of lab would
let scientists work with larger amounts or different forms of germs, she said.

   The CDC says which germs require what safety level. For example, scientists
use level 2 safety for viruses such as the flu or rabies, level 3 for yellow
fever and West Nile virus and level 4 for the Ebola or Marburg viruses. The
required safety level often depends on the amount and form of a germ being
handled.

   Tissue samples that might be infected with hantavirus can be handled in a
level 2 lab, for instance, while scientists who want to grow the virus on a
large scale for research need a level 4 lab.

   "We're really not planning to grow a lot of agents here," Hallick said. "Our
focus is entirely on vaccine production and design."

   Hallick acknowledged that some people might worry about the safety of
bringing a level 4 lab to Oregon. But she said that no disease is known to have
escaped any of the nation's level 4 labs because of their extensive safety
precautions.

   As the name implies, level 4 labs have four separate layers of security
protection. In the most-secure areas, all workers use pressurized suits to avoid
any contact with the germs being studied. All the lab's hazardous waste is
handled inside the secure facility, she said.

   "Everything you work with is handled internally and then killed," Hallick
said. "Nothing comes out of it that's hazardous." Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8239;
andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2003


                             885 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 13, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-9:7; B-5:1

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: DR. HAROLD S. GINSBERG; Noted microbiologist; 85

BYLINE: Anahad O'Connor; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 Dr. Harold S. Ginsberg, a microbiologist whose research provided a foundation
for the field of virology and expanded knowledge of infectious diseases, died
Feb. 2 in Woods Hole, Mass. He was 85.

   The cause was pneumonia.

   Dr. Ginsberg also headed the microbiology departments at Columbia and the
University of Pennsylvania, and conducted research for the National Institutes
of Health.

   In the late 1950s, while on the faculty at Western Reserve University (now
Case Western), Dr. Ginsberg demonstrated that atypical pneumonia and
pharyngitis, respiratory illnesses common in children, and acute respiratory
disease were infections caused by adenoviruses.

   He described how such viruses, found in the lump of lymph tissue at the back
of the nose, also called the adenoid, often remained dormant before gradually
becoming infectious.

   Adenoviruses, known to be particularly hardy, can survive long periods
outside a host and are ubiquitous in humans and animals.

   Dr. Ginsberg showed how the virus invaded host cells and caused disease.  His
discovery led to the development of vaccines for infections and helped explain
how some DNA tumor viruses initiated cancers.

   Later, he worked on characterizing adenoviral genes and proteins, allowing
other scientists to use the viral agents to implant healthy genes in people with
cystic fibrosis and other inherited diseases.

   "He was one of the founding fathers of modern virology and microbiology,"
said Dr. Saul J. Silverstein, chairman of microbiology at Columbia's medical
school and a former colleague of Dr. Ginsberg's.

   "His discoveries involving the genetics of adenoviruses paved the way for the
development of gene therapy," Silverstein said.  "He was certainly a giant in
this field."

   Dr. Ginsberg's first major discovery occurred while he was a 1st lieutenant
stationed in England in World War II at an Army hospital.

   Noticing a high occurrence of severe hepatitis in wounded soldiers who
received blood transfusions, Dr. Ginsberg determined that the pooled plasma the
hospital was giving its patients was causing hepatitis B.

   For his efforts, the Army gave him its Legion of Merit Award in 1945.

   Harold Samuel Ginsberg was born in Daytona Beach, Fla. He received his
undergraduate degree from Duke and his medical degree from Tulane.

   After his military service, he became an associate at the Rockefeller
Institute from 1946 to 1951 and then taught at Western Reserve for nine years
before leaving to head the microbiology department at the University of
Pennsylvania.  He directed Columbia's microbiology department from 1973 to 1985.

   Dr. Ginsberg spent the latter part of his career at the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases studying the simian AIDS virus, called SIV, to
learn how it injures a host after infection.

   "He moved on to research on the AIDS virus essentially because he had
accomplished all he could with adenoviruses," said Dr. Robert Chanock, formerly
chief of the infectious disease agency's laboratory.


LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2003


                             886 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           February 13, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 575 words

HEADLINE: University medical centers are building on teamwork;
Canal St. building to serve as center for cancer research

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   A nondescript blond-brick building that has been vacant for nearly two
decades will become the headquarters of a center designed to turn local research
into money, leaders of New Orleans' academic medical centers said Wednesday.

   The Wirth Building on the 1400 block of Canal Street will become the New
Orleans BioInnovation Center, which will contain an incubator to help research
products go commercial, a facility to manufacture gene therapies and space for
commercial tenants, said Paul Whelton, Tulane University's senior vice president
for health sciences.

   Renovation on the addition to the medical complex is scheduled to begin soon
and should be completed by the end of next year, he told about 20 visiting state
legislators.

   "It's an auspicious site that's going to grow just like Research Triangle
Park" in North Carolina, Whelton said.

   Whelton and John Rock, his LSU counterpart, appeared together with some of
their star researchers to discuss the initiative and other projects that the two
schools have undertaken jointly in an attempt to mesh complementary skills and
defuse what had been a fierce rivalry. In particular, their partnership in
forming the Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium -- rather than pursuing such
research individually at their respective cancer centers -- has been highly
productive, said Nicolas Bazan, director of LSU's Neuroscience Center of
Excellence.

   "All of a sudden, we find that each of us has a different piece of the
puzzle," he said. "This opportunity has allowed us to bring the puzzle
together."

   The consortium formed last year to let the schools unite in their quest for
the Holy Grail of cancer research: designation by the National Cancer Institute
as a comprehensive cancer center.

   Each school is keeping its cancer center, but as a symbol of the two schools'
alliance, a new building to house the consortium's headquarters will rise
somewhere between their medical campuses, Whelton said.

   The National Cancer Institute decides which institutions deserve the
"comprehensive" title. There are 40 in the United States; the closest to New
Orleans are in Birmingham, Ala., and Houston.

   The lawmakers beamed at the positive reports.

   "I've spent most of my adult life watching Tulane and LSU fighting each other
while everyone went to Houston or Birmingham for treatment," said state Sen.
John Hainkel, R-New Orleans. "This is very refreshing."

   The LSU-Tulane consortium should be ready to apply for the comprehensive
recognition within five years, Whelton said.

   The state lawmakers had come to see what the centers were working on jointly
in cancer research, genetics, neuroscience and biotechnology. The projects are
designed to foster innovation, attract scholars, create an array of products,
spin off companies and generate high-paying jobs.

   In addition to grants, since October the cancer consortium has been getting 3
cents from the sale of each pack of cigarettes in the state -- nearly $1.5
million so far. The money not only helps underwrite the consortium but also pays
for smoking-cessation programs.

   That fact that prompted state Rep. Diane Winston, R-Covington, to ask Whelton
if he worries about losing that source of income if smoking-cessation programs
prove effective.

   Not at all, he said. "If we could eliminate smoking in this state, we would
be thrilled."

   . . . . . .

John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY MATT ROSE State Rep. Kay Kellogg Katz, a member of the
state Health and Welfare Committee, delights in learning how a laser cell
dissector works as she and several other members of the Legislature tour
Tulane's and LSU's Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium in New Orleans. [110254]

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2003


                             887 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    February 12, 2003 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 036

LENGTH: 437 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   New CEO, firings come to biotech

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. replaced its CEO yesterday and plans to cut 150
jobs, or about a third of its work force, by firing 100 workers and through
attrition. New CEO Mike Astrue, who replaced Richard Selden, said the Cambridge
biotech firm would retrench around its Replagel Fabry disease treatment sold in
Europe. Transkaryotic suffered a setback last month when the FDA rejected
Replagel for use in the United States. - DOW JONES

   AG tries tower tactic

   State Attorney General Tom Reilly asked a district court judge yesterday for
permission to argue that a proposed windmill farm test tower in Nantucket Sound
needs more than a permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The request was
filed as part of a case brought by the Alliance to Protect Nantucket Sound
seeking to block the tower. - STAFF

   FCC changes date

   The Federal Communications Commission has delayed by a week its review of
whether regional Bell companies such as Verizon Communications Inc. must
continue to lease their lines to competitors. The vote is rescheduled for Feb.
20. - STAFF

   Sycamore narrows loss

   Chelmsford-based Sycamore Networks Inc. said yesterday that it lost $ 16.8
million, or 6 cents a share, on revenue of $ 10.8 million in its second fiscal
quarter of 2003, compared with a loss of $ 35.3 million, or 14 cents a share, on
revenue of $ 16.8 million for the same period in 2002. - STAFF

   Zoom sees improvement

   Boston modem-maker Zoom Technologies Inc. said yesterday that it lost $
529,000, or 7 cents a share, on fourth-quarter sales of $ 8.2 million, compared
with a loss of $ 5 million, or 63 cents a share, in the same period in 2001. For
the year, Zoom said it lost $ 5.1 million, or 68 cents a share, on sales of $
37.3 million, compared with a loss of $ 18.3 million, or $ 2.33 a share, in
2001. - STAFF

   Microsoft suspect dies

   SEATTLE - A former Microsoft Corp. manager who was facing prosecution for
allegedly stealing more than $ 9 million worth of software died unexpectedly at
a local hospital four days ago, the King Country Medical Examiner's office said
yesterday. Daniel Feussner, 32, died last Friday from multiple organ failure,
but the cause of death could not be determined until further tests were
conducted. - REUTERS

   Wyeth in investigation

   TRENTON, N.J. - Drug maker Wyeth, formerly called American Home Products
Corp., disclosed yesterday that the U.S. Department of Justice's antitrust
division plans to have a grand jury review on whether the company colluded with
another, unidentified, pharmaceutical firm on certain sales commission rates. -
AP

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2003


                             888 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  February 12, 2003, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: TKT CHIEF QUITS; NEW CEO VOWS TO END SLIDE

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.'s founder and CEO, Richard Selden, resigned
yesterday, ending a 15-year tenure at the Cambridge biotechnology firm, which
has suffered a series of legal, regulatory, and financial setbacks.

   In its announcement yesterday, TKT said Michael J. Astrue, until recently
senior vice president and general counsel, was appointed president and chief
executive.

      Astrue, 46, a lawyer and executive who has played a major role in the
biotech industry for nearly a decade, had in November made public his plans to
leave TKT. Last month, he stepped down as general counsel.

   The company also said that as part of planned changes that it would cut more
than 20 percent of the jobs at the firm.

   The appointment, analysts said, is a significant step toward restoring the
company's credibility.

   Astrue is widely seen as an ideal choice at a time when TKT must overcome a
series of regulatory hurdles to get its business back on track.

   "We still don't know exactly where the missteps were, but the Street's
extreme negative perception of what had taken place was looming over the
company," said Jennifer Chao, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets in New York.
"Unfortunately, it became necessary for Richard [Selden] to step down."

   Last month, the company's prospects for bringing its drug Replagal to the US
market were dashed when a panel of specialists met to review its Food and Drug
Administration application, raising serious doubts among investors about how
Selden had handled the regulatory process and how forthcoming he had been with
Wall Street.

   A similar drug being developed by TKT's crosstown rival, Genzyme Corp.,
appears on track to be approved this year.

   In the past six months, shares in TKT have fallen nearly 90 percent,
triggering a series of class-action lawsuits. Yesterday, the shares closed at
$4.32, up 52 cents. The news of Selden's departure was announced after the
market closed.

   More than a year ago, Astrue had emerged as President Bush's choice to head
the Food and Drug Administration, but the nomination was blocked by Democratic
Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts. Astrue was considered a candidate
for another senior administration post.

   Before joining TKT, he had played a key role as general counsel at Biogen
Inc., one of the Bay State's oldest and largest biotechnology firms.

   Earlier in his career, he had served as associate counsel to two US
presidents, advising and representing Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush.

   He also served as general counsel in the Department of Health and Human
Services, where he brought a federal case alleging discrimination by an employer
against a person infected with the AIDS virus. And he helped to expand the FDA's
so-called fast-track process for approving drugs.

   "Michael Astrue brings a wealth of experience, and on one of the most
important issues facing the company - its relationship with FDA," said Dennis
Harp, an analyst with Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown in New York. "He has a long
history of building strong relationships with the FDA."

   In an interview yesterday, Astrue said he has three priorities:

   * He wants to get Replagal, a drug to treat the rare genetic disorder Fabry
disease, to as many patients as possible, expanding its sales in Europe, where
it is already approved, and continuing to work with the FDA to get the drug OK'd
in the United States.

   * He aims to push the company's drug to treat another rare inherited
disorder, Hunter's disease, into final clinical trials.

   * And he said he plans to restore financial discipline to the company, in
part by eliminating about 100 jobs in coming months.

   Astrue said the company, which has about 450 employees, has grown too
quickly, given its revenues. For the nine months ending Sept. 30, TKT generated
$23,365 in revenues. The company had more the $288 million in cash reserves, but
is not yet profitable. It has yet to report fourth-quarter and year-end results.

   "We've been disappointing to investors; we've been disappointing to patients
and our own employees," Astrue said. "We're going to do the best we can so we
don't disappoint people going forward."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Michael J. Astrue was named president and CEO of
Transkaryotic Therapies. 2.  Selden / GLOBE FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2003


                             889 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                          February 12, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: Chief Executive of Troubled BiotechnologyCompany Resigns

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   The founder and chief executive of Transkaryotic Therapies, Richard F.
Selden, resigned yesterday after setbacks in the company's drug development
efforts. He will be succeeded by Michael J. Astrue, who until recently had been
the company's general counsel.

        The company did not offer a reason for Dr. Selden's departure but it
seems tied to recent problems. "I think Rich went through a process where we had
a difficult, discouraging and disappointing fall," Mr. Astrue said. "It's my
understanding he went to the board and said it's time for new leadership."

    Mr. Astrue said that Transkaryotic would cut 100 of its 450 employees in the
next six weeks and that another 50 would be laid off by late in the year.

   The company failed last month to win a recommendation from a Food and Drug
Administration advisory panel for its drug, Replagal, to treat Fabry disease, a
rare inherited disorder. The panel endorsed a rival drug made by the Genzyme
Corporation, meaning that Genzyme's drug, Fabrazyme, willprobably win approval
and have the market to itself for seven years under a federal law to encourage
development of drugs for rare diseases.

   Transkaryotic stock has fallen 90 percent in the last year. It dropped 62
percent on a single day in October when the company first announced that the
staff of the drug agency did not agree with the data presented to win approval
for Replagal. The announcement took many investors and analysts by surprise and
several lawsuits have since been filed by shareholders accusing management of
misleading investors. Mr. Astrue said the company did not know of the agency's
view until then.

   A patent suit filed by Amgen blocked Transkaryotic, based in Cambridge,
Mass., from bringing to market its version of Amgen's anemia drug, Epogen, the
biggest-selling product ever produced by the biotechnology industry.
Transkaryotic said its manufacturing method was different enough from Amgen's to
avoid patent infringement, but the judge did not agree.

   An appeals court last month asked the lower court to reconsider some facets
of the case. But deliberations are likely to keep the drug off the market for
many more months, even if Transkaryotic eventually wins.

   Dr. Selden was an instructor in pediatrics at Harvard Medical School before
starting the company in 1988. He stayed chief executive longer than most
founders in the biotechnology industry, where scientific founders tend to give
way to professional managers as the company grows. He could not immediately be
reached for comment.

   Mr. Astrue, 46, has had a career in the public and private sectors. In 2001,
he was considered a candidate to become the commissioner of the Food and Drug
Administration.

   Mr. Astrue held several positions in the Department of Health and Human
Services, including general counsel. He later became general counsel of Biogen,
another biotechnology company. He became general counsel of Transkaryotic in May
2000 but left the company last month, he said, because he wanted to return to
the public sector and because he did not agree with some of the company's
direction.

   "I think we were spread too thin," he said. "We've basically been spending in
anticipation of revenue we're not going to be getting in the next couple of
years."

   Mr. Astrue said he agreed to return after talking to directors.

   Mr. Astrue said the company would drop several programs, including gene
therapy, and would concentrate on Replagal, which is being sold in Europe.

   The shares rose 52 cents, to $4.32. The announcement of the management change
was made after the market closed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2003


                             890 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                          February 12, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:

   Fed Chief Rebuts Bush Plan For New Round of Tax Cuts
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, rebutted many of President Bush's
arguments in favor of new tax cuts, saying the economy probably does not need a
short-term stimulus and warning that deficits could spiral out of control. Mr.
Greenspan also disagreed with Mr. Bush's argument that rising budget deficits
have little link to higher interest rates.

        In a cautious assessment of the economy, he said the biggest obstacle to
faster growth was uncertainty about a likely war with Iraq. Though expressing
optimism that the economy would strengthen once those uncertainties disappeared,
he suggested that the Fed would not raise interest rates soon.  Page A1.


   Chief Resigns at Pipeline Company
William A. Wise, the chairman and chief executive of the El Paso Corporation who
helped transform it into the nation's largest natural gas pipeline company,
announced plans to step down. Market Place.  C9.

Wyeth Expects Subpoena in Inquiry
Wyeth said that it expected to receive a subpoena from the Justice Department
related to an inquiry into whether it colluded with Schering-Plough to lower the
commission rates paid to a broker that was selling over-the-counter medicines in
vending machines on offshore oil rig. Wyeth said a grand jury was expected to
hear the accusations.  C5.

Founder of Biotech Company Quits
The founder and chief executive of Transkaryotic Therapies, Richard F. Selden,
resigned after setbacks in drug development.  C4.

Microsoft Rivals File Complaint
Technology companies said they had filed a new complaint with European antitrust
regulators about the Windows XP operating system of Microsoft.  World Business,
Section W.

Compromise on Internet Monitoring
House and Senate negotiators have agreed to bar the use against Americans of a
military project intended to find terrorists by monitoring e-mail and commercial
databases.  A1.

Qualcomm Plans to Pay Dividend
Qualcomm plans to begin paying a quarterly dividend, the second major technology
company to recently announce plans to do so.  C9.

17 Charged in Satellite TV Case
Seventeen people have been charged in connection with developing technology to
steal satellite television service after a year long federal investigation that
led into the underground world of computer hackers.  A22.

A Quarterly Profit for Cablevision
Cablevision Systems reported a fourth-quarter profit of $517.4 million, in
contrast to a net loss of $281.6 million a year earlier.  C13.

Shares Fall on New War Jitters
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 77 points, to 7,843.11. The Standard &
Poor's 500 index dropped 6.77 points, to 829.20. The Nasdaq lost 1.22 points, to
1,295.46.  C9.

Former Money Manager Sentenced
The former money manager Alan B. Bond has been sentenced to 12 1/2 years in
prison for cheating clients and taking kickbacks from brokers. In addition to
prison time, Mr. Bond was ordered to pay restitution of $6.6 million. He told
the judge he was remorseful and that he recognized that his actions had been
"incorrect and inappropriate." C5.

Brewer Tries to Rekindle a Romance
Rheingold Brewing is hoping that it can get New Yorkers to embrace its beer as
warmly as they did in the 1950's. It is turning to an old favorite, the
Rheingold Girl. Advertising.  C8.

Seeking Customers in Blighted Area
Chesterfield Square -- a $60 million, 22-acre shopping center that opened last
year -- is the first significant commercial development in south-central Los
Angeles since the riots of 1992. Commercial Real Estate.  C7.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo Chart: "YESTERDAY"Dow industrials -- 7,843.11 down 77.00Nasdaq
composite -- 1,295.46 down 1.2210-yr. Treasury yield -- 3.96% down 0.01The euro
-- $1.0738 down 0.0007The dollar -- 121.06 yen down 0.09 Graph tracks the daily
closing price of Wyeth shares for the week.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2003


                             891 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          February 12, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: Lincoln may have had rare disorder;
Local family shares the same symptoms

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   Mandeville resident Kevin Mahony has some traits in common with Abraham
Lincoln: his lanky build, for one, and fingers as long and skinny as asparagus
spears.

   Mahony suffers from a condition known as Marfan syndrome, and scientists
scheduled to gather today in Washington for their annual commemoration of
Abraham Lincoln's birthday have a hunch that Lincoln did, too. Other famous
people who might have been afflicted with the disorder include the composer
Sergei Rachmaninoff; Mary, Queen of Scots; and perhaps even Osama bin Laden.

   Marfan syndrome, a connective-tissue disorder that can weaken blood vessels,
bones and the structures in the eye that anchor the lens, would explain
Lincoln's above-average height, his long arms and his gaunt, haunted face.

   The dispute could be settled with a test developed by a Tulane University
researcher, but until he can get access to a

sample of the 16th president's DNA, talk of whether he had Marfan syndrome
remains a topic for scholarly debate.

   For Mahony, there is nothing speculative about the diagnosis. He is one of an
estimated 200,000 Americans with the condition, which he has transmitted
genetically to his two sons and, perhaps, his 19-month-old daughter.

   "I really don't look on myself as having a disability. It's at the back of my
mind," said Mahony, president of a title-service company bearing his name.

   Marfan syndrome already has forced Mahony to undergo two open-heart surgeries
to repair his damaged aorta, and the lenses of his eyes had to be removed
because they had become dislocated. He takes three prescriptions to thin his
blood and reduce its force as it pounds against his arterial walls, and he
undergoes regular checkups with an Ochsner cardiologist who specializes in the
condition.

   His wife, Alesia Mahony, who does not have Marfan, has become an activist who
wants to educate people, especially doctors, about the condition.

   "A doctor who knows about it will take it seriously," she said, "but it's not
in a lot of doctors' everyday vernacular."

   In the world of Marfan patients, Kevin Mahony is in a minority. Like about 15
percent of people with the condition, there is no evidence that anyone in his
family had it before him, and he had no inkling of his condition as he grew up
in Shreveport. An athletic young man who topped out at 6-foot-4, Mahony
remembered only one health-related complaint in his youth: He needed
increasingly thicker glasses to correct nearsightedness.

   When Mahony's parents took him to see specialists in 1978, the news was far
worse than a vision problem. "Make him as comfortable as possible," Mahony
remembered the doctors saying. "Then he'll die."

   The syndrome's worst trouble spot is the aorta, which is susceptible to a
fatal rupture because of the nonstop pounding it takes from blood leaving the
heart. Because many doctors don't know to suspect Marfan syndrome, the first
doctor to make the diagnosis often is a coroner.

   That was the fate of Olympic volleyball star Flo Hyman, who was 31 when her
aorta burst in 1986, killing her.

   One year earlier, Mahony's aorta had ruptured. His memory of the experience
is succinct: "I died in the emergency room."

   Marfan syndrome is named for the French pediatrician who, in 1896, was the
first to describe the condition. If one parent has the disorder, there is a
50-50 chance that each of his or her children will inherit it.

   Ideally, doctors would be able to head off the disorder by making the
diagnosis in utero and replacing the defective gene, said Dr. Douglas Moodie of
Ochsner Clinic Foundation. Moodie follows about 30 people with the condition,
including the Mahonys. But even though scientists know which gene is involved,
it's a big one, with no one spot where the defect is known to occur, said Dr.
Darwin J. Prockop, director of Tulane Center for Gene Therapy.

   And people with the same mutation can have different symptoms. In one family
Prockop followed, he said a woman was tall, her daughter had long arms, and her
grandson had a defective aorta.

   Although there is no treatment beyond monitoring trouble spots and lessening
the symptoms, there is a blood test for the gene developed by Dr. Leena
Ala-Kokko, a researcher at Tulane Center for Gene Therapy. Prockop would love to
run the screening on something connected with Lincoln to settle the dispute over
whether Lincoln had the disorder -- one of the blood-soaked garments he was
wearing when John Wilkes Booth fatally shot him, perhaps.

   Meanwhile, Mahony remains optimistic about his health prospects -- but
vigilant. "Marfan is a very manageable disease," he said, "as long as you're
under the care of a physician."

   "You have to watch it and watch it," his wife said.

   . . . . . . .

More information is available from the National Marfan Foundation,
www.marfan.org or (800) 8-MARFAN (862-7326).

John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

GRAPHIC: FILE PHOTO Experts think Abraham Lincoln's lanky build may have been
caused by Marfan syndrome.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2003


                             892 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          February 12, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: Lincoln may have had rare disorder;
Local family shares the same symptoms

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   Mandeville resident Kevin Mahony has some traits in common with Abraham
Lincoln: his lanky build, for one, and fingers as long and skinny as asparagus
spears.

   Mahony suffers from a condition known as Marfan syndrome, and scientists
scheduled to gather today in Washington for their annual commemoration of
Abraham Lincoln's birthday have a hunch that Lincoln did, too. Other famous
people who might have been afflicted with the disorder include the composer
Sergei Rachmaninoff; Mary, Queen of Scots; and perhaps even Osama bin Laden.

   Marfan syndrome, a connective-tissue disorder that can weaken blood vessels,
bones and the structures in the eye that anchor the lens, would explain
Lincoln's above-average height, his long arms and his gaunt, haunted face.

   The dispute could be settled with a test developed by a Tulane University
researcher, but until he can get access to a

sample of the 16th president's DNA, talk of whether he had Marfan syndrome
remains a topic for scholarly debate.

   For Mahony, there is nothing speculative about the diagnosis. He is one of an
estimated 200,000 Americans with the condition, which he has transmitted
genetically to his two sons and, perhaps, his 19-month-old daughter.

   "I really don't look on myself as having a disability. It's at the back of my
mind," said Mahony, president of a title-service company bearing his name.

   Marfan syndrome already has forced Mahony to undergo two open-heart surgeries
to repair his damaged aorta, and the lenses of his eyes had to be removed
because they had become dislocated. He takes three prescriptions to thin his
blood and reduce its force as it pounds against his arterial walls, and he
undergoes regular checkups with an Ochsner cardiologist who specializes in the
condition.

   His wife, Alesia Mahony, who does not have Marfan, has become an activist who
wants to educate people, especially doctors, about the condition.

   "A doctor who knows about it will take it seriously," she said, "but it's not
in a lot of doctors' everyday vernacular."

   In the world of Marfan patients, Kevin Mahony is in a minority. Like about 15
percent of people with the condition, there is no evidence that anyone in his
family had it before him, and he had no inkling of his condition as he grew up
in Shreveport. An athletic young man who topped out at 6-foot-4, Mahony
remembered only one health-related complaint in his youth: He needed
increasingly thicker glasses to correct nearsightedness.

   When Mahony's parents took him to see specialists in 1978, the news was far
worse than a vision problem. "Make him as comfortable as possible," Mahony
remembered the doctors saying. "Then he'll die."

   The syndrome's worst trouble spot is the aorta, which is susceptible to a
fatal rupture because of the nonstop pounding it takes from blood leaving the
heart. Because many doctors don't know to suspect Marfan syndrome, the first
doctor to make the diagnosis often is a coroner.

   That was the fate of Olympic volleyball star Flo Hyman, who was 31 when her
aorta burst in 1986, killing her.

   One year earlier, Mahony's aorta had ruptured. His memory of the experience
is succinct: "I died in the emergency room."

   Marfan syndrome is named for the French pediatrician who, in 1896, was the
first to describe the condition. If one parent has the disorder, there is a
50-50 chance that each of his or her children will inherit it.

   Ideally, doctors would be able to head off the disorder by making the
diagnosis in utero and replacing the defective gene, said Dr. Douglas Moodie of
Ochsner Clinic Foundation. Moodie follows about 30 people with the condition,
including the Mahonys. But even though scientists know which gene is involved,
it's a big one, with no one spot where the defect is known to occur, said Dr.
Darwin J. Prockop, director of Tulane Center for Gene Therapy.

   And people with the same mutation can have different symptoms. In one family
Prockop followed, he said a woman was tall, her daughter had long arms, and her
grandson had a defective aorta.

   Although there is no treatment beyond monitoring trouble spots and lessening
the symptoms, there is a blood test for the gene developed by Dr. Leena
Ala-Kokko, a researcher at Tulane Center for Gene Therapy. Prockop would love to
run the screening on something connected with Lincoln to settle the dispute over
whether Lincoln had the disorder -- one of the blood-soaked garments he was
wearing when John Wilkes Booth fatally shot him, perhaps.

   Meanwhile, Mahony remains optimistic about his health prospects -- but
vigilant. "Marfan is a very manageable disease," he said, "as long as you're
under the care of a physician."

   "You have to watch it and watch it," his wife said.

   . . . . . . .

More information is available from the National Marfan Foundation,
www.marfan.org or (800) 8-MARFAN (862-7326).

John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

GRAPHIC: FILE PHOTO Experts think Abraham Lincoln's lanky build may have been
caused by Marfan syndrome.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2003


                             893 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    February 10, 2003 Monday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1078 words

HEADLINE: IMMUNITY TO SMALLPOX MAY LINGER

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Lab tests indicate that the bodies of people who received shots
decades ago "remember" the virus, an OHSU researcher says

   People vaccinated against smallpox decades ago could still have a surprising
amount of immunity, according to preliminary research by an Oregon Health &
Science University researcher.

   Mark Slifka and his lab assistants have exposed more than 100 blood samples
from previously immunized people to a virus closely related to smallpox. That
virus, vaccinia, is used to immunize against the disease -- which has been
eradicated in nature, but which some government officials fear could be revived
in a terrorist attack.

   When vaccinia is exposed to blood plasma from people who were never
immunized, then put into a lab dish with a tissue culture, the virus usually
kills all the cells, Slifka said. In recently vaccinated people, however, the
virus will kill few to no cells.

   By exposing the blood samples to vaccinia and seeing how many cells die,
Slifka hopes to gauge how much immunity against smallpox people might have 20,
40 or 60 years after their last vaccination. Slifka said he has seen signs that
the body remembers the virus decades after vaccination, and mounts two kinds of
immune responses -- antibodies that kill the viruses before they infect cells,
and T-cells that seek and destroy infected cells.

   "Our work is still in its preliminary stages, but people would be surprised
by that levels of immunity we're finding," he said.

   Slifka said his research does not show that people wouldn't be infected with
smallpox decades after being immunized, and he supports ongoing efforts to
immunize health workers and others likely to directly respond to a smallpox
outbreak.

   He is studying whether enough immunity remains over decades to offer some
protection against infections, or at least jump-start an attack on smallpox and
limit damage from an infection.

   No one knows just how much immunity a person retains years after vaccination.
Slifka's work is among the first modern studies into the question. By summer, he
hopes to finalize and publish the findings from his first tests.

   The findings could influence national policy, as the government undertakes a
vaccination campaign based on the assumption that only a handful of U.S.
residents have significant immunity. The government quit recommending
vaccinations for all U.S. residents in 1972 and for health workers in 1976. The
military quit vaccinating soldiers in 1990.

   The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said "smallpox
vaccination provides high level immunity for three to five years, and decreasing
immunity thereafter." The CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
said "substantial but waning immunity can persist" for more than 10 years. The
government said lab employees who work with smallpox-like viruses are supposed
to be vaccinated every 10 years if they handle weakened strains, and every three
years for maximum protection.

   Dr. Alan Melnick, Clackamas County's health officer and a family doctor at
OHSU, said public health officials who are planning to deal with any smallpox
outbreak are assuming that people can be infected 10 or more years after being
vaccinated. There is "a general belief that immunity wanes" over time, he said.

   Doctors do know that anyone who has been vaccinated once is less likely to
have a bad reaction to a second vaccination, even if many decades pass between
the two, Melnick said. That suggests that there is "something qualitatively
different" about the bodies of vaccinated people that lingers, he said.

   But finding immune reactions in a lab dish doesn't necessarily mean people
would be immune to the smallpox virus, he said.

   "We're still operating under the assumption that people vaccinated (a long
time ago) don't have immunity," Melnick said. "I don't know if this changes
that."

   The nature of other viral infections spurred Slifka to study the longevity of
immunity to vaccinia. In most cases, Slifka said, when a person gets a virus
that spreads throughout his body, then kills the virus off fairly quickly, the
body keeps a long immune "memory" to battle the infection, he said.

   "Any time you have a short-lived infection that spreads systemically -- like
measles, mumps or rubella -- you get immunity for life," Slifka said.
"Regardless of the (viral) family, they share that characteristic. That's the
interesting thing."

   If the unrelated viruses causing polio, yellow fever or measles prompt that
immune response, Slifka wondered, why should vaccinia be different? He also is
examining whether those who were vaccinated multiple times, which happened in
some cases decades ago, retain more immunity over time than people vaccinated
once.

   So far, Slifka has studied samples from more than 100 people who were last
vaccinated from 15 to 67 years ago. For comparison, he is studying samples from
six people who were vaccinated within the past seven years because they work in
labs with vaccinia or related viruses. Slifka has paid for the work from funds
for his lab at OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute. He also has applied to
the National Institutes of Health for funding to expand his research.

   If he can better define how much vaccinia immunity remains over time, Slifka
said, government officials could use the data to create better models of how a
case of smallpox might spread today. That also might influence recommendations
on who should be vaccinated and when.

   So far, the government has vaccinated about a half-million military members
and shipped more than 247,000 doses of vaccine to 44 states or counties, which
will vaccinate health officials. As of Thursday, 687 people had been vaccinated,
according to the CDC.

   Oregon health officials have said they will not ask the CDC for vaccine until
next month, at the earliest. Washington state received its vaccines Thursday,
according to the CDC.

   The Bush administration plans to offer the vaccine to a wider group of health
and safety workers this year in a second round of vaccinations. Officials have
said the government will offer all U.S. residents the vaccine by 2004, but they
do not recommend that most people be vaccinated. Slifka said he doesn't think
all U.S. residents should be immunized.

   "I would definitely not propose mass vaccination for the country," Slifka
said. "150 million people have already been vaccinated."

   Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8239; andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                             894 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                    February 10, 2003 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1102 words

HEADLINE: DNA discovery turns 50

BYLINE: By Malcolm Ritter; Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Fifty years ago this month, on a foggy Saturday morning in Cambridge,
England, a 24-year-old beanpole of an American scientist sat down with a few
white cardboard cutouts and set off a revolution in biology.

   The cutouts, the size of teacup saucers, looked basically like a
schoolchild's geometry project: Some were hexagons; others looked like a hexagon
with a pentagon attached.

   But to James Watson, who had created them the night before, they represented
fragments of the mysterious molecule that obsessed him and his collaborator,
Francis Crick: deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as DNA.

   It wasn't yet clear to scientists whether DNA was the stuff of genes. But
Watson and Crick thought it was, and for about 18 months they had been trying to
figure out the three-dimensional structure of the DNA molecule.

   "It seemed to us it had to be the secret of life," Watson said recently. "We
thought it was the most important problem to solve if you were a biologist."

   The cardboard cutouts represented the four kinds of "bases" found in the DNA
molecule. Bases are part of the basic building blocks of DNA, and somehow they
had to pair up in a way that would nestle smoothly in the overall structure. But
how?

   It wasn't just a matter of jamming the cardboard polygons together; the real
bases would bond only via hydrogen atoms, which Watson portrayed with little
sticks protruding from the cutouts.

   As he switched the shapes around on his desk, he suddenly saw the answer: a
scheme that gave him two identically shaped pairs.

   His first reaction: "It's so beautiful."

   Nowadays, even high school biology students know what Watson and, soon
thereafter, Crick realized on that day:

   The DNA molecule is a double helix, resembling a ladder that has been twisted
along its length. Each "rung" is made up of two bases, paired according to the
rule that jumped out at Watson from his desktop. These bases provide the genetic
code; just as a four-letter alphabet could spell out words, the sequence of the
four kinds of bases along the length of the DNA molecule spells out the
information stored in genes.

   The finding unleashed a torrent of research into DNA that is still going on,
both to understand how it works and to put it to use. Many of today's scientific
headlines - the deciphering of the DNA of humans and other species, the
transplanting of genes into animals and crops to change their traits, the use of
gene therapy to treat disease, the DNA evidence that exonerates people unjustly
imprisoned - ultimately came from the double-helix discovery.

   The 50th anniversary of the finding is being widely celebrated this year by
high-profile scientific journals and conferences in the United States, Europe
and Australia. There's a black-tie dinner on Feb. 28 - the actual anniversary
date - at New York's Waldorf-Astoria hotel, hosted by several scientific
institutions.

   And there are books and special art exhibitions celebrating the discovery,
because the double helix has become an icon. Salvador Dali used it long before
the 1962 Nobel Prize recognized the achievement. New York's Museum of Modern Art
sells a double-helix bracelet. The shape shows up in corporate logos,
sculptures, and a British millennium stamp.

   All in all, it is a heady legacy for a couple of researchers who knew little
chemistry and never did an experiment to reach their goal. Instead, they used
research from others to guide them in building models that resembled Tinker Toy
creations.

   Watson, a Chicago native who had abandoned zoology in college after a book
got him excited about genetics, arrived in Cambridge in 1951 at age 23. There he
met Crick, 12 years older, an ebullient physicist with a booming laugh. Soon the
two men were sharing lunch almost daily; their colleagues eventually gave them a
room together so they could talk without disturbing others.

   "It was intellectual love at first sight," says Victor McElheny, author of
the new book Watson and DNA: Making a Scientific Revolution.

   The men shared, Crick wrote, "a certain youthful arrogance, a ruthlessness,
and an impatience with sloppy thinking."

   "Neither of us had a big ego... . We just wanted to get the answer," recalled
Watson, now 74 and president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in Cold
Spring, N.Y.

   "Francis was the brains... . I was the emotion," he said.

   Crick, now 86, is president emeritus and a professor at the Salk Institute
for Biological Studies in San Diego. He has turned to exploring the biology of
consciousness.

   In their DNA research, both men learned from the work of others. Crucially,
they benefited from work by chemist Rosalind Franklin of King's College in
London. She had investigated the shape of DNA molecules by bombarding them with
X-rays and tracking how the rays scattered. She found strong evidence of a helix
structure - results that Watson said made his jaw drop and his pulse race during
one visit to London.

   Franklin died of ovarian cancer in 1958 at age 37, before she could share in
the Nobel Prize.

   So why was there a Nobel Prize at all? Why was this discovery such a big
deal?

   "It was an astonishing revelation," says Horace Freeland Judson, a historian
at George Washington University, who is editing a collection of Crick's
scientific papers. "It made brilliantly clear, instantly, how genes worked in
principle."

   What's more, says Yale historian Daniel Kevles, it made a strong case that
DNA was indeed the stuff of genes, and it opened up huge avenues of research. In
fact, the structure plainly suggested the answer to one basic question about
genes: How do they copy themselves so they can be inherited?

   The pairing scheme Watson saw was soon shown to be critical to the way genes
replicate. The DNA molecule splits lengthwise, cutting each rung in half and
exposing each base to the chemical soup. Each exposed base pairs off with the
same kind of partner as before. Result: two identical DNA molecules.

   The structure also gave scientists a starting point to attack the other big
question about genes: How do they direct the moment-to-moment production of
proteins in cells?

   The DNA story is far from over. Scientists are still working out the details
of how DNA is replicated so quickly and accurately - an astonishing feat, since
each human cell contains billions of base pairs lined up along nearly six feet
of DNA, all packed into a nucleus one-twentieth the width of a human hair.

   Scientists are also exploring the use of DNA as a building material for
making vanishingly tiny devices and powerful computers.

   The 50th-anniversary Web site is at www.dna50.org/main.htm

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2003


                             895 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    February 10, 2003 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg.B-1 MARKET MONDAY

LENGTH: 380 words

BODY:

   Today's Guest: Alison Fox Wertz, vice president, financial consultant, Bill
Few Associates, North Hills, awertz@billfew.com


    Have we put this bear to rest? We think the stock markets will be better
over the next several years than they have been over the past three. It is
always hard to call the bottom, but once we can get some of the international
concerns behind us (Iraq, Korea) we see the markets higher.


    Do you expect the major indices -- the Dow, S&P and Nasdaq -- to end the
year higher than they started, or will it be a case of the blue chips staying
blue while the rest of the market improves? We think the indexes will finish
higher and should get stronger as the year progresses. Our forecast is for
capital spending to improve throughout the year. If that happens, then corporate
profits and stock prices will rise.



    What sectors or investments look good for the next three to five years? The
next three to five years is a difficult time frame. We believe the market as a
whole should be higher over that time period. Historically, small-caps tend to
outperform when exiting a recession and for 12 months following an easing cycle.
Small-caps are also trading at a slight discount to large caps, although it is
not as pronounced as two years ago. Sector-wise, health care provides a good
opportunity. Health-care stocks are trading at a discount to their historic
levels and have many opportunities based on our nation's demographics and the
potential for breakthroughs in cancer and gene therapies.


    Specific names? Small-cap: Bjurman Micro-Cap Growth (BMCFX) and Royce Total
Return (RYTRX). While we are more bullish on small-cap growth, Royce takes
advantage of dividend-paying stocks. Health care: Eaton Vance Worldwide Health
(ETHSX) and Pfizer (PFE). Pfizer has an excellent pipeline of new drugs and a
reasonable P/E.


    What should be avoided? Avoid putting too many dollars in bond funds.
Although bond funds were the place to be for the last three years, yields have
very little room to fall. Therefore, new bond investors will be buying in at
historically low yields in an environment where the price of their bonds is
likely to fall over the next couple of years. Do not overexpose your portfolio
to this area of the market.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (No Caption)

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2003


                             896 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 10, 2003 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Replace Stem Cell Genes

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists working with human embryonic stem cells have for the first time
successfully spliced out individual genes from the medically promising but
politically contentious cells and substituted different genes in their place.

   The work is a step toward the biomedical goal of being able to rebuild or
regenerate parts of the human body by transplanting either stem cells or tissues
grown from stem cells into patients, scientists said. Precise genetic changes in
those formative human cells might enhance their therapeutic potential or make
them more compatible with patients' immune systems.

   Some scientists suggested the success might someday make it unnecessary to
pursue "therapeutic cloning," in which cloned embryos would be created as a
source of therapeutic tissues that match the genetic signature of the patient.

   But the work could escalate concerns among those who fear that stem cell
technology will lead to the creation of "designer babies."

   Applying genetic engineering techniques to humans is "defensible as long as
it's used to cure diseases, but we have to be aware that techniques like these
can be abused, too," said John Robertson, a bioethicist at the University of
Texas School of Law.

   The new work, published in today's issue of the journal Nature Biotechnology,
resembles similar studies decades ago in mice. That was when scientists
discovered how to "knock out" and replace individual genes in mouse embryo
cells.

   The technique, called homologous recombination, revolutionized molecular and
cellular biology.

   By growing animals with those precise genetic changes and seeing what went
wrong as they developed, scientists could start to see what individual genes
did. They also were able to replace "broken" genes in mouse embryos.

   The work with human embryonic stem cells was done by University of Wisconsin
researcher James A. Thomson, the scientist who discovered the cells in 1998, and
his colleague Thomas P. Zwaka.

   They used electrical charges and chemicals to make the cells' membranes
porous enough to allow the cells to take in customized genes. Under proper
conditions, the new genes find and replace their counterparts in the cell DNA.

   In one experiment, they knocked out a gene that in humans causes Lesch-Nyhan
syndrome, a rare and fatal genetic disease. They said they hope such work can
shed light on the molecular underpinnings of the disease and perhaps someday
lead to cures. But others noted that just because a broken cell can be fixed
does not mean a cure will be forthcoming soon.

   Despite years of efforts, Johns Hopkins University stem cell researcher John
Gearhart said, scientists have not been able to make lines of mouse stem cells
that are compatible in all mice.

   He suggested that therapeutic cloning research, controversial though it is,
will remain important in the search for treatments for human disease.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2003


                             897 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                            February 9, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: Solution to riddle of DNA found in bits of cardboard

SOURCE: Associated Press AP

BYLINE: Malcolm RitterNEW YORK--Fifty years ago this month, in Cambridge,
England, a 24-year-old American scientist sat down with a few white cardboard
cutouts and set off a revolution in biology.

HIGHLIGHT:
50 yrs. ago, scientists put the 'secret of life' together on a desk

BODY:


   The cutouts, about the size of teacup saucers, looked like a school geometry
project: Some were hexagons; others looked like a hexagon with a pentagon
attached.

   But to James Watson, a Chicago native who'd created them the night before,
they represented fragments of the mysterious molecule that obsessed him and his
collaborator, Francis Crick: deoxyribonucleic acid--DNA.

   It wasn't yet clear to scientists whether DNA was the stuff of genes. But
Watson and Crick thought it was, and for about 18 months, they had been trying
to figure out the three-dimensional structure of the DNA molecule.

   "It seemed to us it had to be the secret of life," Watson recalled recently.
"We thought it was the most important problem to solve if you were a biologist."

   The cardboard cutouts represented the four kinds of "bases" in the DNA
molecule. Bases are part of the basic building blocks of DNA, and somehow they
had to pair up in a way that would nestle smoothly in the overall structure. But
how?

   It wasn't just a matter of jamming the cardboard polygons together. The real
bases would bond only via hydrogen atoms that Watson portrayed with little
sticks protruding from the cutouts.

   As he switched the shapes around on his desk, he suddenly saw the answer: a
scheme that gave him two identically shaped pairs.

   Now, even high school biology students know what Watson and, shortly, Crick
realized that day:

   The DNA molecule is a double helix, resembling a ladder that has been twisted
along its length. Each "rung" is made up of two bases that provide the genetic
code. Just as a four-letter alphabet could spell out words, the sequence of the
four kinds of bases along the length of the DNA molecule spells out the
information stored in genes.

   The finding, awarded a Nobel Prize in 1962, unleashed a torrent of research
into DNA that's still going on, to understand how it works and to put it to use.
Many of today's scientific headlines--the deciphering of DNA of humans and other
species, the transplanting of genes into animals and crops to change their
traits, the use of gene therapy to treat disease, the DNA evidence that
exonerates people imprisoned unjustly--ultimately came from the double helix
discovery.

   The 50th anniversary of the finding is being widely celebrated this year by
high-profile scientific journals and conferences in the United States, Europe
and Australia.

   Watson is now 74 and president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in Cold
Spring, N.Y. Crick, now 86, is president emeritus and a professor at the Salk
Institute for Biological Studies in San Diego.

GRAPHIC: Associated Press, Francis Crick (left) and James Watson, pictured at
Cambridge University in England in the 1950s, were awarded a Nobel Prize in
physiology-medicine in 1962 for their DNA discovery. Watson is a Chicago native.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2003


                             898 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 9, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: Harold Ginsberg, Microbiologist, Dies at 85

BYLINE:  By ANAHAD O'CONNOR

BODY:

   Dr. Harold S. Ginsberg, a microbiologist whose research provided a foundation
for the field of virology and expanded knowledge of infectious diseases, died on
Feb. 2 in Woods Hole, Mass. He was 85.

        The cause was pneumonia.

    Dr. Ginsberg also headed the microbiology departments at Columbia and the
University of Pennsylvania and conducted research for the National Institutes of
Health.

   In the late 1950's, while on the faculty at Western Reserve University (now
Case Western), Dr. Ginsberg demonstrated that atypical pneumonia and
pharyngitis, respiratory illnesses common in children, and acute respiratory
disease were infections caused by adenoviruses.

   He described how such viruses, found in the lump of lymph tissue at the back
of the nose, also called the adenoid, often remained dormant before gradually
becoming infectious.

   Adenoviruses, known to be particularly hardy, can survive long periods
outside a host and are ubiquitous in humans and animals.

   Dr. Ginsberg showed how the virus invaded host cells and caused disease. His
discovery led to the development of vaccines for infections and helped explain
how some DNA tumor viruses initiated cancers.

   Later, he worked on characterizing adenoviral genes and proteins, allowing
other scientists to use the viral agents to implant healthy genes in people with
cystic fibrosis and other inherited diseases.

   "He was one of the founding fathers of modern virology and microbiology,"
said Dr. Saul J. Silverstein, chairman of microbiology at Columbia's medical
school and a former colleague of Dr. Ginsberg's.

   "His contributions to the field were numerous," Dr. Silverstein said. "His
discoveries involving the genetics of adenoviruses paved the way for the
development of gene therapy. He was certainly a giant in this field."

   Dr. Ginsberg's first major discovery took place while he was a first
lieutenant stationed at an Army hospital in England during World War II.

   Noticing a high occurrence of severe hepatitis in wounded soldiers who
received blood transfusions, Dr. Ginsberg determined that the pooled plasma the
hospital was giving its patients was causing hepatitis B.

   For his efforts, the Army gave him its Legion of Merit Award in 1945. His
work is also considered a foundation for the discovery of hepatitis viruses.

   Harold Samuel Ginsberg was born in Daytona Beach, Fla. He received his
undergraduate degree from Duke and his medical degree from Tulane.

   Upon finishing his military service, he became an associate at the
Rockefeller Institute from 1946 to 1951 and then taught at Western Reserve for
nine years before leaving to head the microbiology department at the University
of Pennsylvania. He directed Columbia's microbiology department from 1973 to
1985.

   Dr. Ginsberg spent the latter part of his career at the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases studying the simian AIDS virus, called S.I.V.,
to learn how it injures a host after infecting it.

   "He moved on to research on the AIDS virus essentially because he had
accomplished all he could with adenoviruses," said Dr. Robert Chanock, formerly
chief of the infectious disease agency's laboratory.

   Dr. Ginsberg received numerous scientific awards and was a member of the
National Academy of Sciences. A prolific writer, he was the author or co-author
of several books, including a widely used microbiology text. He published more
than 200 scientific papers.

   Dr. Ginsberg, who lived in Woods Hole and in Washington, is survived by his
wife of 53 years, Marion Reibstein Ginsberg; two sons, Benjamin, of Washington,
and Peter, of Chappaqua, N.Y.; two daughters, Ann of Westfield, N.J., and Jane
of Denver; a brother, Joseph, of Daytona Beach; and eight grandchildren.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2003


                             899 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2003 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            February 9, 2003 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 1069 words

HEADLINE: Scientist's first reaction to DNA molecule: 'It's so beautiful'

BYLINE: MALCOLM RITTER, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Fifty years ago this month, on a foggy Saturday morning in Cambridge,
England, a 24-year-old beanpole of an American scientist sat down with a few
white cardboard cutouts and set off a revolution in biology.

   The cutouts, about the size of teacup saucers, looked basically like an
elementary school geometry project: Some were hexagons, others looked like a
hexagon with a pentagon attached.

   But to James Watson, who'd created them the night before, they represented
fragments of the mysterious molecule that obsessed him and his collaborator
Francis Crick: deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as DNA.

   It wasn't yet clear to scientists whether DNA was the stuff of genes. But
Watson and Crick thought it was, and for about 18 months, off and on, they had
been trying to figure out the three-dimensional structure of the DNA molecule.

    "It seemed to us it had to be the secret of life," Watson recalled recently.
"We thought it was the most important problem to solve if you were a biologist."

   As he worked in the lab at Cambridge University, he knew he had to be close.

   The cardboard cutouts represented the four kinds of "bases" found in the DNA
molecule. Bases are part of the basic building blocks of DNA, and somehow they
had to pair up in a way that would nestle smoothly in the overall structure. But
how?

   It wasn't just a matter of jamming the cardboard polygons together; the real
bases would bond only via hydrogen atoms that Watson portrayed with little
sticks protruding from the cutouts.

   As he switched the shapes around on his desk, he suddenly saw the answer: a
scheme that gave him two identically shaped pairs.

   His first reaction: "It's so beautiful."

   Nowadays, even high school biology students know what Watson and, soon
thereafter, Crick realized on that day:

   The DNA molecule is a double helix, resembling a ladder that's been twisted
along its length. Each "rung" is made up of two bases, paired according to the
rule that jumped out at Watson from his desktop. These bases provide the genetic
code; just as a four-letter alphabet could spell out words, the sequence of the
four kinds of bases along the length of the DNA molecule spells out the
information stored in genes.

   The finding unleashed a torrent of research into DNA that's still going on,
both to understand how it works and to put it to use. Many of today's scientific
headlines - the deciphering of the DNA of humans and other species, the
transplanting of genes into animals and crops to change their traits, the use of
gene therapy to treat disease, the DNA evidence that exonerates people
imprisoned unjustly - ultimately came from the double helix discovery.

    The 50th anniversary of the finding is being widely celebrated this year by
high-profile scientific journals and conferences in the United States, Europe
and Australia. There's even a black-tie dinner on Feb. 28 - the actual
anniversary date - at New York's Waldorf-Astoria, hosted by several scientific
institutions.

   Beyond the laboratory walls, the anniversary has inspired at least three new
books. There's probably a good market: Watson's own 1968 account of the
discovery, "The Double Helix," was a million-seller translated into more than 15
languages.

   And there are special art exhibits celebrating the discovery, because the
double helix has become an icon. Salvador Dali used it long before the 1962
Nobel Prize recognized the achievement. New York's Museum of Modern Art sells a
double helix bracelet. The undulating shape shows up in corporate logos,
sculptures and a British millennium stamp.

   All in all, it's a heady legacy for a couple of reseachers who knew little
chemistry and never did an experiment to reach their goal. Instead, they used
research from others to guide them in building models that resembled Tinker Toy
creations.

   Watson, a Chicago native who'd abandoned zoology in college after a book got
him excited about genetics, arrived in Cambridge in 1951 at age 23. There he met
Crick, 12 years older, an ebullient physicist by training with a booming laugh.
Soon the two men were sharing lunch almost every day; their colleagues
eventually gave them a room together so they could talk without disturbing
anybody else.

   "It was intellectual love at first sight," says Victor McElheny, author of
the new book, "Watson and DNA: Making a Scientific Revolution."

   Not only did their interests coincide, Crick wrote later, but they shared "a
certain youthful arrogance, a ruthlessness, and an impatience with sloppy
thinking."

   As they pondered the riddle of DNA, they challenged each other. They could be
each other's worst critic, but in a polite way, McElheny said.

   "Neither of us had a big ego. . . . We just wanted to get the answer,"
recalled Watson, now 74 and president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on
Long Island.

   In this drive to the goal, he said in an interview, "Francis was brains. . .
. I was the emotion."

   Crick, now 86, is president emeritus and a professor at the Salk Institute
for Biological Studies in San Diego. He has turned to exploring the biology of
consciousness. He and a collaborator published a commentary on that topic just
this month.

   So why was there a Nobel Prize at all? Why was this discovery such a big
deal?

    "It was an astonishing revelation," says George Washington University
historian Horace Freeland Judson, who is editing a collection of Crick's
scientific papers. "It made brilliantly clear, instantly, how genes worked in
principle."

   What's more, says Yale historian Daniel Kevles, it made a strong case that
DNA was indeed the stuff of genes, and it opened up huge avenues of research. In
fact, the structure plainly suggested the answer to one basic question about
genes: How do they copy themselves so they can be inherited?

   When they announced their discovery to the world in April 1953, Watson and
Crick acknowledged that implication with one of the most famous sentences in
scientific literature: "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing
we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the
genetic material."

    It sure does. The pairing scheme that Watson saw on his desktop was shown
within a few years to be key to how genes replicate themselves. The ladder-like
DNA molecule splits lengthwise, cutting each rung in half and exposing each base
to the chemical soup. Then each exposed base pairs off with the same kind of
partner as before. Result: two identical DNA molecules.

GRAPHIC: 1. Francis Crick, in his office at the Salk Institute for Biological
Studies, "was brains," says collaborator James Watson. "I was the emotion."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             900 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     February 7, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 715 words

BODY:

   The dead of winter annually delivers the most speculative spectacle anywhere
on the sports calendar, the so-called National Letter of Intent Day, which
likely means that schools are closed in Alabama.

    In Georgia, there is no mail delivery. In Florida, Winn Dixie is dark. In
Texas, fireworks celebrations are scheduled on consecutive nights, one for each
Longhorns recruit who can run a 4.4 40. In Nebraska, you don't even want to
know.

    Basically, there are people out there making a living pretending to know
which of the nation's 17- and 18-year-olds will be writing the next glorious
chapters of college football history, and the annoying part is, there are other
people paying attention.

    At some point in the long, sordid history of recruiting football players,
the colleges pledged to stop tormenting each other's recruits once a National
Letter of Intent was signed by prospective student athletes. (I liked it better
when fully capable students just showed up in the fall loaded down with
reference books and academic goals and the football coach was a chemistry
professor who drew the short straw, circa 1543).

    By signing a National Letter of Intent, a high school kid agrees only to
attend a particular school for one year, but often enough, it means the kid
plans to play football at a particular place for his entire college career.

    The actual National Letter of Intent is not published, but what a lot of
folks don't know is that it is not a singular document. There are many forms of
the National Letter of Intent, also non-published, that could shed a lot of
light on the course of things if we only had access to them.

    In addition to National Letter of Intent Day, for example, there is National
Letter of Intent To Eventually Pass Bad Checks Day.

    If you knew who signed one of those, for example, you'd have a lot better
handle on the fortunes of your alma mater and its scheduled opponents.

    Beyond that, there's National Letter of Intent to Associate with People Who
Have Animal Nicknames, such as Joey "The Fish" Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Leave the University Under
Circumstances That Make My Name Synonymous With Major NCAA Infractions Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Get Me An Agent As Fast As Possible
Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Fumble In The Fourth Quarter Against
Oklahoma Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Be Arrested Outside a Bar Day. It's
the day after National Letter of Intent to Be Arrested Inside a Bar Day, and the
day before National Letter of Intent to Be Arrested Due To An Unfortunate
Misunderstanding While Trying to Break Up A Fight In A Bar Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Abuse A Phone Credit Card Registered
To An Assistant Coach Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Discharge a Firearm From My Apartment
Balcony If Someone Gets Too Close to My Hummer Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent To Leave The University The Moment I Even
Suspect I Sense The Approval Of Mel Kiper Jr. Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent To Pull My Girlfriend Down the Dorm Steps
By Her Hair Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Major in Animal Torture Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Punch Opposing Mascots in the Head
Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Occasionally "Borrow" Things Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Alter My High School Transcript Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Have My Buddy Woodrow Retake The SAT
For Me Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Minor in Encroachment Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent to Regularly Take The Concept Of
Unnecessary Roughness Into the Dining Hall Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent To Somehow Avoid Being Charged With
Possession With Intent To Deliver Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent To Violate Unspecified Team Rules Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent To Drive On The Sidewalk At Least Once A
Semester Day.

    There is National Letter of Intent To Return To The Strip Club They Took Me
To On My Recruiting Visit And Get Reaquainted With Crystal -- Or Was It Roxy? --
Day.

    If there was someone out there who could tell which high school players had
signed those letters, then you'd have a real recruiting service.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2003


                             901 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 7, 2003, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 932 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   30 local Circuit City workers lose jobs

   Circuit City this week fired about 30 employees at eight San Diego County
stores and 2,000 workers at 618 outlets elsewhere, and announced that it would
stop paying commissions to its remaining salespeople.  The Richmond, Va.-based
chain said the actions were taken after same-store sales dipped by 2 percent in
January compared with the same period a year earlier.

   Vical to begin testing for vaccine

   Vical said yesterday it has launched a research program to develop a
DNA-based vaccine against cytomegalovirus.

   The San Diego biotechnology company said it intends to begin human Phase 1
clinical testing of the vaccine by the end of the year.  The vaccine is designed
to treat patients undergoing bone marrow or organ transplants because they are
at greatest risk of serious complications from the virus.

   GenStar, Vascular complete merger

   GenStar Therapeutics Corp. and Vascular Genetics yesterday completed a merger
to form a new San Diego gene therapy company, Corautus Genetics.

   Beginning today, the company will trade on the American Stock Exchange under
the symbol CAQ. Corautus will focus on development of a gene therapy to treat
cardiovascular disease.

   Titan Corp. gets Lockheed contract

   Lockheed Martin's Management and Data Systems has awarded a five-year, $29
million contract to San Diego's Titan Corp. for software development and systems
engineering related to advanced extremely high-frequency technology.

   ViaSat to supply data terminals

   ViaSat Inc. of Carlsbad has received an order from Arinc for satellite
communications terminals to be used in GulfStream corporate jets.  The terminals
provide broadband data communications to larger business aircraft.  This initial
production order, combined with the development contract announced in November,
brings the value of ViaSat contracts with Arinc to more than $9 million.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Mortgage rates mostly edge lower

   The average interest rate nationwide on 30-year, fixed-rate mortgages dipped
to 5.88 percent for this week from 5.90 percent last week.  For 15-year
fixed-rate mortgages, a popular option for refinancing, rates edged down to 5.27
percent from 5.28 percent.

   Rates for one-year adjustable rate mortgages this week stood at 3.89 percent,
unchanged from last week. Associated Press

   Nintendo offering deals to lift sales

   Nintendo Co. Ltd. the Japanese games company, said yesterday it would cut
prices on some of its top games and give away hit games with its console as it
works to boost sales for the struggling GameCube.

   The company, which once dominated the U.S. video game market but has fallen
to third place behind Sony Corp.'s dominant PlayStation 2 and Microsoft Corp.'s
upstart Xbox, said it would offer one of four games for free with the $149.95
GameCube. Buyers will be able to choose from "Metroid Prime," "Star Fox
Adventures," "Mario Party 4" or "Resident Evil 0" with purchase of the console.
Reuters

   Delta executives taking cut in pay

   Delta Air Lines, looking to reduce labor costs as it struggles through a
prolonged travel slump, said it would trim the compensation of its executives
and indicated that pilots' pay might be cut this year.

   Starting March 1, Leo Mullin, chairman and chief executive, and Fred Reid,
president and chief operating officer, will take 10 percent pay cuts.  All
employees at the vice president level and above -- roughly 50 people -- will
take 8 percent cuts.

   A memo to employees said workers below the vice president level should not
expect pay increases. Associated Press

   Teamsters, haulers reach agreement

   The Teamsters union said yesterday it has reached a tentative agreement on a
new five-year master contract with four major trucking companies that will boost
wages and maintain health insurance coverage at no cost to drivers and other
workers.

   "The nation is in the depths of recession and on the brink of war, and we
maintained our strong health-care benefits, protected our pensions and won the
highest wage increases in more than a decade," Teamsters President James P.
Hoffa said.

   The current contract with the Motor Freight Carriers Association expires
March 31. The association includes Roadway Express, Yellow Transportation, ABF
Freight System and USF Holland. Associated Press

   Job discrimination complaints climb

   Federal job discrimination complaints filed by workers against private
employers jumped by more than 4 percent in 2002 to the highest number in seven
years, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission said yesterday.  The
commission said 84,442 complaints were filed in the 2002 budget year, up from
80,840 in 2001.

   The number of complaints was the most since 1995, when 87,529 were filed.

   The poor economy, an aging and multinational work force and backlash from the
2001 terrorist attacks likely contributed to the increase, EEOC Chairwoman Cari
M. Dominguez said.  She noted large increases in allegations of religious, age
and national origin discrimination. Associated Press

   Royalties OK'd for transmitting music

   Music Choice, a partnership of Microsoft Corp., Motorola Inc. and other
companies, agreed to pay royalties for transmitting music through digital cable
TV and satellite systems.  Royalties of 7 percent of gross revenue would be paid
for 2002 through 2003 and 7.25 percent for 2004 through 2007.

   By reaching an agreement with recording companies and unions that represent
musicians, Music Choice avoided costly arbitration proceedings that have plagued
Internet radio services. Bloomberg News


LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2003


                             902 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 7, 2003 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 920 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA 30 local Circuit City workers lose jobs Circuit City
this week fired about 30 employees at eight San Diego County stores and 2,000
workers at 618 outlets elsewhere, and announced that it would stop paying
commissions to its remaining salespeople.

   The Richmond, Va.-based chain said the actions were taken after same-store
sales dipped by 2 percent in January compared with the same period a year
earlier. Vical to begin testing for vaccine Vical said yesterday it has launched
a research program to develop a DNA-based vaccine against cytomegalovirus. The
San Diego biotechnology company said it intends to begin human Phase 1 clinical
testing of the vaccine by the end of the year.

   The vaccine is designed to treat patients undergoing bone marrow or organ
transplants because they are at greatest risk of serious complications from the
virus. GenStar, Vascular complete merger GenStar Therapeutics Corp. and Vascular
Genetics yesterday completed a merger to form a new San Diego gene therapy
company, Corautus Genetics. Beginning today, the company will trade on the
American Stock Exchange under the symbol CAQ. Corautus will focus on development
of a gene therapy to treat cardiovascular disease. Titan Corp. gets Lockheed
contract Lockheed Martin's Management and Data Systems has awarded a five-year,
$29 million contract to San Diego's Titan Corp. for software development and
systems engineering related to advanced extremely high-frequency technology.
ViaSat to supply data terminals ViaSat Inc. of Carlsbad has received an order
from Arinc for satellite communications terminals to be used in GulfStream
corporate jets.

   The terminals provide broadband data communications to larger business
aircraft.

   This initial production order, combined with the development contract
announced in November, brings the value of ViaSat contracts with Arinc to more
than $9 million. WORLD AND NATION Mortgage rates mostly edge lower The average
interest rate nationwide on 30-year, fixed-rate mortgages dipped to 5.88 percent
for this week from 5.90 percent last week.

   For 15-year fixed-rate mortgages, a popular option for refinancing, rates
edged down to 5.27 percent from 5.28 percent. Rates for one-year adjustable rate
mortgages this week stood at 3.89 percent, unchanged from last week. Associated
Press Nintendo offering deals to lift sales Nintendo Co. Ltd. the Japanese games
company, said yesterday it would cut prices on some of its top games and give
away hit games with its console as it works to boost sales for the struggling
GameCube. The company, which once dominated the U.S. video game market but has
fallen to third place behind Sony Corp.'s dominant PlayStation 2 and Microsoft
Corp.'s upstart Xbox, said it would offer one of four games for free with the
$149.95 GameCube. Buyers will be able to choose from "Metroid Prime," "Star Fox
Adventures," "Mario Party 4" or "Resident Evil 0" with purchase of the console.
Reuters Delta executives taking cut in pay Delta Air Lines, looking to reduce
labor costs as it struggles through a prolonged travel slump, said it would trim
the compensation of its executives and indicated that pilots' pay might be cut
this year. Starting March 1, Leo Mullin, chairman and chief executive, and Fred
Reid, president and chief operating officer, will take 10 percent pay cuts.

   All employees at the vice president level and above -- roughly 50 people --
will take 8 percent cuts. A memo to employees said workers below the vice
president level should not expect pay increases. Associated Press Teamsters,
haulers reach agreement The Teamsters union said yesterday it has reached a
tentative agreement on a new five-year master contract with four major trucking
companies that will boost wages and maintain health insurance coverage at no
cost to drivers and other workers. "The nation is in the depths of recession and
on the brink of war, and we maintained our strong health-care benefits,
protected our pensions and won the highest wage increases in more than a
decade," Teamsters President James P. Hoffa said. The current contract with the
Motor Freight Carriers Association expires March 31. The association includes
Roadway Express, Yellow Transportation, ABF Freight System and USF Holland.
Associated Press Job discrimination complaints climb Federal job discrimination
complaints filed by workers against private employers jumped by more than 4
percent in 2002 to the highest number in seven years, the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission said yesterday. The commission said 84,442 complaints
were filed in the 2002 budget year, up from 80,840 in 2001. The number of
complaints was the most since 1995, when 87,529 were filed. The poor economy, an
aging and multinational work force and backlash from the 2001 terrorist attacks
likely contributed to the increase, EEOC Chairwoman Cari M. Dominguez said.

   She noted large increases in allegations of religious, age and national
origin discrimination. Associated Press Royalties OK'd for transmitting music
Music Choice, a partnership of Microsoft Corp., Motorola Inc. and other
companies, agreed to pay royalties for transmitting music through digital cable
TV and satellite systems.

   Royalties of 7 percent of gross revenue would be paid for 2002 through 2003
and 7.25 percent for 2004 through 2007. By reaching an agreement with recording
companies and unions that represent musicians, Music Choice avoided costly
arbitration proceedings that have plagued Internet radio services. Bloomberg
News

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             903 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    February 5, 2003 Wednesday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1977 words

HEADLINE: High insurance costs forcing doctors' hands;
 Medicine: Surging malpractice rates in Pennsylvania and other states are
driving physicians to leave, retire early or abandon procedures.

BYLINE: Marego Athans

SOURCE: SUN NATIONAL STAFF

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   PHILADELPHIA - In an era of scattering families, Anthony Clay took a
different route. He remained on home turf through college, medical school and
residency to become a cardiologist in Philadelphia. He gets to treat families he
has known since boyhood. He likes knowing where his patients live, work and
shop. All nine of his siblings still live here. He never thought he would leave.

   But these days, Clay is engaging his patients in the most difficult of
conversations, and not about their medical conditions. He has to tell them he is
leaving his practice in Philadelphia this spring because of surging malpractice
insurance rates - and starting anew in Delaware, where his insurance costs will
drop from roughly $70,000 a year to $8,000.

   "It's been terrible," said Clay, 40. "In this field, you've been with the
patient, and also the family, in some of their most life-defining moments - in
the throes of a heart attack with no blood pressure.

   "Wrongly or rightly, the patient credits you with being there when they
weren't doing so well. You realize you've created a bond. I take that very
seriously."

   Pennsylvania is among a dozen states where the soaring cost of malpractice
insurance is creating a desperate situation, forcing doctors to leave the state,
retire early or abandon high-risk procedures, such as delivering babies.

   President Bush used a visit to Scranton last month to call for a $250,000 cap
on jury awards in medical malpractice cases, not including lost wages, medical
costs and other economic damages. The medical establishment, which backs Bush's
proposal, blames huge "pain and suffering" awards for rocketing malpractice
insurance costs.

   Around the nation, doctors are taking drastic measures to protest the rising
premiums. In New Jersey this week, more than 4,000 doctors participated in
rallies and a work slowdown in which many withheld non-urgent care. Surgeons in
West Virginia and Mississippi, and doctors in Florida, temporarily walked off
the job last month. During the Mississippi walkout, four hospitals canceled
surgeries while the doctors were gone.

   Maryland, which caps jury awards at $620,000 this year - the figure rises
$15,000 a year - has so far avoided the crisis, even attracting some doctors
fleeing Pennsylvania.

   The Pennsylvania problem is compounded by other pressures: For one, the state
has one of the lowest rates at which doctors are reimbursed by insurance
companies, the result of a near-monopoly among carriers of patient insurance.
For the cardiologists in Clay's practice, that means insurance costs alone -
roughly $70,000 this year - can consume nearly a third of a doctor's annual
income, which in that practice ranges from $220,000 to $320,000.

   In addition, many of the companies that wrote malpractice policies have left
Pennsylvania or stopped issuing new policies, leaving doctors to scramble for
any insurance at all.

   The extent of the problem is evident in a list compiled by the state's
Medical Society, which lists 919 doctors who have decided to leave the state or
have scaled back their practices as premiums spiraled upward over the past three
years.

   Most affected are specialists who perform high-risk procedures, such as
neurosurgeons, orthopedic surgeons and obstetricians, whose departures have left
shortages at several hospitals.

   Abington Memorial Hospital, in the Philadelphia suburbs, had to send trauma
patients to other hospitals for nearly two weeks in December because it had too
few surgeons to treat the most severely hurt patients. Late last year, Easton
Hospital in the Lehigh Valley went for a month without a neurosurgeon on staff.

   In Fayette County in western Pennsylvania, three obstetricians who had been
delivering nearly half the county's newborns stopped treating pregnant women
after learning that annual premiums for their practice would rise from $150,000
to $400,000, and 75 pregnant women were referred to new doctors. Without
obstetrics, the premiums fell to less than $100,000.
Lawmakers act

   State lawmakers, criticized for letting the problems fester for years, have
recently lunged into action.

   Last month, Pennsylvania's incoming Democratic governor, Ed Rendell, stopped
a doctors walkout by proposing a one-time, 50 percent rate break in insurance
premiums for a state-run fund that covers catastrophic damages in malpractice
suits.

   Last year, the Legislature enacted new rules for malpractice cases: Among
them, lawsuits are now restricted to the counties where the treatment occurred,
preventing plaintiffs from moving their cases to Philadelphia, where juries have
a history of handing out multimillion-dollar malpractice judgments.

   A group of politically active physicians is urging a compromise that would
limit jury awards and regulate the insurance industry.

   But serious tort reform, doctors say, continues to be elusive.

   "Pennsylvania has a very strong trial lawyers association," said Chuck Moran,
spokesman for the Pennsylvania Medical Society, "and they have the ear of very
powerful people." The lawyers contribute heavily to politicians in the
Legislature, and the elected judiciary.

   Mark Phenicie, legislative counsel for the Pennsylvania Trial Lawyers
Association, asserts that the malpractice crisis is not the result of large jury
awards but rather a poorly managed insurance industry - evidenced by the
bankruptcy of several major insurers - and the state's failure to weed out bad
doctors.

   "For the president and medical society to arbitrarily come in with a
cookie-cutter approach, a cap of $250,000, isn't fair, particularly to children
and college students who might be faced with a lifetime of blindness or
deafness," he said. "How do you put a figure on that? To have the Legislature
come in and say, 'I didn't hear any evidence, I didn't see the trial. I didn't
see the victim. We're going to supersede the jury.' This totally undercuts the
jury system."

   The state laws passed last year, Phenicie said, will correct much of the
problem as soon as pending cases work their way through the courts.
A brutal equation

   But Dr. Andrew Freese, 43, a Philadelphia neurosurgeon schooled at Harvard
University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and trained at the
University of Pennsylvania, isn't waiting around. As soon as he finds the right
fit, he plans to move his wife and four children to a state with a friendlier
climate for physicians.

   Freese, the vice chairman of neurosurgery at Thomas Jefferson University, is
overwhelmed with patients, partly because so many neurosurgeons have left the
area, partly because others have given up high-risk procedures.

   Patients must now wait three to four months for an appointment, some
traveling two hours each way. Five years ago, he'd see 30 patients in a typical
week. Last week, he saw more than 100. He's working 80 hours a week - 20 just to
pay his malpractice insurance, he said.

   "It's just ludicrous that I'd have to do that," he said. "It's not
appropriate for patient care, for personal job satisfaction or for quality of
life. It leads to burnout.

   "There's a true sense of desperation on the part of patients and doctors in
the state."

   In the past five years, Freese's malpractice insurance bill has jumped from
about $40,000 to more than $200,000, and is expected to reach about $250,000 by
July, he said. A job he's considering in Wisconsin, by contrast, would cost him
roughly $15,000 a year in insurance, and his reimbursement rate per surgery
would roughly double.

   "I can do a very demanding, high-risk operation on someone who might die if
it's not done and get $2,000 to $3,000 if it goes well," he said. "If it goes
poorly, I can be punished $20 (million) to $30 million. How can that disconnect
be justified?

   "It comes down to a false pretense that lawyers want to protect their
clients, when the reality is they want to maximize their own income," he said.

   The added workload has forced Freese, who is also the university's director
of neurosurgery research, to give up active participation in a gene therapy
program exploring novel treatments for childhood metabolic disease.

   "I went in full of idealism, and now I am so pessimistic and negative about
the whole process that I've thought about leaving the field of medicine
entirely," he said.

   The prospect of losing physicians like Freese scares Edna Leifheit, 70, of
Cape May, N.J., who was among the patients who had traveled long distances to
see him last Wednesday. Leifheit's orthopedic surgeon told her she'd have
trouble finding a neurosurgeon in South Jersey to take on the risk of back
surgery.

   "I think it should be handled on a federal level," she said of the insurance
crisis. "The states are not moving quickly enough."

   "Two to three years from now," said her husband, Joe, "we might be in a
situation where you can't find a doctor for 100 miles. Not everyone can get on
an airplane and go somewhere else."

   Bush is urging passage of a bill sponsored by Rep. James C. Greenwood, a
Pennsylvania Republican, that would cap awards for pain and suffering at
$250,000 while covering patients' medical costs and lost wages. The bill is
modeled after a 1976 reform in California that is credited with holding down
premiums there. Today, an obstetrician who paid about $57,000 in malpractice
insurance in California would have to pay more than $210,000 in Florida and more
than $116,000 in Pennsylvania, according to the Medical Liability Monitor.

   "On the issue of pain and suffering, there are no rules," said Richard
Corlin, immediate past president of the American Medical Association. "It's
simply an emotional appeal to a jury with an injured person sitting there.
Courts are not places where emotion should rule the day. Rules should rule the
day."

   While reform measures crawl through Congress and state legislatures,
countless doctor-patient relationships are being broken apart.

   For Clay, the cardiologist, the final squeeze began last fall when the 22
doctors in his practice were told that their insurance carrier was dropping
Pennsylvania as of Jan. 1. Researching options for new policies, the doctors
found that they faced huge costs or higher risks.

   And the headhunters - who are swarming all over Pennsylvania - were at the
door. Clay, who is married with three sons, decided to join a practice in
Wilmington, Del., remain in his house in suburban Philadelphia and make the
50-minute trip each morning.
The human cost

   The effect on his income is only part of the equation, he said. "It has
changed the entire way we practice medicine. We've closed offices. Meetings
often are about how can we survive rather than offering new therapies or
expanding services."

   Now, as he looks at his patient list in the morning, he sees the faces in his
mind and winces at the thought of telling them he's leaving.

   Blanche Mycek, 76, was one of the tough ones. Clay has treated her since she
received a diagnosis of congestive heart failure two years ago. Clay took his
time trying to find the right medication to avoid an invasive procedure, said
her daughter, Eileen Ryan.

   "It's exactly like he was treating his own mother," Ryan said. "His bedside
manner and patience and kindness were overwhelming."

   Mycek cried when Clay told her. The doctor, too, had tears in his eyes.

   "I filled up. It was very emotional," Ryan said.

   Ryan says she would like to follow Clay and is willing to make the hour-plus
drive but fears that her mother's insurance won't allow it. An initial
conversation with the carrier did not leave her optimistic. Most importantly,
she worries about emergencies.

   "She's so distraught over it," Ryan said. "How can you force a woman who's 76
years old with a heart condition to go to somebody else when she doesn't want to
go?"

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. "It has changed the entire way we practice medicine," says
Dr. Anthony Clay, a Philadelphia cardiologist, with patient Ella Flynn.; 2. Dr.
Andrew Freese (left), a Philadelphia neurosurgeon, discusses an X-ray with
patient Jeff Koch. Freese works 80 hours a week - 20 just to pay his malpractice
insurance. "It's not appropriate for patient care, for job satisfaction or
quality of life. It leads to burnout."; 3. "Meetings often are about how can we
survive rather than new therapies or expanding serv ices," says Dr. Anthony
Clay.; 1 & 3. KIM HAIRSTON : SUN STAFF; 2. MAREGO ATHANS : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2003


                             904 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2003 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           February 5, 2003 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 854 words

HEADLINE: Mr. Opportunity

BYLINE: ED SILVERMAN, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   In late 2000, Robert Ruffolo left a senior job at SmithKline Beecham
Pharmaceuticals to join Wyeth as head of research and development.

   The timing seemed right because SmithKline was about to merge with Glaxo. Yet
the move to Wyeth was something of a gamble, because the Madison-based drug
maker, then known as American Home Products, was under a cloud.

   A recall of two popular diet pills had created huge legal liabilities and
sullied the company's image. Regulators were probing manufacturing blunders, and
Wall Street was queasy about its pipeline of new products.

   So what made this wiry, 52-year-old pharmacologist - a man who arrives at
work at 5:30 a.m. and eats only one meal a day - take such a risk?

   In a recent interview from Wyeth's research center in Collegeville, Pa., the
bespectacled Ruffolo explains:

    Q. At the time you arrived, there were questions about the company's ethics,
business practices and culture. Weren't you worried about this?

    A. I was an expert witness for SmithKline, which sold phentermine (another
diet pill that was used in combination with Wyeth's diet pills) and I got to
read the subpoenaed documents. I saw their dirty laundry.

    So, no, I wasn't really concerned about the business practices, although
there were some areas where things could have been done better.

   Q. Such as what? The marketing? The manufacturing?

    A. Yes, both of those things. But the issues didn't frighten me. I spent 17
years at SmithKline and was prepared to remain there.

    But as I saw it, it was a once-in- a-lifetime opportunity to run re- search
and development. There simply aren't that many big drug groups left in which to
do that. And during the interview process, Bob Essner, Wyeth's chief executive,
said he was looking for somebody to shake the cage.

    Q. So how exactly did you shake it?

    A. It didn't take a rocket scientist to see R&D wasn't what it could be -
there was plenty of money being spent and there was innovation, but it wasn't
deep. There weren't a lot of drugs being discovered.

   Between 1994 and 2000, only four drugs a year came out of the discovery
effort. Nobody was monitoring the cycle time. And there was a budget of $300
million just for discovery. So I streamlined. I replaced the head of discovery.
And I said we need to discover 12 drugs a year, so we can submit eight
applications to the FDA.

    Not every drug will make it through development, but the more you have to
work with, the better your odds. Yet every single one of the group heads said
they couldn't do it, at least not without more money and people. But they did.
They hit eight in 2001 and 11 in 2002. And this year, we could hit 15 or 16 if
we had enough money. The point was to make people accountable.

   The stated goal is to submit two new drugs a year for regulatory approval.

   Q. How much money are we talking about?

    A. The entire R&D budget increase is very, very low - about 2 percent. That
means it's going to be about the same as last year, which was about $2 billion.
This forces us to do more with the same money.

   And we are.

   We're not dropping compounds out of the process so early anymore. What we did
was force groups - discovery and pre-clinical development - to work together.

   We have the same systems in place at each of the six research sites we
operate. And this year is the year of clinical development: There'll be a major
overhaul of that in March. The message is that you really can manage something
as risky as R&D.

    What we're doing now is really what other industries - auto, steel, finance
- have done. It's just that the pharmaceutical industry is really slow.

   Q. Is the budget increase so small because revenues are down as a result of
the recent news linking the Prempro and Premarin hormone replacement treatments
to cancer?

    A. Yes, there are areas of research we stopped or decreased, such as gene
therapy and anti-infectives. We also slowed some investments in technology.

   I'm working on the assumption that we'll go back to double-digit revenue
growth in 2004. But we'll do clinical development better, cheaper and more
rapidly than we do now. We've been squeezing and we can squeeze more.

   I think we've probably seen the worst, though. It was rough around here for
the last six months.

   Q. Meanwhile, which new drugs that are imminent have big potential?

    A. We'll have FluMist, a cold vaccine. That's going to be a significant
product. I can't tell you the exact date it will be available, but we expect
regulatory approval in the first half of this year and to launch it by the flu
season.

   We'll have additional indications for Effexor, a depression pill, and
Rapamune, which is used in kidney transplants. I also think low doses of Prempro
and Premarin will contribute. In fact, we think their value will go up. We have
an approvable dossier at the FDA now and the FDA commissioner recently said it
was his highest priority.

    Am I going to tell you we have enough new drugs launched? No. Any head of
R&D who tells you his pipeline is deep enough is lying to you. But our goal is
to improve productivity. And we're doing that.

    Ed Silverman can be reached at esilverman@starledger.com or at (973)
392-1542.

GRAPHIC: BIOGRAPHY:

IN PERSON  Robert Ruffolo

 Personal: Wife, Stephany, and three children, ages 11, 14 and 19.

 Education: Bachelor of science in pharmacy, Ohio State University; doctorate in
pharmacology, Ohio State University.

 Favorite scientist: Raymond Fuller, a former mentor who discovered Prozac.

 Hobbies: Playing guitar. He likes heavy metal and dreamed about becoming a rock
star. Also loves watching football on TV.

 Career highlights: Bringing the Coreg heart drug to market and publishing
nearly 500 scientific papers and editing two medical journals.

 Last book read: "Shark: Stories of Life and Death from the World's Most
Dangerous Waters"

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             905 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     February 4, 2003 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 028

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS in Brief

BODY:

   Key3Media files for protection

   Los Angeles-based Key3Media Group, the company operating the giant Comdex
trade show, filed for protection from its creditors yesterday in the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Del.    Key3Media said its filing is part of a
recapitalization plan that, if approved, would leave the company in the
ownership of investment bank Thomas Weisel Capital Partners.  - AP

   Comcast to hire

   Comcast Corp. plans to hire about 300 workers this year to cover its New
England call centers, which include sites in Boston, Malden, Chelmsford and New
Bedford. The Philadelphia-based Comcast said it wants to rely less on
third-party companies.   - STAFF

   WorldCom cuts

   CLINTON, Miss. - WorldCom Inc. said yesterday that it will cut 5,000 jobs, or
8 percent of its work force, as its new chairman and CEO, Michael Capellas,
pushes to lead the telecom giant out of bankruptcy this year.  - AP

   Serono sues

   Serono International S.A. is suing Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. in European
courts alleging the Cambridge company infringed on a patent that has been
revoked. TKT officials denied the charge and said they will vigorously defend
the company.  - STAFF

   Burger King gets help

   DES MOINES, Iowa - Burger King Corp.'s new management, acknowledging that
about 20 percent of its franchisees are in financial distress, said yesterday
that it hired Trinity Capital LLC, a restructuring firm, to help restaurant
operators in trouble.  More than 90 percent of Burger King's 11,450 restaurants
are owned and operated by independent franchisees.  - DOW

   Energy investors sought

   HOUSTON - Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Chairman Pat Wood III said the
U.S. energy industry needs new investment within three years or the nation may
face shortages.

   - BLOOMBERG

   Manufacturing up

   NEW YORK - The nation's manufacturing sector grew for the third straight
month in January, though at a slower pace, as worries about a war with Iraq
dampened optimism, according to the Institute of Supply Management.   - AP

   Allmerica sees Q4 gain

   Allmerica Financial Corp. posted a net income of $ 14.9 million for the
fourth quarter of 2002, up from a $ 70.7 million loss in 2001's fourth quarter.
But the Worcester insurer, weighed down by stock market losses, posted a net
loss of $ 306.1 million for the full year, down from a $ 3.1 million loss in
2001.  - STAFF

LOAD-DATE: February 04, 2003


                             906 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      February 4, 2003 Tuesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: RNA SWITCHES SHOW PROMISE IN GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists have succeeded in setting activity levels of a gene like a
thermostat, illustrating the power of a new technology called RNA interference.

   RNA is the substance best known for its role in taking information encoded in
DNA and creating proteins that carry out life's functions.

      However, scientists in recent years also have discovered that snippets of
RNA can actually block the expression of specific genes.
   Scientists at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories on Long Island described
Sunday in the journal Nature Genetics how they managed to set levels of gene
activity to "low, medium or high" using RNA interference, also called RNAi.
   The scientists tested RNAi in mice on the p53 gene, which when absent or
damaged can lead to different types of cancer. After irradiating mice to
destroy their bone marrow, they injected mice with a fresh batch of stem cells
that had been modified by RNAi to produce low, medium or high levels of p53.
   With each level, the mice developed distinct forms of lymphoma. Mice with
low p53 levels developed aggressive forms of lymphoma, but when p53 levels
were medium, the cancers progressed much more slowly. Mice with high p53
levels survived as long as control mice.

   Ephedra Dangers
   The herbal stimulant ephedra, or ma-huang , accounted for 1 percent of
herbal supplement sales but 62 percent of all herbal-related reports to the
nation's poison-control centers, according to a report in Monday's issue of
the Annals of Internal Medicine.
   The supplement, often used to help people lose weight or boost energy,
should be regulated or banned by the Food and Drug Administration, according
to researchers at the San Francisco Veterans Administration Medical Center,
who conducted the study.
   "Our study shows that ephedra is unsafe for routine and unsupervised
use," said Dr. Michael Shilpak, a researcher at the medical center and senior
author of the study. The researchers relied on 2001 data from poison-control
centers.
   Researchers said risks of adverse events from ephedra was 200 times greater
than the combined number from all the other herbal supplements studied.

   Hearts And Chocolate
    Chocolate may not do much for the waistline, but some types of the sweet
may be good for the heart.
    Flavonoids called flavan-3-ols that are found in cocoa -- and particularly
in dark chocolate -- confer a reduced risk for cardiovascular disease, say
researchers at the University of California at Davis. Their report was
published in the current issue of the Journal of the American Dietetic
Association.
    Also, a type of fat found in cocoa is known to be beneficial for the
heart, the researchers said.
    In the 17th century, chocolate was believed to benefit the liver, noted
Althea Zanecosky of the dietetic association. "It was also viewed as a way to
strengthen the heart and relieve pain," she said.

   West Nile Protection
   West Nile virus kills some people but leaves most others unscathed. Now
researchers at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis seem to
have confirmed experts' suspicions: Vulnerability to the mosquito-borne
disease appears to be directly related to the health of the victim's immune
system.
    Scientists infected mice lacking two critical components of the immune
system -- T cells, which mobilize immune system responses to attack infected
cells, and B cells, which produce antibodies to attack a virus before it
infects cells.
    Even extremely low doses of virus killed the immune-deficient mice,
researchers reported in the current issue of the Journal of Virology. However,
if the mice were injected with B cells, they were able to ward off the virus.
    Last year, more than 3,500 cases of West Nile infections were reported,
and between 5 percent and 10 percent of those cases resulted in serious
illness or death.



COLUMN: MEDICAL FRONTIERS

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2003


                             907 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                   February 3, 2003 Monday City final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: Tragedy clouds bubble boy cure

BODY:

   Our position is: The promising future of gene therapy has been clouded by
evidence of high cancer risk.

   The gene therapy experiment hailed as achieving the first real human cure has
been dealt another crippling blow. The second "bubble boy" has developed
leukemia, and scientists are scrambling to determine what went wrong.

   For more than a decade, researchers here and abroad have sought a way to use
new genes to treat diseases. A study conducted by a Parisian hospital was hailed
as the first real success. Ten children with potentially fatal immune
deficiency, popularly dubbed the bubble boy disease, were injected with a virus
meant to stimulate the growth of immune cells. Nine of the children improved
dramatically. The hospital's research team had scored a stunning breakthrough.
Or so the world thought.

   Last summer, a 3-year-old Dutch boy who had participated in the experiment
developed leukemia. The other children appeared well, so scientists hoped the
first case was a fluke. It wasn't. A second boy now has leukemia. The suspicion
grows that cancer may be an inherent risk of similar gene therapy attempts.

   The Parisian experiment proved that gene therapy can work, but at what cost?
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has now terminated 27 clinical trials
involving immune deficiency, the biggest shutdown in gene therapy. Last year,
the National Institutes of Health cancelled similar trials for six children. The
same concerns followed the death of the first person known to have died as a
direct result of genetic experimentation. Following the death in 1999,
applications to the FDA to approve gene therapy trials declined 50 percent.

   Meanwhile, other gene therapy experiments involving diseases such as HIV and
cystic fibrosis continue apace. So do the glowing promises of breakthroughs,
though these may be muted for a time. Gene therapy is proving treacherous
ground. Science is beginning to learn how much it doesn't know.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2003


                             908 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 2, 2003 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; Pg. T03

LENGTH: 1156 words

HEADLINE: A Beautiful Mind

BYLINE: Reviewed by Elizabeth Hand

BODY:

   THE SPEED OF DARK

   By Elizabeth Moon

   Ballantine. 340 pp. $ 23.95

   "Sometimes I wonder how normal normal people are," muses Lou Arrendale, the
protagonist of Elizabeth Moon's splendid and graceful new novel, The Speed of
Dark. Lou is not what most people would call "normal." He is autistic, and the
heart of this ambitious, beautifully crafted book is his conflict over whether
to engage in an experimental medical procedure that will make him normal --
i.e., like "most people," people like Lou's psychiatrist.

    "When she . . . looks at me," Lou says, "her face has that look. I don't
know what most people would call it, but I call it the I AM REAL look. It means
she is real and she has answers and I am someone less, not completely real."

    In Moon's very-near-future America, gene therapy has made it possible to
cure neurological defects that cause the vast spectrum of autistic syndromes
during infancy. Lou was born a few years too late for such a procedure, though
early-intervention education and treatments have made it possible for him to
live comfortably in mainstream society. Now in his late thirties, he has a job,
an apartment, a car, friends who are, like himself, autistic, and friends who
are not.

    He works at a multinational pharmaceutical company, where he is one of a
small number of autistic employees. His job is to scan a computer monitor,
identifying patterns in the lines of symbols and numbers scrolling past so that
the results can be used to develop new synthesized drugs.

    Then Gene Crenshaw arrives as new division manager. Crenshaw's first order
of business is to get rid of the autistic workers, whose specialized working
conditions -- individual offices, their own enhanced gymnasium -- strike him as
wasteful. He views their work with equal parts incomprehension and scorn. He
threatens the autistic workers with dismissal unless they volunteer for a
human-trials research protocol, a combination of drugs and nanotechnology that
has been used successfully in animal trials but never on human subjects.

    At first, Lou and his co-workers are angry, frightened and intimidated;
fortunately, they have a sympathetic boss who immediately starts scrambling to
obtain legal and medical assistance for them. But, of course, the volunteer
trial is not just a threat: It's also a promise. If it's successful, Lou and his
friends will finally have the opportunity for a normal life -- but what exactly
would that mean?

    Inevitably, The Speed of Dark has been compared to Daniel Keyes' classic and
tragic Flowers for Algernon, in which a mentally disabled young man is medically
enhanced to become a genius. The Speed of Dark may be an even greater book.
True, Moon's plot deployment is rather clunky -- Crenshaw is such a model of
rabid political incorrectness that it's hard to imagine him ever climbing the
corporate ladder. But her novel isn't exactly intended to be a thriller; it is,
rather, a subtle, eerily nuanced character portrait of a man who is both
unforgettable and unlike anyone else in fiction.

    Lou's obsessive attention to pattern details is what makes him brilliant at
his work. His sensorium is so exquisitely attuned to them that, upon entering a
room, he immediately notices the number of squares in a rug, their colors, the
manner in which they are replicated. He sees, and hears, intricate patterns
everywhere: in music, real and imagined; in cars lined up in a parking lot; in
the fencing maneuvers his friends practice; in the stars overhead; and in the
seemingly random movement of the pinwheel mobiles hanging in his office.

    Yet he has difficulty following group conversations and identifying the
emotions behind a sarcastic remark, or understanding what might impel a "normal"
friend to harm him. As Lou begins to research the possible side effects of
Crenshaw's experiment, as well as its moral and ethical dimensions, he also
begins to weigh what he stands to lose -- the intense friendships he has made
with a group of amateur fencers; his relationship with Marjory, a young woman he
is in love with; his autistic friends, who may very well become unknowable to
him after medical intervention; most of all, the self-knowledge and confidence
that he posseses.

    "I glance around my apartment and think of my own reactions, my need for
regularity, my fascination with repeating phenomena, with series and patterns,"
he reflects. "Everyone needs some regularity; everyone enjoys series and
patterns to some degree. I have known that for years, but now I understand it
better. We autistics are on one end of an arc of human behavior and preference,
but we are connected."

    In popular media, those with mental or behavioral disabilities are often
portrayed as liminal beings, magical creatures whose disorderly lives redeem
them or (even better) redeem us "real people." Think of the saintly savants in
the films "Rain Man" and "Being There," the winsome lunatics of Phillipe de
Broca's "King of Hearts," the martyred Randall McMurphy in Ken Kesey's One Flew
Over the Cuckoo's Nest. Too often, such characters are cardboard pasteups who
represent an author's or filmmaker's agenda, not real people tethered to jobs
and families and daily routines.

    Moon, the parent of an autistic teenager, very quietly explodes all those
stereotypes: The disorder can be heart-wrenching, frightening, isolating,
challenging for people born with the syndrome and those close to them. Lou is an
extremely high-functioning autistic, but he makes his way very carefully through
a confusing world that, despite his career and that nice gym, makes few
concessions to him or his co-workers. That it is "important not to scare people"
is something he has learned through experience and observation; but even under
close scrutiny, ordinary human interaction baffles him. Unsure whether Marjory
likes him, Lou notes that normal people "know when someone likes someone and how
much. They do not have to wonder. It is like their other mind reading, knowing
when someone is joking and when someone is serious, knowing when a word is used
correctly and when it is used in a joking way."

    The end of The Speed of Dark is not unexpected, but it is marvelous all the
same, and exceptionally moving in its balance of loss and wonder. "The edge is
what I have," Theodore Roethke wrote in his most famous poem, "In a Dark Time";
what Lou Arrendale gradually realizes, what he ultimately gambles on, is that
the edge is not all he has. It is a measure of Elizabeth Moon's genius that she
enables a reader to thoroughly experience the world through Lou's tangled but
exhilarating neurology, and wonder what we "normal" people are missing when we
don't acknowledge our connection to those who seem so different from us. A lot
of novels promise to change the way a reader sees the world; The Speed of Dark
actually does. *

   Elizabeth Hand is the author of the forthcoming "Bibliomancy: Four Novellas"
and "Mortal Love," a novel.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2003


                             909 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                  January 31, 2003 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: FDA seeks faster creation of drugs;
The agency will try to clarify how firms can prove that a new medication or
medical device will work.

BYLINE: By Lauran Neergaard; Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Worried about a serious slowdown in the creation of novel drugs, the
government is taking steps it hopes will speed medical innovation, largely by
making clearer how companies can prove that a new product works before they
waste time researching the wrong thing.

   Atop the Food and Drug Administration's priority list being announced today
are guidelines to speed treatments for cancer, obesity and diabetes - three of
the country's leading ailments.

   The main issue is not how quickly FDA scientists review treatments - that has
sped up greatly in recent years - but the time it takes to research and develop
new medications and medical devices, FDA Commissioner Mark McClellan said.

   That work can take more than a decade and cost hundreds of millions of
dollars. McClellan's hope is that, by making the FDA's requirements for approval
clearer from the start, research could be performed better and faster - and
companies might not be as reluctant to take a chance on novel treatments instead
of financially safer copycats.

   McClellan said that did not mean the agency was relaxing its requirements.

   "If the drugs don't meet the standards for approval, they're not going to get
through," he told reporters yesterday. "But it's in everybody's interest to
figure out more quickly and at a lower cost."

   Drug companies are sending the government fewer groundbreaking medications
each year. The FDA approved just 17 never-before-seen chemicals last year, down
from 24 in 2001, its drug chief, Janet Woodcock, said. The agency received 23
applications for those novel drugs last year, down from 30 the year before and a
high of 60 in 1995.

   Similarly, the FDA approved 32 novel medical devices last year, down from 56
in 2001.

   McClellan's plans are more a repackaging than a completely new approach. For
years, the FDA has encouraged companies to seek its advice early in a product's
development.

   But too few do, said FDA watcher Ira Loss of Washington Analysis, an analyst
firm that specializes in regulatory and policy matters. He cited ImClone Systems
Inc., a biotechnology company that imploded after the FDA rejected its potential
cancer treatment Erbitux in December 2001, citing shoddy science that failed to
tell if the drug had any effect. The company's top executive later was charged
in an insider-trading scandal.

   "At some point, you have to hold the industries accountable for not taking
advantage of the opportunities presented to them," Loss said.

   Drug discovery is cyclical, and depends on far more - scientific serendipity
and financial investments, for example - than the FDA's involvement, Loss noted.
But McClellan's plan "can't hurt. If it will help [with speed], we'll have to
wait and see."

   Among the FDA's plans:

   Help companies understand what is needed for quality applications so that
more approvable treatments get the FDA's approval on the first try. The FDA
rejects half of all novel medications and 93 percent of cost-saving generic
drugs on the first try. Too often, the FDA discovers that companies had data
that would have cleared up concerns yet did not think to provide them at first,
its medical device chief, David Feigal, said. That can delay marketing at least
six months.

   Develop special guidelines for brand-new technology, such as gene therapy,
bioengineered tissue, or drug-and-device combinations, so companies can design
the right studies from the beginning.

   Increase training of FDA reviewers and consistency in requirements for each
application.

   The medical-device industry welcomed the news.

   "The more innovators can know what the requirements are at the beginning of
the process, the more quickly we can get those kinds of breakthroughs to
patients," said Randy Burkholder of the Advanced Medical Technology Association.

   The drug industry's Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America
declined comment, but noted that more than 1,000 experimental medications were
in development, and almost 4,000 studies of those potential drugs were under way
in patients.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2003


                             910 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     January 31, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 758 words

BODY:

   Don't know about you, but I'm about ready for it to be hockey season.

    Someone mentioned that it's actually been under way for some time, and, in
fact, a quick check reveals that the Penguins have fewer than half their
regular-season games remaining, which means they'll soon be within a month of a
game that means something.

    Still, as of this week, things are different. By that I mean I'm cold enough
and bored enough with everything else that I'll actually turn the game on,
joining several dozen other Americans already engaged by stuff like
Thrashers-Predators on ESPN2. Used to be that Thrashers vs. Predators was
confined to Animal Planet, but no more.

    TV ratings for National Hockey League games are so low that announcers could
give the names and addresses of everyone who's watching between periods, but
that wouldn't be as interesting as the urgent observations of a wringing-wet
stay at home defenseman, now would it? Would it?

    In any event, it has further come to my attention that the NHL at its
All-Star break is the partially willful recipient of all kinds of advice on what
it needs to bring TV ratings up and player salaries down, thereby assuring its
very existence beyond the Bush administration, and to move out of 18th place on
the list of Americans' favorite sports behind, what, celebrity cat chasing.

    Here are my suggestions, at least the suggestions I have without having to,
you know, work.

    1. Contraction. Massive and ruthless. Ottawa and Buffalo seem about to
contract themselves, but the league could further do without San Jose, Los
Angeles, Anaheim, Tampa Bay, Florida, Dallas, Phoenix, Nashville, Atlanta and
Carolina.

    2. Cheerleaders. Let's not pretend there's a shortage of young women out
there willing to degrade themselves for a shot at some TV face time. Give us the
Boston Bruinettes, the Minnesota Wild Things, the New York Dolls, the Toronto
Leaf Ladies, the Columbus Santa Marias and the Pittsburgh Penguin Babes, not to
be confused with the minor-league Baby Penguins, the stupidest nickname in all
of 'ockey.

    3. Edgier in-house promotions. Instead of putting some poor citizen in that
big sling shot thing and shooting him or her the length of the ice between
periods, quickly select a dozen fans to stage a short hockey game, the only
qualification being that they must never before have been on skates. It would
kill.

    4. Remove all helmets, visors, masks, pads, etc. The audience better
identifies with players when it can plainly see their faces, especially if it
can plainly see blood streaming down those faces from a gash worthy of a slasher
film. This is elemental stuff boys. Sex and violence. It's what works on TV. It
works in all media in all forms. Nobody's got a tentative screenplay out there
titled, "Icing and Offsides: The Final Beginning."

    5. Erase that red line from the ice. I don't want this to get technical, but
traffic in the neutral zone looks too much like a PennDOT project. Open it up
for longer passes or risk spreading narcolepsy through the remaining audience.

    6. Again, not to be technical, but try this: Two fewer skaters, two more
pucks. That's right, it's four-on-four instead of five-on-five, and three pucks
are in play at all times. This ought to snap some people awake, particularly the
goalies, the cameramen, and, -- is it too much to hope for? -- the officials. I
used to think the equipment guy should just dump the whole big bucket o' pucks
on the ice just before the faceoff, but that's just silly.

    7. Stop naming the big individual awards after Melissa Hart, Art Ross, Maddy
Ross, Art Bing, Lady Sings the Blues, Dave Bing, Homer Norris, the Clancy
Brothers, Connie Smythe Smythe and William Jennings Bryan. The game's younger
fans identify better with Goalie of the Year.

    8. In the third period, instead of losing a player for two minutes as the
result of a penalty, the penalized team loses its goalie for that period and
plays with an empty net. That ought to make things a little manic.

    9. Adopt the policy I did long ago: no more ties. Nobody should have to wear
a tie, and nobody should have to see one after paying $60 or more. Play on,
shoot out, stage a quick round of Jeopardy, do whatever you have to do, but
don't send the customers out wondering what the point of three hours of 2-2 was.

    10. Examine the impact of Reality TV and explore the possible applications.
Could we stop play at some random point and vote somebody off the pond? At least
have someone swallow an eel.

    No need to thank me.

NOTES:
NAMES & GAMES

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2003


                             911 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              January 31, 2003 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: GUIDELINES AIM TO SPEED UP NEW MEDICAL TREATMENTS;
 DRUG AGENCY FOCUSES ON HELPING FIRMS AVOID WASTING RESEARCH TIME

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The government is taking steps it hopes will speed medical innovation,
largely by making clearer how companies can prove a new product works before
they waste time researching the wrong thing.

   Atop the Food and Drug Administration's priority list being announced today
are guidelines to speed treatments for cancer, obesity and diabetes - three of
the country's leading ailments.

   The main issue is not how quickly FDA scientists review treatments - that has
sped up greatly in recent years - but the time it takes to research and develop
new medications and medical devices, FDA Commissioner Mark McClellan said.

   That work can take more than a decade and cost hundreds of millions of
dollars. McClellan hopes that by making FDA requirements for approval more clear
from the start, research could be performed better and faster - and companies
might not be as reluctant to take a chance on novel treatments instead of
financially safer copycats.

   McClellan said that did not mean the agency was relaxing its requirements.

   "If the drugs don't meet the standards for approval, they're not going to get
through," McClellan told reporters Thursday. "But it's in everybody's interest
to figure out more quickly and at a lower cost."

   Drug companies are sending the government fewer groundbreaking medications
each year. The FDA approved just 17 never-before-seen chemicals last year, down
from 24 in 2001, said Dr. Janet Woodcock, who is the agency's drug chief. The
agency received 23 applications for such novel drugs last year, down from 30 the
year before and a high of 60 in 1995.

   Similarly, the FDA approved 32 novel medical devices last year, down from 56
in 2001.

   Among the FDA's plans:

   * Help companies understand what is needed for quality applications so that
more approvable treatments get the FDA's approval on the first try. The FDA
rejects half of all novel medications and 93 percent of cost-saving generic
drugs on the first try.

   * Developing special guidelines for brand-new technology, such as gene
therapy, bioengineered tissue or drug-and-device combinations, so companies can
design the right studies from the beginning.

   * More training of FDA reviewers and consistency in requirements for each
application.

NOTES:
HEALTH & SCIENCE

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2003


                             912 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            January 31, 2003 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: FDA Clarifies Guidelines for Approval of Drugs, Devices

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

    Worried about a serious slowdown in the creation of novel drugs, the
government is taking steps it hopes will speed medical innovation, largely by
making clearer how companies can prove a new product works before they waste
time researching the wrong thing.

    Atop the Food and Drug Administration's priority list being announced today
are guidelines to speed treatments for cancer, obesity and diabetes -- three of
the country's leading ailments.

    The main issue is not how quickly the FDA reviews applications, but the time
it takes industry to research and develop new medications and medical devices,
FDA Commissioner Mark McClellan said.

    That can take more than a decade and cost hundreds of millions of dollars.
McClellan's hope is that by making FDA's requirements for approval clearer from
the start, the research could be performed better and faster -- and companies
might not be as reluctant to take a chance on novel treatments instead of
financially safer copycats.

    McClellan said that does not mean the agency is relaxing its requirements.

    "If the drugs don't meet the standards for approval, they're not going to
get through," McClellan said yesterday.

    Drug companies are sending the government fewer groundbreaking medications
each year. The FDA approved 17 never-before-seen chemicals last year, down from
24 in 2001, said drug chief Janet Woodcock. The agency received 23 applications
for those novel drugs last year, down from 30 the year before and a high of 60
in 1995.

    Similarly, the FDA approved 32 novel medical devices last year, down from 56
in 2001.

    The FDA has long encouraged companies to seek its advice early in a
product's development, but too few do, said veteran FDA watcher Ira Loss of
Washington Analysis.

    Drug discovery is cyclical and dependent far more on factors such as
scientific serendipity and financial investments than on the FDA, Loss said.

    Among the FDA's plans:

   * Helping companies understand its requirements, so that more approvable
applications gain the FDA's approval on the first try. The FDA rejects half of
all novel medications and 93 percent of cost-saving generic drugs on the first
try.

   * Developing special guidelines for brand-new technology, such as gene
therapy, bioengineered tissue or drug-and-device combinations so companies can
design the right studies from the beginning.

   * More training of FDA reviewers and consistency in requirements for each
application.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2003


                             913 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 30, 2003, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 17 MetFront

LENGTH: 811 words

HEADLINE: Baylor picks new chief for med school

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writers

BODY:

   Baylor College of Medicine will announce today that it has selected a drug
company executive who has held high-ranking academic posts as its new president
and CEO.

   Dr. Peter Traber, senior vice president and chief medical officer at the drug
giant GlaxoSmithKline, will succeed Dr. Ralph Feigin, who has headed Baylor
since 1996. Under pressure from his board chairman, Feigin initially said he was
resigning in December 2000, but in an extraordinary turnabout a month later,
trustees announced he would continue until this year.

   Traber, 47, is a colon cancer expert and former University of Michigan
football player. Prior to taking the job at GlaxoSmithKline, he brought
stability to the University of Pennsylvania Health System, then rocked by
financial crisis, scientific embarrassment and a highly publicized patient
death.

   "There's a lot of enthusiasm for this person at all different levels," said
Hugo Bellen, a Baylor professor of molecular genetics. "He's the first outside
president for Baylor; he's a person with a nicely balanced background; he's
young. It's a very nice package."

   Baylor officials refused to confirm Traber's hiring, saying only that the
search committee made "an excellent choice." Today's announcement will conclude
a nearly nine-month national search.

   The Baylor president has a complicated job, overseeing nearly 1,000 medical
residents, maintaining relationships with eight hospitals and managing revenues
of $ 876.2 million and a research budget of $ 346 million. Like the medical
industry as a whole, the school is facing greater financial challenges than
ever.

   The selection of a pharmaceutical company official as a medical school
president is fairly unusual, observers said. But they added that Traber's
diverse background, particularly in industry and dealing with the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, would be an advantage. They said he may signal a greater
commitment by Baylor to the commercialization of new technology.

   Traber's arrival will come at a time when Houston is trying to develop its
biotech industry and Texas Medical Center institutions are forging new, mutually
beneficial alliances with each other.

   "He's got a wonderful reputation, a pretty good combination of academic and
drug company experience," said Dr. James Willerson, president of the University
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston. "I believe he'll be a fine president
and, from what I hear, he'll be great about collaborating with other Texas
Medical Center institutions."

   At the Pennsylvania Health System, Traber was a "rising superstar," according
to faculty. A gastroenterologist who received three major promotions in eight
years, Traber took over as chief executive officer in the aftermath of several
crises: Operating deficits totaled nearly $ 300 million and resulted in the
slashing of 2,800 jobs, or nearly 20 percent of the system's work force. The
death of an 18-year-old in a gene therapy experiment raised safety and ethical
questions at Penn and even other institutions. And the FDA charged that
operations of the school's animal laboratories were fraught with irregularities
and violations.

   When Traber announced he was leaving for GlaxoSmithKline after just seven
months as Pennsylvania's CEO, faculty expressed sadness they would be losing a
longtime colleague who gave them "a comfort zone."

   Traber's tenure will mark the end of an era in which Baylor's president also
held the position of physician-in-chief at Texas Children's Hospital, a burden
that chafed some trustees, particularly then-Chairman Daniel Arnold.

   Feigin, who has held almost legendary status since elevating Baylor and Texas
Children's to world-class institutions, will continue as Texas Children's
physician-in-chief, Baylor's pediatrics department chairman, and Ben Taub and
The Methodist hospitals' physician-in-chief of pediatric services.

   Traber's selection was praised by Texas Medical Center Inc. President Richard
Weinardi, who said he'd heard nothing but positive things, and Baylor department
of medicine vice chair Dr. Herbert DuPont, who praised his biotechology
expertise and administrative skills. Others lauded his publication record and
knowledge of what it takes to move medical technology from the laboratory to the
bedside.

   Traber received his medical degree from Wayne State University School of
Medicine in Detroit in 1981 and completed two residencies at Northwestern
University Medical Center in Chicago. He went to Michigan on an athletic
scholarship and played backup tight end on the team that went to the 1976 Orange
Bowl. He joined Pennsylvania in 1992 as chief of gastroenterology and was soon
tapped to chair the department of medicine.

   Baylor faculty and residents staff Ben Taub General Hospital, The Methodist
Hospital, Texas Children's and the Houston Veterans Affairs Medical Center.


GRAPHIC: Mug: Dr. Peter Traber (b/w, p. 1)

TYPE: Appointments

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2003


                             914 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 29, 2003, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Challenger, Apollo heroes recalled

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.

BODY:

   CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. - Space shuttle Columbia's astronauts joined Mission
Control in a moment of silence Tuesday at the exact time 17 years ago that
Challenger exploded in the sky.

   NASA's work force, in orbit and on Earth, remembered not only the seven
astronauts who died on Jan. 28, 1986, but also the three who were killed by a
fire in their Apollo spacecraft at the pad on Jan. 27, 1967.

   At the launch site Tuesday, flags flew at half staff for the second day in a
row.

   The two tragedies, separated by 19 years and a single day, represent NASA's
darkest hours.

   "It is today that we remember and honor the crews of Apollo 1 and Challenger.
They made the ultimate sacrifice, giving their lives and service to their
country and for all mankind," Columbia commander Rick Husband radioed a few
minutes before the airwaves went silent.

   "Their dedication and devotion to the exploration of space was an inspiration
to each of us and still motivates people around the world to achieve great
things and service to others."

   The six Americans and one Israeli aboard Columbia marked their 12th day in
space Tuesday.

   Their round-the-clock laboratory research mission, featuring more than 80
experiments, is due to end with a landing at Kennedy Space Center on Saturday,
Day 16.

   The mission has been considered a success by both NASA and scientists, many
of whom have obtained data that exceeded their expectations.

   Thomas Goodwin, project scientist on a study of the interplay of prostate
cancer and bone cells, said Tuesday that the experiment had produced a golf-ball
size piece of tumor that he called the "largest piece of tumor tissue grown in
microgravity."

   Goodwin said tissue grown in microgravity closely resembles tumors that grow
in the body, offering scientists a lifelike model for further research.

   Goodwin said the tissue still growing on the shuttle will be harvested live
when the shuttle lands and used in experiments of gene therapy for cancer.

   On the international space station, the two American astronauts and one
Russian cosmonaut also paused to remember, and the airwaves fell silent there,
too.

   Challenger erupted in a fireball at 11:39 a.m., 73 seconds after liftoff,
over Cape Canaveral.

   The moment of silence Tuesday ended with 10 bell chimes at Johnson Space
Center in Houston, one for each of the 10 astronauts killed.

   The Challenger crew included Christa McAuliffe, a New Hampshire teacher who
had hoped to give lessons from space.

   Last week, NASA announced it will hire three to six teachers for its next
astronaut class.

   McAuliffe's backup, Barbara Morgan, will be on Columbia's next flight, to the
international space station in November.

   Morgan quit her Idaho teaching job in 1998 to become a full-fledged
astronaut.


LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2003


                             915 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 29, 2003 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA METRO; Part 2; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: A Big Job for Gene Genies

BODY:

   Two Italian scientists have discovered the gene connected to severe migraine
headaches, which could be a real relief for millions if it helps counter the
bodily mechanism igniting this debilitating pain.

   But is this also another step down the path of reluctant realization that no
matter how much we try to improve ourselves -- running, walking, swimming,
biking, bending, lifting, eating, not eating, not smoking, not chewing -- we're
perpetual prisoners of our own genes? That virtually everything in our lives
beyond birth has been determined for us before birth? And that all this self-
improvement talk and sweat is designed solely to move the stocks of vitamins,
health foods and ab machines through the shipping room?

   On one level this would be terribly discouraging: We're each on our
individual Xtreme-Ride through life, and although each twist and plunge feels
new, it's all been laid out and waiting for years. So we should just give up and
eat doughnuts, the ones with icing and nuts?

   The idea of scientifically tweaking predetermined behavior or traits is most
intriguing if it's aimed at the annoying behavior of others. Migrainers could be
treated in a lab, bringing relief to them and loved ones caught in their pain
radiation zone. But what other annoying afflictions of modern life might be
susceptible to gene jiggering?

   Could gene therapy cause young drivers with mammoth sound systems blaring for
blocks to be considerate, to keep the volume down? It might be asking a lot, but
could gene adjustment suddenly create real judgment among those who try to
muscle VW-sized suitcases into an airliner's overhead bin? Would a little needle
remind cell phone users to turn them off in the theater? Prompt spouses to
remember whether toilet seats go up or down? Stop hair from growing beyond a
certain length? Or graying? Or calm movie award recipients?

   How about grocery shoppers who don't even look for their checkbooks until the
last little item is rung up? Could a little goo inserted here or there speed
them up a tad? Would gene tinkering among the genus called bank managers
suddenly cause them to staff all eight teller slots, even at lunchtime? Could a
teenager be treated to hear parental questions as early as the second or third
repetition? The possibilities for improving life through better genes is limited
only by the imagination of some Italian scientists. All this thinking about
annoying things is giving us a migraine. How far away is Italy anyway?

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2003


                             916 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 25, 2003, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 117 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF / THE REGION;
TRANSKARYOTIC FACES SUIT

BYLINE: Dow Jones

BODY:

   The law firm Wolf Popper LLP said it filed a lawsuit against Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. on behalf of shareholders, alleging securities fraud. Wolf Popper
alleged Transkaryotic misrepresented the prospects for Food and Drug
Administration approval for its Replagal enzyme therapy for Fabry disease. A
Transkaryotic spokeswoman said the firm had not received a copy of the
complaint. Wolf Popper said the complaint alleges Transkaryotic knew as early as
December 2000 that the FDA considered its pain reduction data to be
"uninterpretable" and that it told the firm its renal and liver data did not
support approval. The law firm said Transkaryotic first mentioned the FDA's
comments Oct. 22.


LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2003


                             917 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 24, 2003 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 132 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF / BIOTECH;
Fabry's Drug Gets FDA Orphan Status

BYLINE: Denise Gellene

BODY:

   Large Scale Biology, a Vacaville company working to produce biotechnology
drugs in tobacco plants, said the Food and Drug Administration designated its
experimental treatment for Fabry's disease as an orphan drug.

   Orphan status allows Large Scale to apply for research grants and tax
credits.

   If approved for sale, the medication could receive exclusive marketing rights
in Fabry's disease for seven years. The company expects to begin testing the
drug in people later this year.

   Two other biotechnology companies, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and Genzyme
Corp., are ahead of Large Scale in developing an orphan drug treatment for
Fabry's, a rare disorder that causes fats to build up in the kidneys, resulting
in organ failure.

   Shares of Large Scale Biology rose 12 cents to 69 cents on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2003


                             918 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 23, 2003, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: STEVEN SYRE / BOSTON CAPITAL;
A QUESTION OF DISCLOSURE

BYLINE: BY STEVEN SYRE

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a small Cambridge biotech company with big
ambitions, was one busy place as the last weeks of 2000 wound down and the
beginning of a new year dawned.

   The company commonly known as TKT was waiting for a key court decision in a
patent case against giant Amgen Inc. Even more importantly, the company was
anxious to learn what the US Food and Drug Administration thought of Replagal,
its drug to treat a rare inherited disease called Fabry. Meanwhile, TKT was
laying the groundwork to raise hundreds of millions of dollars in fresh capital
by selling stock.

       TKT would hear from regulators about its application to sell Replagal in
America soon enough. But a new question has just surfaced, two years later. Did
TKT give it to investors straight when it disclosed the FDA's original opinion
about a drug crucial to the company's future?

   Replagal wasn't just another drug seeking FDA approval. It was going head to
head with a very similar treatment for the same disease developed by crosstown
rival Genzyme Corp. Each company knew a Fabry treatment would carry orphan drug
status, with exclusive marketing rights for seven years. They were investing
hundreds of millions of dollars in their drugs, and one company could get shut
out.

   The FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research sent its first
complete response to TKT's Replagal application in a letter dated Dec. 22, 2000.
Twelve days later, TKT issued a press release describing the correspondence in
one sentence. "The FDA has asked for further explanation in several areas and
requested additional data," it said.

   The FDA finally held public meetings on both Fabry drug applications last
week and TKT found itself on the short end of the stick, though the outcome
still isn't final. During those public meetings, an FDA chemist described that
first correspondence with TKT in a strikingly different light.

   He said the confidential letter "stated that the clinical study data had not
provided substantial evidence of efficacy and fully detailed the facts leading
to that conclusion. CBER recommended that additional clinical studies be
conducted."

   Got that? TKT didn't provide substantial evidence it worked. The letter
didn't say the FDA wanted more data and explanation. It said the research failed
to prove Replagal worked and laid out the details.

   Why were the descriptions of the letter so different? I don't really know,
and TKT declined to talk about it. But look back in time again.

   TKT's announcement early in 2001, though vague, was poorly received by
investors at first. TKT shares slumped to $27.13 from $36.56 over the next three
days, but recovered almost as quickly. TKT stock was back over $35 within two
weeks of the announcement.

   There was more stock market trouble just days ahead. A court ruling in favor
of Amgen and its blockbuster anemia drug Epogen, still under appeal today,
blocked TKT from selling its competing drug. TKT shares were crushed and fell to
as low as $16.50 within a month.

   This was very bad news for TKT's ambition to raise money. The company had
filed documents in December, when the stock traded near $40, to raise as much as
$500 million.

   Replagal came to the rescue, not in America but overseas. TKT and Genzyme
both won key regulatory backing in Europe by March 2001, and the stock began to
recover. TKT raised about $250 million in three sales over the next nine months,
at prices from $28.50 to $42 per share. Updated stock documents were only
slightly more expansive about the FDA letter.

   But Replagal ran into public problems in 2002. By October, TKT said the FDA
believed company research wasn't good enough to support approval of the drug.
The stock plunged and has since fallen below $6.

   Disclosure about drug research can be tricky. Some people say companies
should release FDA correspondence in full. Others think that would be confusing
and ultimately misleading to most people. It's also a competitive problem.

   But was TKT's one-sentence disclosure two years ago good enough? Not by me.

   Steven Syre is a Globe columnist. He can be reached at syre@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2003


                             919 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 22, 2003 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS MAIN NEWS; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1287 words

HEADLINE: Medical Tests Skewed, Study Finds;
Commercial ties are tainting the outcome of research atuniversities, Yale
investigators say.

BYLINE: Robert Lee Hotz, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   NEW YORK -- The scramble for profit warps the way scientists and universities
conduct medical experiments, undermining the integrity of research, said Yale
University investigators who studied the impact of commercial funding on
science.

   One-quarter of the biomedical researchers at universities had commercial ties
serious enough to raise questions of financial conflict, the analysts found. In
many cases, it was enough to skew their research.

   Moreover, the universities expected to police the integrity and ethics of
faculty scientists have their own commercial research interests and financial
conflicts. At least two-thirds of the universities also were involved in
commercial ventures, holding equity shares in start-up companies whose research
they were also expected to monitor. Twenty-seven universities had equity in 10
or more start-up companies, the researchers said.

   The result can be slanted science.

   Industry-sponsored research is 3.6 times more likely to produce results
favorable to the company that helped pay for it, the Yale researchers determined
in a university-funded study published today in the Journal of the American
Medical Assn.

   "Medical research is a matter of life and death," said Yale University
medical analyst Justin Bekelman, who led the study team. "The guidance patients
receive from their doctors relies on valid scientific research."

   In all, the Yale researchers assembled and analyzed data from 37 previously
published peer-reviewed studies -- covering hundreds of research projects,
thousands of scientists, and more than 1,000 peer-reviewed scientific papers --
on the extent, impact and management of financial conflicts.

   They named no scientists or schools involved, nor did they reveal the names
of any firms. Conducting the most extensive study of commercialism and science
so far, they did identify a troubling trend across the realm of biomedical
research.

   Their review covered the decades from 1980 to 2000, a period during which the
share of commercial funding grew to 62% of all U.S. spending on biomedical
research. Even as public spending on biomedical research doubled in the last
five years, the financial ties between academic scientists, universities and
industry became more common and more likely than ever to influence research
findings.

   "Financial conflicts were even more prevalent among institutions than among
individuals," said Yale research analyst Cary Gross. "How workable is oversight
and the policing of financial conflicts by institutions if they themselves have
conflicts?"

   By necessity, the public looks for reliable medical guidance almost every
day.

   Public health warnings, medical claims and policy pronouncements come draped
in the cloak of scientific authority, usually backed by a bible of published
research findings. But along the frontier of science and business, the line
between research and marketing can be hard to find.

   Every day seemingly brings a blizzard of new assertions: Roller coasters are
safer than bunk beds. Wine and walnuts improve your health. This vaccine is
harmless. That drug works better than a placebo or competitor.

   Who among the chorus of experts should the public believe?

   "It is getting harder and harder to find someone who can conduct the research
or evaluate the research who does not have a financial interest in a particular
product or particular company or a particular outcome," said Stanford University
biomedical ethicist Mildred Cho.

   This financial tangle is the consequence of a basic change in the way
biomedical research is conducted in the United States, several experts said.

   Commercial funding, once anathema to ivory-tower academics, has become the
lifeblood of biomedical research, fostered by federal laws and regulatory
changes since 1980 that give scientists and schools more freedom to profit from
work once considered in the public domain.

   At most universities and medical centers, researchers are obliged to tell
people whom they want to enroll in an experiment that the researchers have a
financial stake in the drug or treatment on trial. Many medical journals, which
publish new research, also have rules requiring scientists to reveal any
financial stake they may have in the work.

   Such disclosure policies are meant to alert the public to the possibility of
bias in published research, but they are honored more in the breach than in
practice, medical research analysts at Stanford and Tufts universities said.

   When researchers checked 47 of the most influential biomedical journals,
fewer than half had disclosure policies. When Richard Smith, editor of the
British Medical Journal, checked 3,642 articles published in the five leading
medical journals, only 52 declared the authors' financial stake in the works.

   In response to growing qualms about clinical trials, the American Assn. of
Medical Colleges, which represents the nation's 125 accredited medical schools
and nearly 400 major teaching hospitals, recently issued stricter guidelines to
control financial relationships for medical research, urging that no one be
allowed to experiment with human beings if they have a financial stake in the
outcome.

   So did the American Society for Gene Therapy. Its new, voluntary guidelines
insist that anyone involved in choosing patients or managing a clinical trial
"must not have equity, stock options or comparable arrangements in companies
sponsoring the trial."

   Even so, it can be unclear who has most at stake in a clinical trial; the
patient, the doctor or a corporate research partner.

   "The results of [a clinical] investigation can swing huge amounts of money
one way or another," said David Korn, senior vice president for biomedical and
health sciences research at the American Assn. of Medical Colleges. "The way the
world is now, we need a very high degree of sensitivity and a very high degree
of scrutiny."

   Voluntary guidelines and good intentions are hardly enough, said Tufts
University policy analyst Sheldon Krimsky, author of a forthcoming book called
"Science in the Private Interest."

   "The conventional view was that the integrity of the scientists put them
beyond the corruption of funding," Krimsky said. The new study, however, shows
"that private funding of research can bias the results."

   Whether it comes in direct grants and consultant fees or through gifts of
research materials and travel expenses, commercial funding can affect a
researcher's behavior, said health care analyst David Blumenthal at the Harvard
University Medical School.

   It can sway the kinds of scientific questions researchers ask, the way they
frame their experiments, and the role they play in influencing the medical
decisions that people make about their health.

   Several medical research analysts said that the pharmaceutical industry is
especially aggressive in its efforts to influence researchers.

   By itself, the sheer size of the pharmaceutical research enterprise is
persuasive enough. A single company -- drug giant Pfizer Inc. -- spent $5.3
billion on research and development last year, more than the National Science
Foundation.

   The drug companies also proselytize aggressively. In 2000, the drug industry
sponsored more than 314,000 events for doctors, ranging from luncheons to
weekends, some in exotic locales, at a cost of about $2 billion.

   "Physicians who take part in research studies often become spokespersons for
the companies or join advisory boards," said Jerome Kassirer, a former editor of
the New England Journal of Medicine who teaches at Yale and the Tufts University
Medical School. "Then they move up to become [medical] guideline writers. They
get involved with professional organizations. They write blurbs and books, all
of them supported by industry."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003


                             920 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 5; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1990 words

HEADLINE: RNA Trades Bit Part for Starring Role in the Cell

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   In the family of genetic material, RNA has long been the poor cousin of DNA.
DNA makes up the genes, the master instructions of life, while RNA merely
conveys those instructions to other parts of the cell.

        But surprising new discoveries are showing that cells contain an army of
RNA snippets that do much more than act as DNA's messenger. The discoveries are
helping to refine the prevailing theories of genetics -- or even upend them.

    "It's like discovering the neutrino or something," said Dr. Gary Ruvkun, a
professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School. "These things were all around
us for many years," and no one was aware of them. "Now we're discovering they
are all over the place," he added. "Genomes are full of them."

   The discoveries are having practical applications. Scientists have found that
tiny snippets of RNA with two strands instead of the usual one can be used to
shut off specific genes. The technique, known as RNA interference, is being
widely used to discover the functions of genes by turning them off and seeing
what happens to the plant or animal.

   In a paper published in Nature on Thursday, Dr. Ruvkun and his colleagues at
Harvard and Massachusetts General Hospital used RNA interference to turn off
almost all of a worm's genes, one at a time, to discover those linked to
obesity. Doctors hope that RNA interference will one day be used for medicine,
inactivating genes, say, in tumors or viruses.

   "This is a gift from heaven," said Dr. Phillip A. Sharp, a Nobel laureate and
a professor of biology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is also
a founder of Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, one of several companies started to
exploit RNA interference. Many other companies are trying to develop drugs based
on other aspects of RNA.

   Dr. Stuart Peltz, chief executive of PTC Therapeutics in South Plainfield,
N.J., said RNA had become "sort of a huge discovery zone." PTC is developing
drugs that influence the way RNA works.

   Scientists have recently reported that Prader-Willi and Fragile X syndromes,
each leading to mental retardation, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia may be
linked to RNA defects. Biologists studying other species are also looking to RNA
for answers to unsolved mysteries.

   "Everybody wants to look in their favorite organism or favorite system and
see if there's an RNA lurking there," said Dr. Susan Gottesman, chief of
biochemical genetics at the National Cancer Institute, who studies E. coli
bacteria. "A lot of the regulatory puzzles in E. coli are explained by small
RNA's we didn't think were there."

   RNA and DNA are strings of chemical units called bases that embody the
genetic code. The bases are represented by the letters A, C, G and either T in
DNA or U in RNA. The C base always binds to G. A binds only to T or U. So a
single strand of DNA or RNA can bind to another strand that has the
complementary bases.

   Under what is known as the central dogma of genetics, genes, which are the
recipes for making proteins, are part of the DNA of the chromosomes. When a
protein is to be made, the DNA is copied onto a corresponding piece of
single-stranded RNA, known as messenger RNA, that delivers the recipe to the
cell's protein-making machinery. Proteins make up most of a cell and perform
most of its functions, including turning genes on and off.

   But new evidence suggests that some RNA is not merely the intermediary
between DNA and protein, but the end product. Some huge stretches of DNA that do
not contain protein-coding genes and have been considered "junk" actually hold
the code for some of this RNA.

   A study published in May by scientists at Affymetrix of Santa Clara, Calif.,
a maker of gene chips, reported that in addition to the DNA's containing the
recipes for proteins, a lot more DNA was being copied into RNA.

   The recently deciphered mouse genome was found to have about twice as much in
common with the human genome as could be accounted for by protein-coding genes.
Areas of the genome that are similar are thought to have important functions,
explaining why they have not mutated as species evolved. At least part of this
overlap appears to be genes that produce RNA as their end product.

   What all of this RNA is doing is not clear, and much of it may have no
function. Dr. Sean Eddy, a researcher at Howard Hughes Medical Institute at
Washington University, said cells might just be sloppy, turning far more DNA
into RNA than they needed. But mounting evidence suggests that at least some RNA
is involved in regulating the way genes are turned on or off.

   Dr. John S. Mattick, a molecular biologist at the University of Queensland in
Australia, holds the most radical view: that RNA provides the command and
control of cells.

   Proteins, Dr. Mattick said, are like bricks and beams. But the RNA determines
whether those bricks and beams become office buildings or houses. This RNA
network, he said, provides the complexity that separates higher life forms from
simpler ones.

   "People have totally misunderstood the nature of genetic systems in higher
organisms," he said. "This will probably turn out to be the greatest failure in
the history of molecular biology."

   Most scientists say Dr. Mattick's views, although intriguing, are not backed
by much evidence. Rather than upending the central dogma, they say, the new
findings just add some tenets.

   It has long been known that RNA is more than a messenger. The ribosome, which
makes proteins, is made partly of RNA. Another type of RNA, called transfer RNA,
aids in protein production. Some scientists say it is not surprising that RNA
has multiple roles, because it is generally believed that RNA had the role of
both proteins and DNA in the early days of life on earth.

   "We still have a lot of remnants from that," said Dr. Stephen R. Holbrook, a
scientist at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.

   The recent excitement has been generated by two discoveries related to small
RNA snippets and their ability to turn off genes.

   Some genes, scientists found, produce tiny RNA's, known as micro-RNA's or
miRNA, which are about 21 to 23 bases, or letters, in length. The micro-RNA's
bind to matching pieces of messenger RNA, turn it into a double strand and keep
it from doing its job. The process effectively stifles the production of the
corresponding protein.

   The first such micro-RNA was discovered in the early 1990's by Dr. Victor
Ambros and his colleagues at Dartmouth. It helps control larval development in
C. elegans, the roundworm often used for genetic studies.

   Because the finding was so unexpected, "there was a considerable amount of
legitimate doubt," Dr. Ambros recalled. It was not until 2000 that Dr. Ruvkun
discovered the second one, which also acts to control development in roundworms.

   Now micro-RNA's are being found in many species. Dr. David Bartel, an
associate professor at the Whitehead Institute and M.I.T., and his sister, Dr.
Bonnie Bartel of Rice University, found 16 in arabidopsis, a plant. He also
found 50 micro-RNA's in the roundworm and is about to publish his estimate for
humans, which other scientists say is more than 200.

   The second discovery is known as RNA interference, or RNAi. About four years
ago, Dr. Andrew Fire of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and Dr. Craig
Mello of the University of Massachusetts found that when double-strand RNA was
given to roundworms, it would silence the gene corresponding to that RNA. That
helped explain a similar gene-silencing phenomenon noticed in plants years
earlier.

   Many scientists theorize that RNA interference is a protective mechanism
against viruses, which sometimes create double-strand RNA when they replicate.

   When double-strand RNA is detected, an enzyme called dicer, discovered at the
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island, chops the double-strand RNA into
shorter pieces of about 21 to 23 bases. The pieces are known as small
interfering RNA's or siRNA's. Each short segment attracts a phalanx of enzymes.

   Together, they seek out messenger RNA that corresponds to the small RNA and
destroy it. In plants and roundworms, the double-strand RNA can spread through
the organism like a microscopic Paul Revere.

   It did not take scientists long to realize that micro-RNA and small
interfering RNA's were the same length and used much of the same mechanism.
Indeed, micro-RNA's appear to be formed as longer stretches of RNA that fold
back on themselves like hairpins to create double strands. The sequence of bases
is sort of like a palindrome, so that when the folding occurs, complementary
bases line up, and the two arms of the hairpin stick together.

   Even more roles for small RNA are being found: in yeast, for example, small
RNA's bind to chromosomes to shut down genes more permanently than can be done
by stifling messenger RNA.

   At first, it was not clear that RNA interference would work in humans.
Mammalian cells, confronted with long double-strand RNA, basically destroy
themselves as a defense against pathogens.

   But two years ago scientists at the Max Planck Institute found that short
double-strand RNA, again about 21 to 23 bases, would not set off the
self-destructive response but would silence the corresponding gene.

   "Immediately, it was obvious that the ability to do experiments in human
cells had just changed completely," said Dr. David Engelke, a professor of
biological chemistry at the University of Michigan.

   Scientists are now finding that RNAi is a faster way to turn off genes than
other methods like creating so-called knockout mice that lack a particular gene.
Scientists are also looking to use RNA interference to treat diseases.

   Dr. John Rossi of the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, Calif.,
and Dr. Ramesh Akkina at Colorado State University genetically engineered
blood-producing stem cells to make a double-strand RNA that corresponded to a
part of a gene in H.I.V. When those stem cells were transplanted into mice, they
formed T cells -- the target of H.I.V. -- that inactivated the gene in the virus
and staved off infection.

   Others scientists have found in test tube experiments that they can inhibit
infection by knocking out the genes in T cells that form the receptors used by
H.I.V. to enter cells.

   Still, it will be much harder to make the technique work in patients, because
RNA tends to break down quickly in the body.

   "It comes down to whether you can deliver the small interfering RNA to the
cells where it is needed and get it inside the cells," said Dr. David Bartel.

   An alternative is to deliver DNA, which is more stable. This DNA would be
engineered to make an RNA that folded back on itself into a double strand. But
delivering DNA is gene therapy, which has had little success.

   Viruses that are used to ferry in DNA or RNA could raise safety questions.
Last week, the Food and Drug Administration suspended 27 clinical trials of gene
therapy after two children in France developed leukemia from such treatment.

   The inability to deliver a dose high enough has plagued antisense, a
technology similar to RNAi that was once also hailed as a wondrous way to treat
disease. The approach uses a single strand of RNA or DNA that binds to the
messenger RNA and shuts off protein production. Numerous antisense drugs have
failed, although one is now on the market, and others are in late stages of
clinical trials. Another gene-silencing technology, ribozymes, has not worked in
patients either.

   Scientists say RNA interference may work better because it takes advantage of
a natural process. "We've done antisense, and RNAi is about 1,000 times better,"
said Dr. Ruvkun.

   As research continues, scientists wonder how the small RNA's eluded them for
so long. One explanation is that genes that code for RNA are easy to overlook in
computer scans of genomes. But another reason, scientists say, is simply that no
one thought to look.

   "This work could have been done 20 years ago," Dr. Sharp said. "There's
nothing new in it in terms of technology. We just missed it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Gary Ruvkun of Harvard, with a projection of roundworms,
used RNA to turn off most of the worm's genes, one at a time. (Rick Friedman for
The New York Times)(pg. F4) Chart: "RNA as a Messenger"Most genes produce change
in a living organism by instructing the cell to make proteins. The instructions
are contained in chromosomes in the cell's nucleus. DNA strands unwind and their
genetic information is copied onto a messenger RNA, which is single-stranded.
The messenger RNA leaves the cell's nucleus carrying the recipe for proteins to
the protein-making machinery in the cell's cytoplasm. Chart shows RNA messenger
path from cell's nucleus to the cell's cytoplasm. RNA as a WeaponRNA is more
versatile than has been thought. Besides transmitting the code to make proteins
from genes, either of these two forms of RNA can stop protein production,
effectively inactivating genes. Scientists are trying to harness this process to
disable disease-causing genes. MICRO-RNA HAIRPINThis newly discovered
double-stranded RNA is joined at one end. It is produced from the cell's genes.
LONG DOUBLE-STRANDED RNAThis RNA is longer than micro-RNA hairpins. Scientists
copy it from the gene they seek to silence. A "dicer" enzyme cuts either into
short pieces, 21-23 base pairs long, called small RNA. 1. The small RNA unravels
into a single strand.2. It is joined by proteins.3. The RNA-protein complex
seeks out messenger RNA that matches the small RNA and either represses it or
cuts it apart, depending on how many of their base pairs match. Scientists can
also create a piece of small interfering RNA. This avoids the long
double-stranded RNA, which can be toxic to human cells. BLOCKING MESSENGER
RNAThe small RNA binds to the messenger RNA, but several base pairs don't match.
So protein production is blocked and the gene is silenced. CUTTING APART
MESSENGER RNAThe base pairs of small RNA and messenger RNA match exactly. This
prompts the protein complex to cut the messenger RNA into pieces, silencing its
gene. (Sources: Dr. Phillip Sharp and Dr. David Bartel, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology)(pg. F1)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2003


                             921 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 21, 2003 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.D-4

LENGTH: 201 words

HEADLINE: NEW TRIAL AWAITS FDA APPROVAL

BODY:

   At the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, three doctors are awaiting
final approval from the Food and Drug Administration for a gene transfer trial
that will use novel therapy to attack mesothelioma.

    For the past eight years, Penn doctors have conducted trials with funding
from the National Cancer Institute.

    Dr. Steven M. Albelda, vice chief of the pulmonary, allergy and critical
care division, said doctors plan to inject the interferon beta gene into
patients to stimulate their immune response.

    Once a patient's immune system attacks the cancerous rind that spreads like
a sheet over the lungs, Dr. Larry R. Kaiser will perform surgery.

    "The intent here is to remove the majority of the disease," Kaiser said,
adding that earlier trials have shown that doing gene therapy first and
following it with surgery may be more effective.

    Dr. Daniel H. Sterman, director of interventional pulmonology at Penn's
thoracic oncology gene therapy program, said the goal is to introduce tumor
suppressor genes into sick patients.

    The therapy, Sterman said, is experimental and will begin with low doses but
no participants will be accepted until the FDA gives its final approval.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2003


                             922 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     January 21, 2003 Tuesday, Final / All

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy study at UH is among 27 suspended by U.S.

BYLINE: Harlan Spector, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   A gene therapy study for cancer patients at University Hospitals was among 27
trials suspended by the government last week after a second child in France
developed leukemia like illness while undergoing gene therapy.

   The UH study involves protecting the bone marrow of advanced cancer patients
from the ravages of chemotherapy, while the children in France were being
treated for a deadly immune deficiency known as "bubble boy disease."

   In the French and U.S. studies, a retrovirus delivers new genes to blood stem
cells in bone marrow. The Food and Drug Administration temporarily stopped U.S.
trials that use the method of introducing genes to cells.

   UH is in the early stages of human trials. Only one person had received the
gene therapy, and that patient died from the cancer.

   Doctors at UH and Case Western Reserve University developed the gene, called
MGMT, that makes bone marrow more resistant to chemotherapy. The vulnerability
of bone marrow to chemotherapy limits a patient's tolerance to the
cancer-fighting drugs.

   "No patient was affected by the hold. We were in the middle of making small
revisions in the trial," said Dr. Stanton Gerson, chief of hematology and
oncology at the UH Ireland Cancer Center.

   The FDA said it planned to hold an advisory committee meeting next month to
discuss the retroviral gene therapy trials. The agency said the suspensions were
precautionary.

   Gerson said doctors hope to treat 12 to 16 cancer patients in the gene
therapy trial in the next two years.

   "There is a huge amount of interest across the world in this approach," he
said. "Three other centers are actively pursuing clinical trials with our
drug-resistant gene."

   The bubble boy disease, called severe combined immunodeficiency, is the only
disease ever to be cured with gene therapy. A 3-year-old boy whose life was
saved by the therapy developed leukemia-like illness several months ago, putting
a halt to three gene therapy studies for the disease in the United States.

   The Associated Press contributed to this story.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   hspector@plaind.com, 216-999-4543

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003


                             923 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      January 20, 2003 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 550 words

HEADLINE: State gene experiments go on;
FDA halted some testing when new illness turned up

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE mmarchione@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Gene therapy experiments in Wisconsin are unaffected by the Food and Drug
Administration's decision last week to freeze certain gene therapy trials
because a second child in a French study developed a leukemia-like illness.

   However, some Wisconsin patients participated in similar experiments in the
past, which used retroviruses to deliver genes. The use of retroviruses is
causing concern because they stitch themselves permanently into a patient's
chromosomes. Scientists have no way to control precisely where those
retroviruses land and therefore can't prevent them from triggering another
disease, such as cancer.

   About 200 gene therapy experiments are under way around the United States,
more than half of them for cancer. Several thousand Americans are enrolled in
them.

   About 60 of the 200 use retroviruses, and 27 of the 60 insert those viruses
into blood stem cells. It's these 27 trials, involving 200 to 300 patients, that
the FDA has suspended, said FDA spokesman Jason Brodsky.

   Researchers conducting such trials were ordered to notify all hospitals and
patients involved, he said. The FDA plans to hold an advisory committee meeting
next month to discuss these and all gene therapy trials using retroviruses.

   One such trial was halted at the Medical College of Wisconsin in late 1999,
not because of problems that developed in patients but because the therapy
wasn't working, said William Drobyski, the professor who led the study.

   Six patients got the treatment at the Medical College and several more did at
Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., which was collaborating on the
project, he said. It was aimed at treating a variety of blood cancers and
included a novel approach -- a "suicide gene" -- that could switch off the gene
therapy if complications arose from it.

   But the cells carrying the therapeutic genes failed to live once inside
patients, dooming the treatment, Drobyski said.

   "We actually conceptualized a second-generation approach to this problem"
using a modified retroviral mechanism but now will watch to see what happens in
the field before considering it further, he said.

   No human gene therapy experiments are under way now at the Medical College or
at Marshfield Medical Research Foundation, which does a lot of cutting-edge
genetic research. Gene therapy trials at the University of Wisconsin-Madison use
modified cold viruses instead of retroviruses, a spokesman said.

   UW did have federal approval to do four gene therapy trials using
retroviruses for a variety of cancers and Gaucher's disease in 1992 and 1993,
but university officials don't think any patients actually wound up getting the
treatments.

   The French study has been considered the clearest victory for gene therapy
because it appeared to cure severe combined immune deficiency, or SCID, commonly
called "bubble boy disease."

   Two toddlers helped by the therapy now have developed leukemia-like
illnesses. That this happened "surprised some, but not those of us who regulate
biologic products such as gene therapy," Philip Noguchi, who oversees gene
therapy for the FDA, wrote in an article in Thursday's New England Journal of
Medicine.

   The manipulations needed to create these therapies "add enormous complexity
to considerations of safety," he wrote.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2003


                             924 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 20, 2003, Monday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. C-8

LENGTH: 1199 words

HEADLINE: Fighting a good fight against a bad gene

BYLINE: Jane Brody; (C) New York Times News Service

BODY:
 More than 10 million people in this country carry in all their cells one copy
of a defective gene that regulates the movement of sodium, chloride and water in
and out of cells.

   These people are, on the surface, perfectly healthy, but when two such
carriers of this defective gene have children, they have a 25 percent chance
that each child will inherit an abnormal gene from each parent and, as a result,
will be born with cystic fibrosis.

   The result of a defective protein, cystic fibrosis is a chronic, progressive
and ultimately fatal disease that clogs the lungs and pancreas with thick,
sticky mucus.

   About 30,000 people in the United States have cystic fibrosis, the most
common life-shortening genetic disease among Caucasians worldwide.  It occurs in
1 in 3,300 live births among whites, with a lower incidence in other racial
groups.  The incidence is highest, 1 in 2,500 births, among descendants of
Northern European whites and Ashkenazi Jews.

   Gene mutations

   How has such a lethal gene survived the throes of evolution?  Just as
carriers of the sickle cell gene have a survival advantage because their
abnormal gene offers some protection against malaria, some scientists believe
that carriers of the cystic fibrosis gene were better able to survive the often
fatal diarrhea caused by cholera.

   At least 800 different defects, or mutations, are known to occur in this
critical gene, which causes a cell to create a protein called the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator, or CFTR.

   Different mutations cause different disruptions of the regulator's role, and,
as a result, different degrees of severity of cystic fibrosis.

   The most common mutations disrupt the movement of CFTR from its point of
origin to its site of operation and cause a severe and ultimately fatal disease.

   New treatments

   As recently as 25 years ago, most children born with cystic fibrosis died in
early childhood and few survived to their teen-age years.  Today, most can
expect to live past 30. Many finish high school and college, get jobs and have
families.

   The difference stems from productive research, the results of persistent
fund-raising efforts and pressure from parents, who established the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation in 1955.

   The research led to an understanding of the way cystic fibrosis causes
life-threatening damage through a chain of events that involves damaged genes,
abnormal tissues and malfunctioning organs.

   This understanding, in turn, has led to the development of preventive
techniques and treatments that can attack every stage of the disease process.

   New treatments now in development promise even further gains.

   Some experts predict that within a decade, the lung damage from cystic
fibrosis will be limited by periodic gene therapy in children and young adults.

   Better yet, some say, will be the application of techniques already
technically feasible to correct the defect genetically even before a child is
born, or soon enough afterward to prevent tissue damage.  Only then might
researchers begin to talk cautiously of a cure.

   New antibiotics

   Meanwhile, a host of therapies to forestall complications have become the
focus of survival for patients with cystic fibrosis.

   Respiratory physical therapy done two or more times a day to loosen the
thickened mucus, enabling it to be coughed up, is essential to maintaining the
ability of the lungs to transfer oxygen and carbon dioxide.

   In years past, clapping on the chest, back and sides was the only method.

   Now the job can be done by inhaled nebulizers, vibration vests and a flutter
device that is blown into, freeing a patient from daily dependence on a lay or
professional therapist.

   Because the thickened mucus is a breeding ground for bacteria, antibiotics
are another critical factor in maintaining pulmonary health.  With mucus coating
the small airways in the lungs, the hair cells are unable to clear out invading
bacteria.

   The trick has been staying ahead of the ability of micro-organisms to develop
resistance by continually finding new antibiotics to which they are still
susceptible.

   The potentially deadly infections mean frequent hospitalizations for many
cystic fibrosis patients.  Some have a central line implanted to aid in the
frequent administration of antibiotics.

   Malnutrition is a constant risk because ducts clogged by mucus are unable to
move digestive enzymes to sites where food is broken down and absorbed.

   Thus, enzyme-packed pills to aid digestion and fat-soluble vitamin
supplements (A, D, E and K) are other daily requirements for maintaining the
health of people with the disease.

   Stamina and support

   Another problem is consuming enough calories to compensate for the effort
expended in breathing with congested lungs.

   Dehydration is yet another risk because the defective gene causes an abnormal
absorption of sodium, dehydrating the lungs and making them more susceptible to
infection.  So people with cystic fibrosis have to be even more devoted to water
bottles than aerobics instructors.

   Experts on cystic fibrosis emphasize two other important factors in coping
with the illness: building and maintaining physical stamina and obtaining
psychological support for patients and their families.

   The stronger people are, physically and emotionally, the better able they are
to handle the complications and treatments for the disease.

   But eventually, despite the best therapy available, the lungs of people with
cystic fibrosis become too damaged to sustain life.  When that critical time
appears on the horizon, a growing number of patients seek a double-lung
transplant, an operation as risky as a heart transplant.

   Both lungs are needed to prevent the transplanted one from becoming diseased.

   When kidneys fail, dialysis can substitute for kidney function, but nothing
similar exists for the lungs.

   Lung transplants

   There is no telling when lung failure will occur, necessitating a transplant.
For some, like Stefanie Allen, it happened at age 11. For Charlie Tolchin, it
was 28. For Michael Maggio, it was 40.

   About 3,700 patients are on a lung transplant waiting list nationwide.  But
each year only about 1,000 receive transplants.  The problem stems from an acute
shortage of viable organs and a limited number of medical centers with staff
members skilled at the procedure.

   The lungs have to be big enough to sustain the recipients.  For some patients
who are small, it is possible to use part of the lungs from two live donors,
usually relatives.

   The operation is expensive and risky: 5 percent of patients do not survive
it.  Three years after a transplant, 62 percent of the patients are still alive.
The main problem is chronic rejection, which can occur despite the constant use
of complication-prone immune-suppressive drugs.  One complication is the
development of lymphoma, a cancer of the lymph system that can be fatal, as it
was for Maggio at 49.

   Those seeking more information or referrals to cystic fibrosis care centers
throughout the country can contact the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation at 6931
Arlington Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, by phone at (800) 344-4823, or check the
foundation's Web site, www.cff.org.


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003


                             925 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    January 19, 2003, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: Gene research critical in cystic fibrosis fight

SOURCE: New York Times

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   More than 10 million people in this country carry in all their cells one copy
of a defective gene that regulates the movement of sodium, chloride and water in
and out of cells.

   These people are, on the surface, perfectly healthy, but when two such
carriers of this defective gene have children, they have a 25 percent chance
that each child will inherit an abnormal gene from each parent and, as a result,
will be born with cystic fibrosis.

   The result of a defective protein, cystic fibrosis is a chronic, progressive
and ultimately fatal disease that clogs the lungs and pancreas with thick mucus.

   About 30,000 people in the United States have cystic fibrosis, the most
common life-shortening genetic disease among Caucasians worldwide. It occurs in
1 in 3,300 live births among whites, with a lower incidence in other racial
groups. The incidence is highest, 1 in 2,500 births, among descendants of
Northern European whites and Ashkenazi Jews.

   How has such a lethal gene survived the throes of evolution? Just as carriers
of the sickle cell gene have a survival advantage because their abnormal gene
offers some protection against malaria, some scientists believe carriers of the
cystic fibrosis gene were better able to survive the often fatal diarrhea caused
by cholera.

   At least 800 different defects, or mutations, are known to occur in this
critical gene, which causes a cell to create a protein called the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator, or CFTR.

   Mutations cause different disruptions of the regulator's role, and, as a
result, different degrees of severity of cystic fibrosis. The most common
mutations disrupt the movement of CFTR and cause a severe and ultimately fatal
disease.

   As recently as 25 years ago, most children born with cystic fibrosis died in
early childhood, and few survived to their teenage years. Today, most can expect
to live past 30.

   The difference stems from productive research, the results of persistent
fund-raising efforts and pressure from parents, who established the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation in 1955.

   Some experts predict that within a decade, the lung damage from cystic
fibrosis will be limited by periodic gene therapy in children and young adults.

   Better yet, some say, will be the application of techniques already
technically feasible to correct the defect genetically before a child is born,
or soon enough afterward to prevent tissue damage. Only then might researchers
begin to talk cautiously of a cure.

   Respiratory physical therapy done two or more times a day to loosen the
thickened mucus, enabling it to be coughed up, is essential to maintaining the
ability of the lungs to transfer oxygen and carbon dioxide.

   In years past, clapping on the chest, back and sides was the only method. Now
the job can be done by inhaled nebulizers, vibration vests and a flutter device
that is blown into, freeing a patient from daily dependence on a lay or
professional therapist.

   Antibiotics are critical in maintaining pulmonary health. With mucus coating
the airways in the lungs, hair cells are unable to clear out invading bacteria.

   The trick has been staying ahead of the ability of micro-organisms to develop
resistance by finding new antibiotics to which they are susceptible.

   Experts on cystic fibrosis emphasize the importance of building and
maintaining physical stamina and obtaining psychological support for patients
and their families. The stronger people are, physically and emotionally, the
better able they are to handle the complications and treatments for the disease.

   For information contact the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation at 6931 Arlington
Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, at 301-951-4422 or 800-344-4823, or at www.cff.org.


LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2003


                             926 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Column 2; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 84 words

HEADLINE: JANUARY 12-18: NATIONAL;
GENE THERAPY SETBACK

BYLINE:  By Andrew Pollack

BODY:

        The Food and Drug Administration suspended 27 gene therapy clinical
trials after a second child receiving such treatment in France developed a
disease resembling leukemia.

   Nine children in France had been virtually cured of a fatal immune disease,
in the first unequivocal success for gene therapy. But two of them subsequently
developed leukemia because, scientists determined, the curative gene put into
their blood cells landed on or near a cancer-promoting gene and activated it.
Andrew Pollack

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2003


                             927 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 19, 2003, Sunday

SECTION: BOOKS;Pg. BOOKS-2

LENGTH: 493 words

HEADLINE: AN INNOCENT'S FACEDOWN; Lou Arrendale can't read a person's
expression, but he sees more than you think

BYLINE: Jim Hopper; Jim Hopper writes the Eccentric Orbits column for Books.

BODY:
 Lou Arrendale is in a difficult situation and has to make some very hard
choices.  Lou is autistic, though he functions well enough to live alone and
work at a pretty good job -- and to narrate nearly all of an excellent novel.

   Lou can't read people very well.  He can see and create patterns, even
patterns as abstruse as fractals for biochemical engineering, but human facial
expressions tend to be too fleeting and too muddled.  Like so many people, he's
also frightened of being wrong.  Unlike most people, he carries a card in his
pocket to tell police and security personnel why he's frozen up, flustered and
stammering into muteness.

   Even though Lou doesn't know it, he's like "normal" people in a lot of other
ways.  The bared-nerve narration of his encounters with strangers, co-workers
and his friends is served up in a simple, straightforward manner, without a
scrap of anesthetic.

   This makes for a difficult book to read, not because of the style, but
because I don't read well or quickly with my eyes misted over.  Should it come
out on audio, one wouldn't want to drive with this story in the player.

   One of the hard things Lou has to deal with is that he's one of a generation
of autists whose younger counterparts were able to be normalized in early
infancy, with gene therapies and such.  People a few years older than Lou tend
to be very low-functioning, as they didn't have as many or as effective
therapies as did Lou.

   To make it harder yet, a new therapy for adults seems to have worked in
primate tests.  The company Lou works for buys up the research.  A new manager
very much wants to have Lou and his colleagues participate, as the first human
subjects.

   Lou is an innocent.  He's been a member of a fencing group for five years,
but he keeps his gear at the instructor's house; "normals" don't like the idea
of an odd person carrying around a bag of long, sharp blades.  There's a woman
in the group that he really wants to know better, but he can't read people, and
is more than half frightened of doing the wrong thing with Marjory.  He has so
few friends that it hurts him (and the reader) to think of losing any of them.

   Including the male fencer in the group, who becomes jealous of Lou's
interaction with Marjory, and his fencing as well.  Lou believes, against a lot
of evidence, that Don is still his friend, up until too many coincidences build
up.

   There is a long and humorously deadpan explication by Lou on the actual odds
involved in the old saying about coincidence and enemy action, but it's too
earnest, in Lou's persona, to be funny as you read it.  If you can stand to be
in the mind of a person who's innocent and painfully honest and sadly, badly
underestimated by most of the folks around him, you'll like "The Speed of Dark"
a great deal.

   And maybe dark really is faster than light.  It has to get there first,
doesn't it?

   The Speed of Dark

   Elizabeth Moon

   Ballantine, 340 pages, $23.95


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2003


                             928 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 19, 2003, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-14

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: Worm-gene research linked with treatment for obesity

BYLINE: Alex Dominguez; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 Scientists have manipulated hundreds of genes to create roundworms that are
sleek and trim -- a feat that could someday lead to new obesity treatments for
people.

   Harvard biologist Gary Ruvkun used a promising new technique to identify
about 400 genes in the roundworm's genetic code related to fat production and
storage.

   His team then deactivated, or turned off, about 300 of the genes in
experiments, and now "the worms are thin and happy," Ruvkun said.  When they
knocked out the activity of the remaining 100 genes, worms grew fatter.

   Details of the roundworm experiments and the new genetic technique appeared
in Thursday's issue of the journal Nature.

   "If someone told me we'd be using this kind of protocol even three years ago,
I'd have said that's crazy -- don't even think about it," Ruvkun said.

   Scientists frequently conduct basic experiments with roundworms -- known by
their scientific name as C. elegans -- because they are inexpensive and simple.
Scientists can fit 100,000 on a lab dish, and they reproduce within four days.
In October, British and American researchers shared the Nobel Prize in medicine
for experiments using roundworms to study organ growth and cell death.

   Roundworms are about a millimeter long, with smooth, cylinder-shaped bodies
tapered at both ends.  In nature, they live in the soil and feed on bacteria.

   The Harvard scientists disabled genes so that the bioengineered roundworms
would have much lower fat levels than normal.

   Humans share about half of the roundworm's 19,000 genes, including 200 of the
fat-storage genes.  Whether the same gene-knockout technique will work in humans
is unclear, but obesity drugs might be developed based on the basic
understanding of the genes, Ruvkun said.

   Other biologists cautioned that drug companies would need at least a decade
to safely develop a genetic therapy for obesity.  One in five Americans is
obese, and obesity contributes to heart disease, diabetes and other illnesses.

   "The worm studies will allow the identification of many more genes much more
rapidly.  It'll also speed up the process of figuring out how they work," said
Leon Avery of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas,
which is conducting its own fat-gene experiments with roundworms.  "For the drug
companies, this means a much longer list of 'targets' that they can try to find
drugs for."

   Ruvkun used a novel gene-identification method developed at the Wellcome
Trust/Cancer Research UK Institute in England.

   Scientists study a gene by deactivating it and examining how the organism
behaves.  But creating that version of an organism is not always easy;
scientists often need up to six weeks to create a knockout roundworm.

   In the new method, British researchers added genetic material from a
roundworm to bacteria.  Then they fed the bioengineered bacteria to the worms.
The worms' immune systems recognized the genetic material carried by bacteria as
foreign and destroyed that sequence in their own genetic coding.  In doing so,
the worms rapidly turned themselves into knockout versions.

   The technique takes advantage of the roundworm's natural defenses against
viruses.

   The method can be used for many genetic experiments beyond obesity.

   "We can inactivate hundreds of worm genes in a day," said Julie Ahringer, a
Wellcome Trust researcher.  "It's amazing."



LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2003


                             929 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 19, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: BOOKS; Pg. BOOKS-2

LENGTH: 483 words

HEADLINE: AN INNOCENT'S FACEDOWN;
Lou Arrendale can't read a person's expression, but he sees more than you think

BYLINE: Jim Hopper, Jim Hopper writes the Eccentric Orbits column for Books.

BODY:

   Lou Arrendale is in a difficult situation and has to make some very hard
choices.

   Lou is autistic, though he functions well enough to live alone and work at a
pretty good job -- and to narrate nearly all of an excellent novel. Lou can't
read people very well.

   He can see and create patterns, even patterns as abstruse as fractals for
biochemical engineering, but human facial expressions tend to be too fleeting
and too muddled.

   Like so many people, he's also frightened of being wrong.

   Unlike most people, he carries a card in his pocket to tell police and
security personnel why he's frozen up, flustered and stammering into muteness.
Even though Lou doesn't know it, he's like "normal" people in a lot of other
ways.

   The bared-nerve narration of his encounters with strangers, co-workers and
his friends is served up in a simple, straightforward manner, without a scrap of
anesthetic. This makes for a difficult book to read, not because of the style,
but because I don't read well or quickly with my eyes misted over.

   Should it come out on audio, one wouldn't want to drive with this story in
the player. One of the hard things Lou has to deal with is that he's one of a
generation of autists whose younger counterparts were able to be normalized in
early infancy, with gene therapies and such.

   People a few years older than Lou tend to be very low-functioning, as they
didn't have as many or as effective therapies as did Lou. To make it harder yet,
a new therapy for adults seems to have worked in primate tests.

   The company Lou works for buys up the research.

   A new manager very much wants to have Lou and his colleagues participate, as
the first human subjects. Lou is an innocent.

   He's been a member of a fencing group for five years, but he keeps his gear
at the instructor's house; "normals" don't like the idea of an odd person
carrying around a bag of long, sharp blades.

   There's a woman in the group that he really wants to know better, but he
can't read people, and is more than half frightened of doing the wrong thing
with Marjory.

   He has so few friends that it hurts him (and the reader) to think of losing
any of them. Including the male fencer in the group, who becomes jealous of
Lou's interaction with Marjory, and his fencing as well.

   Lou believes, against a lot of evidence, that Don is still his friend, up
until too many coincidences build up. There is a long and humorously deadpan
explication by Lou on the actual odds involved in the old saying about
coincidence and enemy action, but it's too earnest, in Lou's persona, to be
funny as you read it.

   If you can stand to be in the mind of a person who's innocent and painfully
honest and sadly, badly underestimated by most of the folks around him, you'll
like "The Speed of Dark" a great deal. And maybe dark really is faster than
light.

   It has to get there first, doesn't it? The Speed of Dark Elizabeth Moon
Ballantine, 340 pages, $23.95

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             930 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 24 words

HEADLINE: Corrections

BODY:

        A headline yesterday about two leukemia-like cases in a gene therapy
test misstated its sponsorship. It was a French test, not an F.D.A. test.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2003


                             931 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 17, 2003 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 538 words

HEADLINE: 2nd Cancer Is Attributed To Gene Used In F.D.A. Test

BYLINE:   By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   The second case of a leukemia-like disease in a gene therapy patient in
France appears to have the same basic cause as the first one, a scientist
investigating the incident said yesterday.

        In both cases, it appears the gene inserted into the boys' cells to cure
their disease accidentally landed on or near a cancer-causing gene and switched
it on, said the scientist, Dr. Christof von Kalle of Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, who is collaborating with the French researchers.

    Dr. von Kalle said his preliminary assessment, which is still to be
verified, suggested that the problem might be restricted to the particular gene
therapy regimen in France. "This is something that is so specific and unique I
would say it would not have been possible to predict this," he said.

   The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday suspended 27 clinical trials of
gene therapy after learning of the second case of leukemia. The halt was another
setback to the fledgling field of gene therapy because the French experiment, in
which 9 of 11 boys were essentially cured of a fatal immune deficiency, had been
considered the first unequivocal success for the technique.

   But three years after their treatment, two of those nine boys have developed
uncontrolled growth of blood cells characteristic of leukemia. They are
responding to chemotherapy, according to the National Institutes of Health.

   In both cases, the gene inserted into the boys' blood-forming stem cells
landed on or near an oncogene, or cancer-promoting gene, called LMO-2, which can
spur childhood leukemia. In the first case the gene landed inside LMO-2 and the
second landed near enough to turn on the gene, Dr. von Kalle said.

   The gene therapy used viruses to carry the therapeutic cells into the
children's blood-forming stem cells. The virus lands at random on the cell's
DNA. So scientists have long known there was a risk that the virus could land on
a cancer-spurring gene, but it was thought that the chances of its happening
were small.

   Dr. von Kalle said the chance of a virus landing on LMO-2 was about 1 in
100,000. But since each child was given about one million cells, the probability
is very high that a child received at least one cell in which the virus landed
on the gene. That makes it important to monitor the other children closely, he
said.

   But Dr. von Kalle said scientists believed that turning on just one oncogene
would not be a problem because it usually requires multiple genetic changes to
turn a cell cancerous.

   "There's no human cancer model where you can see that one gene got turned on
and it gave you a cancer," he said.

   Dr. von Kalle's hypothesis is that a second genetic change came from the
therapeutic gene itself. The gene put into the French children was designed to
spur growth of infection-fighting blood cells, since the boys suffered from a
lack of such cells, meaning they would be killed by infections. It is possible
that the therapeutic gene combined with the activated oncogene to cause a surge
of such blood cells, Dr. von Kalle said.

   If this hypothesis is confirmed, it would indicate that gene therapy
treatments in which the inserted gene is not a growth-promoting one would not
face the same risk, he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 18, 2003

CORRECTION:

   A headline yesterday about two leukemia-like cases in a gene therapy test
misstated its sponsorship. It was a French test, not an F.D.A. test.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                             932 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    JANUARY 17, 2003, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SAN FRANCISCO FRIDAY; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1021 words

HEADLINE: Business partners find a way to Give Something Back;

Company hands profits to charity

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tony Cooper

BODY:
Buddies Mike Hannigan and Sean Marx were working out in a San Francisco gym one
day, and in between exercises, tossed around the idea of starting a business.

    Marx figured that like himself, Hannigan yearned for a wildly successful
enterprise, drawing paychecks with many zeros on them and kicking would-be
competitors in the teeth. But there was one footnote to the plan: Hannigan
intended to give the money away.

    "When Mike first gave me the idea, I thought he was crazy," said Marx. "Why
would I bust my butt to grow a company and donate everything we earn?"

    Fast forward 12 years and no doubt many in the business world would ask the
same question. However, Hannigan is showing that the wiring in his brain wasn't
faulty, because the Oakland company he and Marx formed -- Give Something Back --
has been a smashing success. And the company continues to grow, even in these
iffy economic times.

    Give Something Back sells office supplies, competing with heavy-hitting
corporate giants such as Office Depot and Boise Cascade. True to Hannigan's
vision, GSB donates its after-tax profits to a variety of community
organizations in Northern California. Since its inception, the company has
donated more than $2 million to charitable causes, using Newman's Own food
products as a model and inspiration.

    Founded in 1982 by actor Paul Newman, Newman's Own has given $125 million to
charity, all from post-tax profits.

    In 2001, GSB wrote checks to the tune of $405,856 to organizations ranging
from Big Brothers Big Sisters to Tri-Valley Animal Rescue. GSB gave away
$408,000 last year, and expects to go well beyond that in the future.

    Since GSB's humble beginnings of Hannigan making sales calls from his living
room -- Marx and Hannigan plunked down $20,000 each from their savings to launch
the firm -- GSB has been doubling in size every two years and now does national
business. The company grew 10 to 15 percent in 2002, which Hannigan called a
slow year.

    There is plenty of cash to be made in the office-supply business, too.
Hannigan says it's a $250 billion industry, $7 billion in the Bay Area. Give
Something Back is getting a burgeoning piece of the action and wants a lot more.

    "They're a model of what corporate America could be," said Sue Collett,
executive director of the East Bay Agency for Children in Oakland, which has
received annual grants from GSB since 1997. "I'm impressed by their commitment
to give back to the community. All the stuff they say they do, they really do it
. . . they're for real."

    Neither Marx nor Hannigan has a title on his business card. Step into
Hannigan's modest office, and you'll see an Amnesty International bumper sticker
on his computer. On one wall are two replica posters advertising a 1968 concert
at the Fillmore featuring Jimi Hendrix, Bo Diddley, Big Brother and the Holding
Company, among others. Talk about the anti-Larry Ellison.

    Hannigan, a 53-year-old graduate of Concord's Ygnacio Valley High School
with a UC Berkeley master's degree in criminology, says when people ask what he
does for a living, he tells them he's a community activist.

    Marx, a 37-year-old Cambridge, Mass., native, said: "We feel good about
doing the right thing and building a business. Everyone says, 'Why in the world
would you do what you do?' Our perspective is, why wouldn't you want to do it
(this way)?"

    Which nonprofits receive money and how much they get are determined in an
electionlike process. GSB customers, employees and Marx and Hannigan nominate
agencies (an organization can nominate itself, as well), and those names are
placed on a ballot. Grants are given on a proportional-vote basis.

    The folks at GSB can talk about altruism and helping others all night long,
but the fact is if it didn't provide good products and services and satisfy
customers, the philanthropic mission wouldn't mean a thing.

    "As a business, they've taken good care of us," said Dusty Gipson of
Genitope, a gene therapy cancer research company in Redwood City. "They don't
feel the need to be pushy. They know what they're doing is a good thing, and
they will sell. In the end, everyone is benefiting."

    They have been recognized in the industry. In November, GSB was named
Outstanding Corporate Grantmaker by the Golden Gate chapter of the Association
of Fundraising Professionals.

    Hannigan has what he calls "lifetime interest in community work." His
parents were ardent anti-Vietnam War protesters, and he picked up the same
leftist leanings. Though he wasn't on the stereotypical management track,
Hannigan started out at Xerox as a credit representative ("I called people to
tell them we owe you money," he said), then moved on to several other
business-products companies and was climbing up the corporate ladder.

    Marx, a graduate of Occidental College in Los Angeles, said he "went to
college in the late '80s, the height of the yuppie generation. My friends were
all focused on monetary wealth -- 'How quickly can I get rich?' "

    And Marx was right there with them. He began with Ricoh as a sales
representative, making six figures when he was in his early 20s. But Marx says
the dash for cash eventually turned him off, uncovering his dormant concerns for
community issues.

    Marx and Hannigan, both of whom live in Berkeley, didn't hesitate when asked
their salaries: each made $96,000 last year. And while this wage will certainly
keep them out of food banks, they say they could make 25 percent more at a
similar job with another company.

    "I wish more (companies) would adopt the philosophy, 'We're all in this
together,' " said Collett of East Bay Agency for Children. "I don't know any
other company as deeply committed to philanthropy. To be that dedicated and
successful . . . I've never seen that."

   ---------------------------------------

   Get in touch

   Actor Danny Glover will be the guest speaker for Give Something Back 4-6 p.m.
Feb. 3 at the Rotunda Building, 300 Frank Ogawa Plaza, adjacent to City Hall in
Oakland. Contact Give Something Back at (800) 261-2619 or visit
www.givesomethingback.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Sean Marx (left) and Mike Hannigan own Give Something Back, an
office supply company that donates 92 percent of profits to charity. / Craig
Lee/The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                             933 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    January 17, 2003, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2324 words

HEADLINE: The real face of CLONING

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:
The Raelians, a religious group that believes space aliens created life on
Earth, grabbed headlines with their day-after-Christmas claim that they had
helped bring the first human clone into the world. That claim remains unproven,
and most experts consider it a hoax.

   But as the dust settles from the carnival atmosphere of the past few weeks,
other claims that clones are coming remain. The day of the clone may still be at
hand.

   "It is absolutely inevitable that groups are going to try to clone a human
being. But they are going to create a lot of dead and dying babies along the
way," says bioethicist Thomas Murray, president of the Hastings Center, a
bioethics think tank in Garrison, N.Y.


   Lost in the hype surrounding claims of human cloning are hard scientific
facts that show cloning animals is fraught with perils both before and after
birth. Scientists are able to clone sheep, cattle, pigs, goats and mice, but not
without significant errors that commonly result in oversized fetuses, placental
defects, lung, kidney and cardiovascular problems, brain abnormalities, immune
dysfunction and severe postnatal weight gain.

   Efforts to clone primates have proven even more difficult and might be
impossible with current methods, scientists say. Of particular concern are
embryos that appear normal and healthy but at the genetic level are a "gallery
of horrors," says Tanja Dominko, who conducted primate cloning research at the
Oregon Regional Primate Research Center in Beaverton.

   Advanced Cell Technology of Worcester, Mass., is the only scientific group
that has acknowledged making cloned human embryos for research purposes. ACT
medical director Robert Lanza says he hopes one day to create cures for diseases
such as Alzheimer's based on cells harvested from cloned embryos. But his team
has found that cloning human embryos is no simple task. Only one has reached the
six-cell stage, and it had significant genetic abnormalities.

   Lanza says techniques are improving for purposes of medical research but not
enough for reliably creating healthy babies.

   'Devastating birth defects'

   If cloned babies start showing up in hospital nurseries, scientists predict
that they will be hooked up to respirators because their hearts and lungs will
have been deformed. Feeding tubes also might be necessary for infants who have
brain damage and cannot suckle. Others might have extensive physical
abnormalities. Even those born with a normal appearance probably would
experience epilepsy, autism or behavioral abnormalities.

   "All of the data on animal cloning demonstrates exceptionally high rates of
fetal loss, abortion (and) neonatal deaths, and many cloned animals have
devastating birth defects," says Gerald Schatten, vice chairman of obstetrics,
gynecology and reproductive science at the University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine.

   "When people are working with farm animals or laboratory mice and there is a
newborn that is suffering, veterinarians can euthanize the animal. Are people
who are attempting to clone humans going to euthanize suffering children?"

   Two fertility specialists, Severino Antinori of Rome and Panos Zavos of
Lexington, Ky., have announced independent efforts to clone humans. Antinori
announced in March that a clone would be born around January. Zavos was to have
begun his cloning efforts last fall. Antinori, Zavos and Brigitte Boisselier of
Clonaid, the Raelian company that claims to have brought two cloned babies into
the world, have made dozens of television appearances, and to the chagrin of
some critics, have acquired an air of legitimacy by being invited to testify
before Congress and the National Academy of Sciences.

   Yet none of these people has provided evidence of the ability to actually
clone a human safely, Murray says. When asked how they plan to avoid the types
of deformities found in cloned animals, all three repeatedly have stated that
the scientists who clone animals don't know what they are doing.

   "If you are doing it the way of the animal cloners, yes, there is a risk,"
Zavos told USA TODAY in August when he introduced an anonymous couple who said
they plan to have a cloned baby. "We have the science of maternal fetal
medicine, and we will be monitoring the pregnancies very carefully."

   Many of the birth defects observed in cloned animals are similar to the gross
physical deformities and mental retardation found in rare genetic disorders
caused by a phenomenon known as genetic imprinting, says Arthur Beaudet,
professor of genetics at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.

   These disorders arise when the genes of the mother and father do not align
for embryonic development as nature intended.

   Here's how imprinting occurs: At the moment of natural conception, the 30,000
genes in the DNA of the father must combine in the fertilized egg with the
30,000 genes of the mother. Then there are two copies of every gene, and
together they form a master program to build an embryo cell by cell, sometimes
with genes from the father turned off to let the mother's genes do the work, and
other times the mother's genes stay silent to let the father's do their part.

   Imprinting disorders arise when either the mother's or father's genes imprint
themselves on the program in places where they should have been minding their
own business -- like mom and dad talking at the same time rather than taking
turns. In other words, both copies of a gene are turned on when one of them
should be silent, and the result is a genetic error that might cause a
developmental disorder.

   Perils of reprogramming

   In cloning, a scientist plucks the DNA containing the copies of all of the
mother and father's genes from a fully formed adult cell and inserts it into an
egg that has been stripped of its own nucleus of genes. Because there is no
conception to spark the creation of an embryo, scientists must somehow reprogram
that adult DNA back to the brink of embryonic development as though
fertilization had just occurred.

   Reprogramming is perhaps the most active area of cloning research, but
scientists do not know how to do it. So they must insert the DNA from adult
cells into dozens or even hundreds of eggs, give a little jolt of electricity to
stimulate the cell to divide and keep their fingers crossed. Most scientists
agree that only about 1% to 2% of these attempts in animals lead to a live
birth. Of live births, only about 20% appear to be normal.

   The prevalence of genetic disorders in cloned animals and the lack of
knowledge about reprogramming are the primary reasons the scientists who work on
cloning and issues of reprogramming say they are skeptical that anyone can clone
a human without genetic errors, Beaudet and others say.

   "Just from the scientific safety considerations alone, this is completely
appalling," says Schatten, who is leading efforts to clone rhesus monkeys. These
efforts have been unsuccessful. "Those of us actively engaged in research
cloning have invested years and years of dedicated efforts and have encountered
enormous difficulties in generating a single" cloned embryo.

   Congress introduced another bill Jan. 8 to make human cloning in the USA
illegal. But it has been unable to pass a number of anti-cloning bills because
the legislation has included a ban on research using cloning techniques to
create stem cells.

   Researchers want to create tiny pre-embryos -- a ball of cells that has not
yet taken any form -- as sources of stem cells; this type of research is called
therapeutic cloning. Supporters believe these primordial stem cells hold promise
for treating a wide range of disorders including Alzheimer's, cancer and
diabetes. They say they fear that the bath water will be thrown out with the
baby and that Congress will ban embryonic stem cell research.

   Opponents say it is immoral to use human embryos for research. Obtaining stem
cells means destroying the embryo, which many people consider the same as
abortion.

   But some experts believe the real stake in the heart of human cloning will
come the first time angry parents sue a laboratory or a doctor over a
genetically damaged cloned child. A strong case for malpractice could be made.
And the same arguments that scientists are making today against human cloning
will become fodder for expert witnesses.

   "People will forgive a health care provider for making a mistake as long as
enough basic information was provided in advance, and the alternative to a
treatment was death or a miserable life," says Scott McMillen of McMillen,
Reinhart and Voght, malpractice attorneys in Orlando. "But in cloning we're not
trying to save a life. We're trying to create a life from scratch, and to do
that with negligence would be actionable. And ultimately it is a jury that will
decide whether there was negligence."

   Defense attorneys may be hard-pressed to find a sympathetic jury. A USA
TODAY/CNN/Gallup PollJan. 3-5 shows 86% of Americans say human cloning should be
illegal.

   Boisselier says the parents of the supposedly cloned children created by
Clonaid all have "agreed to share the risk." But Murray says parents can change
their minds and sue, and the people who are so eager to clone humans should
recall the Jesse Gelsinger case.

   Headed to the witness stand

   Gelsinger died Sept. 17, 1999, at age 18, four days after entering a
gene-therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania to treat his inherited
liver disorder. At first, Gelsinger's parents were sympathetic to the
scientists. But as information emerged about risks and side effects that
Gelsinger and his parents were never told about, they sued the hospital and
everyone involved in the experiment.

   Gelsinger's parents stated in the lawsuit that risks were downplayed and that
the doctors were negligent in performing the experiment. The university settled
the suit for an undisclosed amount.

   McMillen says human cloning raises key questions of informed consent.
Boisselier and Zavos have testified before Congress that human cloning in their
hands is not as risky as animal cloning and that they are unlikely to create
damaged babies. In a trial, those comments could come back to haunt them as they
face cloning experts as expert witnesses for plaintiffs.

   "I expect that the animal cloners who have said that it is too soon to clone
humans would rally to the witness stand," McMillen says.

   What is unknown is whether parents can recover anything from a group that has
few assets, whether cloners that perform procedures outside the USA are liable
or whether the cloners will have malpractice insurance.

   What is certain is that parents of cloned children who have genetic defects
will face high medical costs. Imprinting disorders that cause mental retardation
and physical abnormalities carry medical costs of $ 1 million to $ 20 million
over the lifetime of the child, says Beaudet, who treats children with
imprinting disorders.

   "There are many longer-term issues to be considered, such as: If we in fact
develop this human cloning technology, who will have access to it, and who will
pay for the procedures, and who will pay for the medical care if these children
are born with medical defects?" asks Mark Rothstein, director of the Institute
for Bioethics, Health Policy and Law at the University of Louisville.

   Experts in the health insurance industry say the questions have not been
addressed on whether infants born with genetic disorders caused by cloning would
or should be covered. But legal experts say insurers might be justified in
denying coverage if an infant is born as the result of a procedure that
mainstream science says is likely to cause birth defects.

   At the moment, however, insurers believe they might be obligated to pay for
costs. "Obviously this is a new area," says Susan Pisano of the American
Association of Health Plans, which represents the managed-care community.
"Traditionally whether or not there has been some technology or procedure that
has led to a pregnancy, the baby has been covered as a dependent. It is
important to look at the safety aspects of this.

   "But I also think discussions about these new developments need to be broad.
This is an issue for all of society."

   Several insurance companies declined to comment on the record. But all
suggested that unless changes are made to specifically exclude cloned babies,
the babies would be covered under group health plans. Individual plans could
exclude a high-risk clone.

   Murray says he is concerned for the people who would want to have themselves
cloned. Boisselier, Zavos and Antinori have said the couples seeking their
business are motivated by the desire to have a child who has their genes or to
re-create a child who died.

   'Narcissism run wild'

   Murray, whose daughter was murdered in 2000, says it reflects "despair, grief
and narcissism run wild. These aren't wicked motives, but trying to spare
yourself the grief reflects a deep misunderstanding. Grief doesn't work that
way, and cloning will not bring back a child."

   These parents must realize that a clone has a good chance of being
brain-damaged. A narcissist might end up with a mentally retarded version of
himself or herself.

   Just a few years ago, human cloning appeared to be something that would be
left to science fiction while mainstream scientists pursued cloning techniques
to create medical therapies. Scientists seem baffled that two fertility
specialists and the Raelians have commandeered the debate with unsubstantiated
claims.

   Murray says it is tragic.

   "People will keep claiming to have created cloned babies, and eventually
someone will succeed, but at what cost? A lot of damaged children and
disappointed parents.

   "That is the very sad baggage that cloning will carry into the world."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Mike Tsukamoto, USA TODAY (ILLUSTRATION); PHOTO, B/W,
Advanced Cell Technology; Born with defects: A cloned calf that was born several
years ago is shown on a respirator. The reason, says Robert Lanza of Advanced
Cell Technologies in Massachusetts, is that cloned calves often have placentas
three to four times the normal size. That causes heart problems that back fluid
up into the lungs. The fear is that human clones would be born with similar
complications.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                             934 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 16, 2003, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: Worms may hold the key to obesity;
Genes used to adjust fat production

SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY:

   Scientists have manipulated hundreds of genes to create roundworms that are
sleek and trim - a feat that could someday lead to new obesity treatments for
people.

   Harvard biologist Gary Ruvkun used a promising new technique to identify
about 400 genes in the roundworm's genetic code related to fat production and
storage.

   His team then deactivated, or turned off, about 300 of the genes in
experiments, and now "the worms are thin and happy," Ruvkun said. When they
knocked out the activity of the remaining 100 genes, worms grew fatter.

   "If someone told me we'd be using this kind of protocol even three years ago,
I'd have said that's crazy - don't even think about it," Ruvkun said.

   Scientists frequently conduct basic experiments with roundworms - known by
their scientific name as C. elegans - because they are inexpensive and simple.

   Scientists can fit 100,000 on a lab dish, and they reproduce within four
days. In October, British and American researchers shared the Nobel Prize in
medicine for experiments using roundworms to study organ growth and cell death.

   Roundworms are about a millimeter long, with smooth, cylinder-shaped bodies
tapered at both ends. In nature, they live in the soil and feed on bacteria.

   The Harvard scientists disabled genes so that the bioengineered roundworms
would have much lower fat levels than normal.

   Humans share about half of the roundworm's 19,000 genes, including 200 of the
fat-storage genes. Whether the same gene knockout technique will work in humans
is unclear, but obesity drugs might be developed based on the basic
understanding of the genes, Ruvkun said.

   Other biologists cautioned that drug companies would need at least a decade
to safely develop a genetic therapy for obesity. One in five Americans is obese,
and obesity contributes to heart disease, diabetes and other illnesses.

   "The worm studies will allow the identification of many more genes much more
rapidly. It'll also speed up the process of figuring out how they work," said
Leon Avery of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas,
which is conducting its own fat gene experiments with roundworms. "For the drug
companies, this means a much longer list of 'targets' that they can try to find
drugs for."

   Ruvkun used a novel gene identification method developed at the Wellcome
Trust/Cancer Research UK Institute in England.

   Scientists study a gene by deactivating it and examining how the organism
behaves. But creating that version of an organism is not always easy; scientists
often need up to six weeks to create a knockout roundworm.

   In the new method, British researchers added genetic material from a
roundworm to bacteria. Then they fed the bioengineered bacteria to the worms.
The worms' immune systems recognized the genetic material carried by bacteria as
foreign and destroyed that sequence in their own genetic coding. In doing so,
the worms rapidly turned themselves into knockout versions.

   The technique takes advantage of the roundworm's natural defenses against
viruses.

   The method can be used for many genetic experiments beyond obesity.


LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                             935 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 16, 2003 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 396 words

HEADLINE: ROUNDWORM STUDY SHOWS PROMISE FOR TREATING OBESITY

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

BODY:

   Scientists have manipulated hundreds of genes to make roundworms that are
sleek and trim - a feat that could someday lead to new obesity treatments for
people.

   Harvard biologist Gary Ruvkun used a promising new technique to identify
about 400 genes in the roundworm's genetic code related to fat production and
storage.

   His team then deactivated, or turned off, about 300 of the genes in
experiments, and now "the worms are thin and happy," Ruvkun said. When they
knocked out the activity of the remaining 100 genes, worms grew fatter.

   Details of the roundworm experiments and the new genetic technique appear in
today's issue of the journal Nature.

   "If someone told me we'd be using this kind of protocol even three years ago,
I'd have said that's crazy - don't even think about it," Ruvkun said.

   Scientists frequently conduct basic experiments with roundworms - known by
their scientific name as C. elegans - because they are inexpensive and simple.
Scientists can fit 100,000 on a lab dish, and they reproduce within four days.
In October, British and American researchers shared the Nobel Prize in medicine
for experiments using roundworms to study organ growth and cell death.

   Roundworms are about a millimeter long, with smooth, cylinder-shaped bodies
tapered at both ends. In nature, they live in the soil and feed on bacteria.

   The Harvard scientists disabled genes so that the bioengineered roundworms
would have much lower fat levels than normal.

   Humans share about half of the roundworm's 19,000 genes, including 200 of the
fat-storage genes. Whether the same gene knockout technique will work in humans
is unclear, but obesity drugs might be developed based on the basic
understanding of the genes, Ruvkun said.

   Other biologists cautioned that drug companies would need at least a decade
to safely develop a genetic therapy for obesity. One in five Americans is obese,
and obesity contributes to heart disease, diabetes and other illnesses.

   "The worm studies will allow the identification of many more genes much more
rapidly. It'll also speed up the process of figuring out how they work," said
Leon Avery of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas,
which is conducting its own fat gene experiments with roundworms. "For the drug
companies, this means a much longer list of 'targets' that they can try to find
drugs for."

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                             936 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2003 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           January 16, 2003 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: Worms slim down and fat research heats up

BODY:

   Scientists have manipulated hundreds of genes to create roundworms that are
sleek and trim - a feat that could someday lead to new obesity treatments for
people.

   Harvard biologist Gary Ruvkun used a promising new technique to identify
about 400 genes in the roundworm's genetic code related to fat production and
storage.

   His team then deactivated, or turned off, about 300 of the genes in
experiments, and now "the worms are thin and happy," Ruvkun said. When they
knocked out the activity of the remaining 100 genes, the worms grew fatter.

   Details of the roundworm experiments and the new genetic technique appear in
today's issue of the journal Nature.

   "If someone told me we'd be using this kind of protocol even three years ago,
I'd have said that's crazy - don't even think about it," Ruvkun said.

    Scientists frequently conduct basic experiments with roundworms - known by
their scientific name as C. elegans - because they are inexpensive and simple.
Scientists can fit 100,000 on a lab dish, and they reproduce within four days.
In October, British and American researchers shared the Nobel Prize in medicine
for experiments using roundworms to study organ growth and cell death.

   Roundworms are about a millimeter long, with smooth, cylinder-shaped bodies
tapered at both ends. In nature, they live in the soil and feed on bacteria. The
Harvard scientists disabled genes so that the bioengineered roundworms would
have much lower fat levels.

   Humans share about half of the roundworm's 19,000 genes, including 200 of the
fat-storage genes. Whether the same gene knockout technique will work in humans
is unclear, but obesity drugs might be developed based on the basic
understanding of the genes, Ruvkun said. Other biologists cautioned that drug
companies would need at least a decade to safely develop a genetic therapy for
obesity.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             937 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    January 15, 2003 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 301 words

HEADLINE: FDA panel bounces Replagal; Transkaryotic Therapies lacked proof of
benefit

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   A regulatory advisory panel said yesterday that Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
has failed to show its experimental Replagal effectively treats patients with
Fabry disease.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration panel voted 15-0 to tell the agency
that the company hasn't provided enough evidence that Replagal works.

   The committee also voted 8-7 against recommending conditional approval, which
would require the company to complete more research.

   Although the company couldn't convince the panel that Replagal showed
clinical benefit, Dr. Richard F. Seldon, TKT's chief executive, said he is still
hopeful for FDA approval.

   "I'm confident in Replagal," he said. "I believe Replagal has shown clinical
benefit and patients in Europe are benefiting from Replagal."

   He said the company will, at the panel's recommendation, reread its research
data to see whether it can show an indication of long-term clinical benefit.

   The company is competing with neighboring Genzyme Corp., of Cambridge, to
develop a treatment for the rare metabolic disease.

   The advisory committee voted Monday to tell the FDA that Genzyme's research
showed a reduction in abnormal fatty deposits in the kidneys.

   The companies each hope to be the first to be approved. That company would be
eligible for orphan drug status - a seven-year U.S. market exclusivity granted
to encourage companies to develop drugs for rare diseases.

   Competition may have spurred the two companies to move too quickly, a
committee member told Bloomberg News yesterday.

   "One company, maybe by luck, maybe by smarts, has ended up with a better
application than the other," said Jerry Schneider, a University of
California-San Diego doctor and panel member.

   Genzyme shares rose 93 cents yesterday to $ 32.61. Trading of TKT was halted
Monday.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             938 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 15, 2003, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1377 words

HEADLINE: FDA REVIEW DEALS BLOW TO TKT DRUG PANEL SAYS REPLAGAL CLINICAL DATA DO
NOT JUSTIFY APPROVAL

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. - After two days of deliberations, a Food and Drug
Administration panel yesterday may have dashed Transkaryotic Therapies' chances
of ever marketing its drug, Replagal, used to treat a rare inherited disorder
known as Fabry disease, in the United States.

   Although panel members were split on the issue, most agreed that the data
presented by TKT on Replagal did not justify approval at this time. Under normal
circumstances, the decision might delay the drug's approval. But this case is
anything but normal and has served to bring into bold relief the increasing
difficulty the FDA is experiencing in dealing with rare diseases.

      Cambridge-based TKT and its crosstown rival, Genzyme, submitted
applications within weeks of each other to market virtually identical drugs to
treat the same rare disorder, a situation the FDA has never before faced.  FDA
rules require that only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease such as
Fabry. And on Monday, the panel agreed that approving Genzyme's drug, Fabrazyme,
based on the main measure of its clinical trial would be appropriate.

   "Genzyme, for all intents and purposes, got an approval," said Dr. Yaron
Werber, an analyst with SG Cowen in New York. "TKT has not. That definitely puts
them behind."

   Investors, physicians, and patients had hoped that the panel hearings would
mark the culmination of a two-and-a-half year review process plagued by delays
and uncertainty. Instead, the imperatives of the "orphan drug" act - which gives
a company seven years to sell its drug unhindered by competition in exchange for
being the first to develop a drug to treat a rare disease - led both companies
to rush their studies, observers said, as they raced to be first to market.

   Panel members and regulators said neither company proved its drug actually
improved patients' health or survival. Neither company's trials comparing the
effect of their drug to a placebo for only six months were ideal, panel members
said, but TKT's in particular were riddled with methodological problems.

   "It's this crazy situation - only one company can get approved and the other
stands to lose the millions it's invested just to wait for seven years," said
Dr. Jerry A. Schneider, a panel member and dean of academic affairs at
University of California San Diego's School of Medicine. "Consequently, they've
both gone way too fast. It's a shame we're doing it this way, but I don't see
that we have much of a choice. Thousands of patients need this drug. Personally,
I think both should be approved. But if we have to pick one, Genzyme - by luck
or smarts - ended up with a better application."

   Patients with Fabry disease lack an enzyme known as alpha-galactosidase that
breaks down certain fatty lipids in the body. The buildup of those lipids causes
intense pain in hands and feet and an inability to sweat, and eventually causes
kidney failure, heart attack or stroke, usually killing its victims around age
40. Both Replagal and Fabrazyme are recombinant versions of that missing enzyme.
In theory, panel members said, they believed the two drugs likely have a similar
effect.

   But the FDA found much of the data from TKT's trials were statistically
insignificant or uninterpretable. TKT measured pain and kidney function in hopes
of showing that its drug improved patients' health and survival. Meanwhile,
Genzyme focused on showing that its drug cleared the buildup of fatty lipids
from kidney cells and other tissues. In the end, TKT was forced to rely on
similar measures, but since its trials weren't designed to focus on those
measures, its data were not as robust as Genzyme's.

   "It's inexperience and Genzyme, in this case, is the more experienced
company," said Abbey Meyers, president of the National Organization for Rare
Disorders. "They studied fewer endpoints so they couldn't get caught missing
them. TKT studied all these things. Are the drugs equally effective? Yes. Could
a bad study keep a good drug from the market? Yes."

   Meyers said rare diseases, especially a category of genetic diseases such as
Fabry known as lysosomal storage disorders, are difficult to study because there
are so few patients.  Showing that a drug can slow or stop the progression of
such diseases can take many years and many patients.  She said companies,
especially small biotech firms, need to hire better regulatory consultants to
help design their trials. And regulators need to be open to different kinds of
studies.

   "The FDA didn't understand this disease," Meyers said. "They didn't know.
They should have talked about many of these issues three years ago. Their
science has to come up to modern times."

   If Genzyme wins approval, as some analysts expect will happen sometime later
this year, the approval will be based on what is known as a surrogate marker,
the clearance of fatty lipid from certain kidney cells. Genzyme will have to
prove in coming years that the reduction in the surrogate marker translates into
a true benefit. Once the drug is on the market, however, panel members expressed
grave concerns that it might become impossible. Typically, studies require drugs
to be compared to a placebo.

   Patients are unlikely to participate in such studies, however, once a drug is
on the market, leaving panel members struggling about how to balance the need to
get promising treatments to market without jeopardizing their ability to
determine whether the drugs are truly effective.

   "If I had Fabry disease or someone close to me had the disease, I'd want a
treatment," said Dr. Nelson Watts, a panel member and professor of clinical
endocrinology at the University of Cincinnati, during Monday's proceedings. "But
there's also the problem of having a drug out there that doesn't have clinical
benefit. It's incredibly important to show this drug helps people."

   Panel members also expressed concerns about setting the bar too high,
however. If it takes 20 years to prove a drug is effective and there is no way
to bring the drug to market under an accelerated approval process using
surrogate markers, Dr. Lawrence Hunsicker said, regulators risk discouraging
companies from developing drugs. Over the two days of hearings, more than a
dozen patients or relatives of patients pleaded with panel members to recommend
approval of both drugs, saying they were willing to take the risks in exchange
for the promise of better, longer lives.

   TKT yesterday said it will continue to pursue regulatory approval in the
United States, noting that it hopes to re-analyze its tissue samples and provide
regulators and panel members with the data they felt were missing. The process
could be done without additional clinical trials in a relatively short period of
time, said Dr. Richard Selden, TKT's chief executive. The question, Meyers and
Wall Street analysts said, is time - the firm may be forced to either give up on
US approval or prove that Replagal is safer or more effective than Fabrazyme in
order to break its orphan drug status and come to market.

   Although most analysts said they believed the odds were stacked in Genzyme's
favor, others said the FDA had left the door open for TKT, sparking yet another
round of speculation in the controversial review process. Trading in both stocks
was halted Monday, as the hearings began; yesterday Genzyme rose $1.03 to
$32.61, while trading in TKT's stock remained suspended at its Friday closing
price of $8.74.

   In the winner-takes-all scenario, the loss would be far more devastating to
TKT than to Genzyme. Replagal would be TKT's first marketed product in the
United States, whereas Fabrazyme would represent a relatively modest percentage
of Genzyme's US sales. Analysts estimate that the US market could be anywhere
from $300 million to $500 million. Both drugs are approved in more than two
dozen countries worldwide, including those in the European Union.

   "The take-home message is that trials are going to have to be longer in
duration than six months," Werber said. "Companies are going to have to do
better studies to determine the right dose. The bar has clearly been raised
since the early days of enzyme replacement therapies, but it's not
overwhelming."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Mark Goldberg of Genzyme Corp. speaking to an FDA panel
Monday. The firm's drug Fabrazyme was deemed appropriate for approval. / AP
PHOTO 2. FDA panel members Lawrence Hunsicker (left) and Allan Simpson at
yesterday's review of TKT's drug Replagal. The panel said TKT's data contained
methodological problems. / AP PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             939 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 15, 2003, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BIOTECHNOLOGY; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: IN THE PIPELINE;
ARIAD GETS PATENT FOR THERAPY METHOD

BYLINE: BY JEFFREY KRASNER and GLOBE WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   Ariad Pharmaceuticals of Cambridge said yesterday it received a US patent for
its method of delivering and regulating a type of gene therapy intended to treat
patients with anemia.

   Ariad's drug candidate is in preclinical trials. The treatment is a gene
therapy, injected into a patient's muscle tissue, that enables the muscle to
produce erythropoietin, or EPO, a protein that stimulates bone marrow to produce
more red blood cells. But the gene is dormant until the patient takes a drug in
pill form, which stimulates the muscle to produce the protein.

       While patents covering individual parts of the process have already been
granted, the new patent is the first to encompass the entire therapeutic
process, said Dr. Harvey J. Berger, chairman and chief executive of Ariad. "This
really hones in directly on all the components of our product candidate," he
said.

   The patent isn't specific to the protein being generated by Ariad's therapy,
Berger said. That might make the patent particularly valuable, as other firms
seeking to use a similar process for a different therapeutic challenge might
have to secure a license to use the technique.  EISAI TO BUILD RESEARCH SITE IN
ANDOVER

   Eisai Co., the fourth-largest drug maker in Japan, confirmed reports in a
Japanese newspaper that it will spend $65 million to build a research center in
Andover. Construction will begin next year and is to enable the firm to double
its basic research staff in the United States to 170 people. It also plans to
increase its US sales force to 400 from 250 by May. The company generates about
a third of its sales in the United States. Revenues for the year ended March 31,
2002, were $3.65 billion.  VARIAGENICS, CELERA IN LICENSING DEAL

   Variagenics Inc. of Cambridge said it licensed a patent to Celera Diagnostics
to commercialize genetic tests that can potentially identify the risk of stroke
and heart attack. The patent, originally issued to McGill University of
Montreal, covers the identification of mutations in the MTHFR gene, which has
been associated with many diseases, including osteoporosis, nervous system
disorders, and cancer. Researchers are seeking to develop tests which could find
the mutations in a DNA sample, signaling a predisposition for particular
diseases in patients. "The significant value of this important biological
marker, across a broad range of therapeutic areas, continues to be demonstrated
through high-profile licensing agreements of this sort," said Jay Mohr,
president of Variagenics, in a statement. Celera Diagnostics is a unit of
Applera Corp. of Norwalk, Conn.  PHASE FORWARD WINS BIOGEN CONTRACT

   Phase Forward Inc. of Waltham said it signed a three-year contract with
Biogen Inc. to provide the Cambridge biotech giant with software to help collect
and manage data from clinical trials. The contract is worth more than $2
million, but specific terms weren't disclosed. Phase Forward's system uses the
Internet to compile and process the enormous amount of data generated by
large-scale human clinical trials that are conducted in many remote locations.
HISTOGENICS OK'D TO START PRODUCT TRIALS

   Histogenics Corp. of Malden said the US Food and Drug Administration approved
its plan to start human clinical trials of NeoCart, a proposed cartilage
replacement. The company takes a cartilage sample from a patient's body and uses
that to grow so-called autologous cartilage. The engineered tissue can be
surgically inserted to replace damaged cartilage in a patient's knee. Phase 1
trials are intended to show a new therapy does not hurt patients; subsequent
trials are needed to determine that the therapy is effective.  SIDEBAR: BIOTECH
20 JAN. 7-14 PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                             940 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 15, 2003, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 360 words

HEADLINE: FDA suspends gene therapy test after 2nd child develops cancer

SOURCE: Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHNGTON

BODY:

   WASHNGTON - For the second time in four months, a child treated with an
experimental gene therapy in France has developed a form of leukemia apparently
caused by the treatment.

   The new cancer case, in a boy who was given new genes to cure a severe immune
system deficiency, undercuts scientists' initial hopes that the first case was a
fluke, and calls into question the value of the radical treatment, which had
been touted as the first successful use of DNA to cure a disease.

   In response, the Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday suspended as "a
precautionary measure" more than two dozen U.S. gene therapy studies that
involve techniques similar to those in the French experiment.

   Three U.S. gene therapy studies that even more closely resemble the French
experiment had already been on hold since the first leukemia case came to light
in September.

   The new cancer case is a serious blow for an experimental field that has
struggled for a dozen years to produce its first cure and which suffered a
terrible setback in 1999 with the death of an American patient, Arizona teenager
Jesse Gelsinger.

   The approach involves the delivery of new genes to take over for missing or
broken ones.

   Gelsinger died in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania
that was later heavily criticized by the FDA for violating basic safety rules.

   But until the recent leukemia cases, gene therapy had at least seemed safe
when used in accordance with approved protocols. Now, scientists said, that
sense of safety has been undermined.

   "When the first leukemia showed up, we as a community were certainly upset
and concerned about the patient," said Joe Glorioso, president of the American
Society of Gene Therapy and chairman of molecular genetics and biochemistry at
the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

   "But when the second event happened, that really is a red flag."

   Nonetheless, Glorioso and others noted, no cases of leukemia have been
documented in any of the thousands of other people who have received some form
of gene therapy, which suggests that the risk may be specific to this particular
disease or treatment plan.


LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                             941 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS MAIN NEWS; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 938 words

HEADLINE: Citing Illnesses, FDA Halts Gene Therapy Trials;
The move is made after a second French child undergoingtreatment develops
leukemia.

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday suspended 27 gene therapy trials
-- nearly half of those now underway in the United States -- after the agency
learned that a second French child had developed leukemia after receiving the
promising, yet highly experimental, treatment.

   The agency had halted three trials in October following the revelation that
one child had developed the potentially fatal form of cancer. The suspension was
broadened Tuesday "because of unanswered questions about what is going on," said
Dr. Philip Noguchi, in charge of gene therapy issues at the FDA.

   Noguchi cautioned, however, that participants in the programs should not be
unduly alarmed, because an intensive study has revealed no other cases of
leukemia outside the French program.

   Three trials at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles have been halted as a result
of the "clinical hold" initiated by the FDA, and that is an "appropriate
action," said Dr. Donald Kohn, who leads one of them. "We need to find out why
this has happened twice," he added.

   An emergency meeting has been called for Friday by the Office of
Biotechnology Activities at the National Institutes of Health to discuss the
problem. The FDA has also scheduled a meeting Feb. 28, at which some of the
trials could be reinstated.

   The first leukemia case increased concerns about potential risk from gene
therapy, but proponents argued that it represented only an isolated problem. The
occurrence of a second case in such a small group of children, however, has
raised concerns substantially higher.

   Critics argue that researchers have charged into human trials without first
fully exploring potential risks in tests on animals, and even some proponents
now concede that further animal studies may be necessary.

   Those concerns were first brought forward after the 1999 death of 18-year-old
Jesse Gelsinger, who suffered a violent reaction to a gene therapy treatment at
the University of Pennsylvania. Critics charged that Gelsinger's death was
needless because he suffered from a mild genetic disorder and had it under
control with drugs and diet. Several gene-therapy trials were halted after his
death, but they were allowed to resume the following year.

   "I have no doubt that the death of Jesse Gelsinger is going to lead to
nothing but a cautious, go-slow approach," said ethicist Arthur Caplan of the
University of Pennsylvania. "As a society, we're more nervous about genetics"
than about any other form of medical therapy, he said. "Maybe it's time to go
back to animals and see what we can establish there" about the causes of the
leukemia, he added.

   Kohn said that despite the new setback, he remained hopeful for the field.
"We have to remember that seven of the 10 kids [in the French trial] were cured
of an otherwise fatal disease" without developing problems, he said. "There is
tremendous promise in gene therapy, but this specific approach may be a problem,
and we may need to look for other ways to use gene therapy in this disease."

   Gene therapy seeks to replace defective genes with healthy ones to cure a
variety of diseases, from genetic disorders to HIV infections and cancers.
Researchers believe it is the only potential treatment for many inherited
diseases.

   The two children who developed leukemia were part of a group of infants with
a disease, known as X-linked severe combined immune deficiency, treated with
gene therapy by Dr. Alain Fischer and his colleagues at the Necker Hospital for
Children in Paris. The illness is commonly known as "bubble boy" disease.

   The children have a defective gene, called GammaC, that prevents them from
developing immunity against infectious diseases. Untreated, such children die
within the first year of their lives due to severe and recurrent infections.
Some victims are successfully treated with a bone-marrow transplant from a
sibling who is a perfect match, but such matches are not often available.

   Fischer used a so-called retrovirus to insert a healthy copy of the gene into
the children's hematopoietic (blood-forming) cells. His trial was widely hailed
because nine of the children were apparently cured of the disease and were able
to go home.

   But in October, one of the children, now 3 years old, was found to have
leukemia. Childhood leukemia has a 90% cure rate with chemotherapy, and the
child is reportedly doing well under treatment. The second child is also being
treated, and doctors say he is doing well.

   But U.S. officials concluded that the disease was a direct result of the gene
therapy, and they halted three U.S. trials that had very similar protocols. That
included the trials at Childrens Hospital. Kohn said researchers there
voluntarily suspended a third trial -- involving treatment for pediatric AIDS --
that had not yet begun.

   Now that a second leukemia case has been discovered, the FDA halted all
trials in which retroviruses are being used to insert genes into hematopoietic
cells.

   The American Society of Gene Therapy said Tuesday that it will organize an ad
hoc committee to conduct a comprehensive review of such trials in an effort to
understand whether the leukemia problem is unique to the French trial or a more
common problem.

   Some researchers have argued that gene therapy has a potential for harm
because the retroviruses insert the gene into the host cells at random
locations. Some insertions could trigger carcinogenic genes or produce other
adverse effects.

   Others suspect that GammaC itself is the problem. The gene is the blueprint
for a growth-factor receptor that can stimulate a proliferation of cells, and
inserting it into cells may trigger cancerous growths.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             942 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    January 15, 2003 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 05A

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: Sick child spurs gene therapy halt;
FDA suspends studies after second toddler develops side effect

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- A second European toddler apparently suffered a leukemia-like
side effect from gene therapy that cured him of the rare but deadly "bubble boy
disease," prompting the government on Tuesday to suspend 27 more gene therapy
studies while they investigate the risk.

   Bubble boy disease, an immune disorder formally called severe combined
immunodeficiency, or SCID, is the only disease ever to be cured with gene
therapy.

   But three months ago, a boy whose life was saved by a SCID gene therapy
experiment in France when he was a baby came down with a leukemia-like syndrome
at age 3.

   Scientists have long warned that cancer is a possible risk from any gene
therapy, such as that for SCID, that uses retroviruses, a type of virus that
permanently invades cells, to deliver new genes into a patient's body. Still, no
one else given gene therapy for SCID or other diseases had ever had such a side
effect.

   That first ill toddler prompted U.S. and French scientists in October to stop
gene therapy experiments for SCID, including three in this country.

   Now a second toddler in the French SCID experiment has come down with that
same leukemia-like side effect, Food and Drug Administration scientists
announced Tuesday.

   Quietly notified by French researchers about a month ago, the FDA decided
that the second serious side effect warranted a bigger precaution: temporarily
stopping about 27 more U.S. experiments that use retroviruses to insert new
genes into blood stem cells in hopes of fighting diseases other than SCID.

   The FDA didn't release a list of the experiments but said they include some
targeting such diseases as cancer and include several hundred participants.

   The FDA said that if researchers argue any of the retrovirus experiments
offer a sole option to people with life-threatening illnesses, the agency will
work to let them restart on a case-by-case basis, with appropriate warnings to
participants. Gene therapy for SCID, however, appears to be on hold
indefinitely.

   "We do think it's a prudent course," because "there are things going on here
that we really don't understand," FDA gene therapy chief Phil Noguchi said.

   The FDA will convene its scientific advisers next month to pore over the
research and debate future steps.

   SCID babies are born without the ability to produce disease-fighting immune
cells. The best known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived
in a germ-proof enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   Both boys in the recent study responded well to chemotherapy and are stable,
but their long-term outlook is uncertain, Noguchi said.

   ------------

   On the Net: FDA announcement: www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/ANSWERS
/2003/ANS01190.html

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             943 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 171 words

HEADLINE: F.D.A. Panel Rejects Transkaryotic Drug

BYLINE:  Reuters

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Jan. 14

BODY:

   A federal advisory panel ruled today that Transkaryotic Therapies had failed
to provide data showing that its drug Replagal was likely to benefit patients
suffering a rare genetic disorder.

        The biotechnology company is seeking Food and Drug Administration
approval to market Replagal for treating Fabry disease, which causes possible
life-threatening accumulation of fats in the body.

    Another company, Genzyme General, is also seeking approval to market a
treatment for Fabry disease. On Monday, the advisory panel supported Genzyme's
main measurement of Fabrazyme's effectiveness, giving that drug a push toward
approval.

   Because Fabry is considered a rare disease, the first treatment approved
could win seven years of exclusive time on the market under a federal program
aimed at encouraging research on rare illnesses.

   There is no federally approved treatment for Fabry disease.

   The advisory panel declined to endorse the Transkaryotic product, by an 8 to
7 vote, and the F.D.A. usually follows the advice of its panels.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             944 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 31 words

HEADLINE: QUOTATION OF THE DAY

BODY:

        "The exciting thing was that it was working. The horrible thing is that
a shadow has been cast over that success."

DR. JOSEPH C. GLORIOSO, on the suspension of 27 gene therapy trials.  A1

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             945 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1101 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:

        INTERNATIONAL   A3-7

Bush Signals Major Shift In Approach to North Korea
President Bush signaled a major shift in the administration's approach to North
Korea, saying for the first time that if North Korea abandoned its nuclear
weapons program he would consider offering what he called a "bold initiative"
that could bring aid, energy and eventually even diplomatic and security
agreements to the politically and economically isolated country.   A1

China stepped up an effort to defuse the North Korea nuclear crisis, offering to
act as host to direct talks between the United States and North Korea should
both sides agree.   A12


   Tough Talk From Bush on Iraq
President Bush said that "time is running out on Saddam Hussein" to avert an
American-led attack by disarming voluntarily. But the president issued no
specific deadline, while Washington's allies reinforced demands that any
military action must be approved by the United Nations.   A9

3 War Enemies Still at Large
Three leftover enemies from the war in Afghanistan remain at large and, American
and Afghan officials say, still pose a potentially lethal threat to peace in the
region even as the United States turns its attention toward Iraq. The list
includes Osama bin Laden and Mullah Muhammad Omar, the Taliban leader.   A11

Police Officer Killed in Britain
A police officer was stabbed to death and four others were wounded during the
arrests of three terror suspects in Manchester that police said were linked to
the discovery last week of the deadly poison ricin in London.   A10

British Crackdown on Porn
More than 1,300 people have been arrested in Britain in the past 10 months as
part of a nationwide hunt for users of Internet child pornography. A total of
some 7,200 Britons are under suspicion.   A7

Labor Won't Join Likud in Israel
The left-of-center Labor Party ruled out joining any government led by Ariel
Sharon, increasing the chances that after the elections on Jan. 28, Israel will
be governed by a shaky rightist coalition.   A6

NATIONAL   A13-18

Air Force Pilots in Court Over Attack on Canadians
An Air Force judge began weighing whether two pilots should be court-martialed
on charges of involuntary manslaughter, aggravated assault and dereliction of
duty for an errant bombing run in Afghanistan that killed four Canadians and
wounded eight others.   A1

Hearing on Sniper Defendant
Virginia prosecutors told a state judge that fingerprints, notes and phone calls
linked Lee Malvo, 17, to the Washington-area sniper shootings. They spoke on the
first day of a hearing to decide whether he will be tried as an adult and
possibly face a death sentence.   A13

Ruling on Double Jeopardy
The Supreme Court ruled that the Constitution's bar against double jeopardy does
not protect a murder defendant from being sentenced to death in a new trial
after the first jury had deadlocked over the sentence.   A14

G.E. Workers Begin Strike
Seventeen thousand workers in 23 states who are angry about General Electric's
decision to force employees to pay more for their health coverage began a
two-day strike.   A14

$8 Million Gift to A.C.L.U.
Peter B. Lewis, the feisty philanthropist who has forced several beneficiaries
to practice greater financial discipline, is giving $8 million to the American
Civil Liberties Union.   A16

EDUCATION   B7

Admissions Policy Is Opposed
President Bush has asked administration lawyers to present him with a brief
arguing that the University of Michigan's programs for using race in admission
decisions go too far, officials said.   A1

Plan for Failing Schools
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg will propose that every low-performing school in the
city use a single uniform curriculum, officials said. Though Mr. Bloomberg and
chancellor, Joel I. Klein, have announced a number of changes to the Department
of Education, few have directly affected teaching and learning.   B3

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

McGreevey Asks His State To Curb Suburban Sprawl
Gov. James E. McGreevey issued a fervent call to legislators in New Jersey, the
most congested state in the nation, to curb the sprawl that he said was
devouring 50 acres a day. In his first State of the State address, he spoke with
a zeal that surprised planners and environmentalists.   B1

F.A.O. Files for Bankruptcy
F. A. O. Inc., which owns F. A. O. Schwarz, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection. It is considering closing some of its chain stores.   B3

Gotti Prosecutors Open Case
Federal prosecutors opened their case yesterday against Peter Gotti, who the
government says is the boss of the Gambino crime family. They evoked the history
of Mafia domination of the New York waterfront and repeated their claim of a
movie-star extortion.   B3

Michael D'Urso, the government's latest Mafia informant, described for the jury
what it feels like to be the victim of an attempted rub-out.   B3

Neediest Cases   B4

ARTS   E1-12

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Gene Therapy Trials Suspended
The Food and Drug Administration suspended 27 gene therapy trials involving
several hundred patients after learning that a second child treated in France
had developed a condition resembling leukemia.   A1

OBITUARIES   C12

SPORTS   D1-7

N.F.L. Vetoes Las Vegas Ad
The National Football League, enforcing a clause in its contracts with networks
that prohibits gambling-related advertising, rejected a commercial that the Las
Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority submitted to air during the Super Bowl.
D3

BUSINESS DAY   C1-11

Seven From Datek to Pay Fines
Seven former officials of Datek Online, once heralded as a pioneer in online
stock trading, agreed to pay $70 million in fines for what regulators called
illegal trading and fraudulent bookkeeping practices.   A1

Husband and Wife Suspected
A stock analyst at Lehman Brothers and her husband, a stock trader at SAC
Capital Advisors, are under investigation for insider trading.   C1

Positive Report From Intel
Intel, the computer chip maker, reported better-than-expected fourth quarter
sales and profits and gave investors at least slight reason to hope that the
worst of the downturn in the technology industry is over.   C1

Asbestos Burden Grows
Travelers Property Casualty will set aside $2.45 billion more to pay potential
claims for asbestos-related illnesses and deaths. The action underscores the
growing risks of asbestos litigation to the insurance industry.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

DINING   F1-14

EDITORIAL   A20-21

Editorials: New players on global warming; Tony Blair's keen instincts; a
crucial decision on race; the not-so-garden state.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E9
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             946 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 529 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:

   $70 Million in Fines Paid In Illegal Stock Trading
Seven former traders and executives of Datek Online, once heralded as a pioneer
in online stock trading, agreed to pay $70 million in fines for what regulators
called illegal trading and fraudulent bookkeeping during the market boom of the
1990's. The Securities and Exchange Commission called it one of the largest
securities fraud settlements in history.

        Regulators said the group of former traders and executives made tens of
millions of dollars by engaging in stock fraud that went on for nearly a decade
and involved taking advantage of a Nasdaq trading system that was intended to
help smaller investors.  Page A1.


   Charges Raise China Questions
In three separate cases since October, natives of China have been accused of
obtaining technology from Silicon Valley companies with the intent of exporting
it to China.  C11.

Little Detail From WorldCom Chief
In his first extensive public comments since taking over at WorldCom, Michael D.
Capellas, left, said his executive team would help cut costs and maintain high
ethical standards at the company. But he offered few specifics about how many
jobs he intends to cut or other steps the company will take as it tries to
emerge from bankruptcy protection.  C3.

Kmart Plans to Lay Off 35,000
Financially troubled Kmart will lay off as many as 35,000 workers and close 326
stores over the next three months.  C4.

F.C.C. Chief Reassures Lawmakers
The F.C.C. chairman reassured Congress that there would not be radical changes
in rules governing phone service, high-speed Internet access and media
ownership.  C3.

Regulators Halt Gene Therapy Trials
Federal regulators suspended 27 gene therapy trials involving several hundred
patients after learning that a second child treated had developed a condition
resembling leukemia.  A1.

Industry Won't Seek Help on Piracy
The major recording companies said they would not seek government intervention
to prevent digital piracy.  C3.

Microsoft Offers Access to Code
To try to slow the acceptance of the Linux operating system by governments
abroad, Microsoft is announcing today that it will allow most governments to
study the programming code of its Windows systems. Under the program,
governments will also be allowed to plug their security features instead of
Microsoft's technology into Windows.  C10.

Airbus Is on Course to Lead Market
Airbus said that it was raising its prices by an average of 2.5 percent and
forecast that it would deliver about 300 planes this year, setting it on course
to be the market leader over Boeing.  World Business, Section W.

Car Deals Spur Rise in Retail Sales
Retail sales rose 1.2 percent in December as strong car sales offset lackluster
holiday business, the Commerce Department said.  C4.

Strike at G.E. Over Health Costs
Angry about General Electric's decision to force employees to pay more for their
health coverage, 17,000 workers at 48 locations in 23 states began a two-day
strike.  A13.

Going Green a Matter of Economics
The tools for building environmentally sensitive, energy efficient offices have
existed for decades. But such buildings are just now drawing interest.
Commercial Real Estate.  C5.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo Chart: "YESTERDAY"Dow industrials -- 8,842.62 up 56.64Nasdaq
composite -- 1,460.99 up 14.9510-yr. Treasury yield -- 4.08% down 0.04The euro
-- $1.0564 up 0.0017The dollar -- 117.99 yen down 0.89 Graph: "TODAY" shows
producer prices.December figures due at 8:30 a.m. Eastern time.Expected: +0.3%
Graph tracks share prices of Microsoft for the week.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             947 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1016 words

HEADLINE: F.D.A. Halts 27 Gene Therapy Trials After Illness

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration yesterday suspended 27 gene therapy trials
involving several hundred patients after learning that a second child treated in
France had developed a condition resembling leukemia.

        The agency said it was not aware that any of the patients treated in the
27 American trials had suffered illnesses similar to that of the infants in
France but was nevertheless taking precautions.

    "We see no evidence that the subjects in these 27 trials are actually at
risk," said Dr. Philip Noguchi, acting director of the agency's office of
cellular, tissue and gene therapies.

   The temporary halt, the largest such action involving gene therapy trials, is
yet another setback to the fledgling field, which usually involves introducing
healthy genes into patients to treat diseases caused by defective ones. The
field is still shaken from the death of a teenager undergoing gene therapy in
1999 at the University of Pennsylvania and from the first case of leukemia in an
infant in France last year.

   The treatments in France had been considered the only unequivocal success for
gene therapy after a decade of failures. Nine of 11 young boys treated for a
fatal immune deficiency widely known as bubble-boy disease were able to leave
the hospital and take up nearly normal lives. But now two of them have developed
the condition resembling leukemia.

   "The exciting thing was that it was working," said Dr. Joseph C. Glorioso,
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy and chairman of molecular
genetics and biochemistry at the University of Pittsburgh. "The horrible thing
is that a shadow has been cast over that success."

   In September, after the first of the children in France was found to have the
leukemia-like disease, the F.D.A. halted three clinical trials that involved a
similar treatment for immune deficiencies. Yesterday it decided to halt all
trials involving the technique used in the French trial, regardless of the
disease being treated. That technique uses a type of virus known as a retrovirus
to ferry genes into blood-producing stem cells.

   The 30 trials halted represent about 15 percent of the 200 gene therapy
trials under way and half of the 60 trials involving retroviruses. The other
trials using retroviruses insert the genes into cells other than blood stem
cells. The trials involving stem cells are considered more risky because those
cells proliferate, and leukemia is a disease in which blood cells proliferate
out of control.

   Some of the trials being halted are intended to treat AIDS and cancer, Dr.
Noguchi said. The agency will consider lifting the suspensions in individual
cases for these life-threatening diseases if doctors fully inform the patients
of the risk and then monitor them carefully, he said.

   Retroviruses are only one of several types of viruses used to deliver genes
into cells. But they are considered both particularly promising and risky
because the genes they carry become a permanent part of the target cell's DNA.
That means that when the cells divide, the inserted genes remain in the daughter
cells. Without that permanent insertion, scientists said, gene therapy might
have to be performed over and over.

   But scientists also knew there was a theoretical risk that a retrovirus would
lodge near a cancer-causing gene and turn it on. Scientists say that is what
happened in the first leukemia case in France. The cause in the second case has
not been announced but some scientists say they have heard the cause is similar.

   But until the second case, scientists believed that the risk was low. There
have been perhaps 40 or 50 trials involving more than 100 patients in the United
States that involved using retroviruses to insert genes into stem cells, said
Dr. Donald B. Kohn, professor of pediatrics at the University of Southern
California and a gene therapy expert at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles. Most
had limited or no success, but none had caused a cancer-like complication.

   "The big question is why are we seeing this all of a sudden in two patients
in this trial but not all these previous patients?" said Dr. Kohn, who was
conducting two trials affected by the F.D.A.'s suspension. He said one
explanation could be that gene transfer has become more efficient. Another is
that there could be something specific to the disease treated or to the gene
used in the French experiment.

   The American Society of Gene Therapy, which endorsed the F.D.A.'s
precautionary measure, said yesterday that it would set up a committee to study
the situation. The gene therapy advisory committee of the National Institutes of
Health will meet on Friday to consider the situation, and an F.D.A. advisory
committee will meet on Feb. 28.

   Scientists said the new problems would not derail gene therapy because the
risks had to be balanced against the benefits. In this case, they said, nine
infants were virtually cured of a terrible disease. Indeed, after the first
three trials were suspended in September, an F.D.A. advisory panel recommended
resuming those trials on the ground that the benefits outweighed the risks. The
trials had not yet restarted.

   Dr. Noguchi said the F.D.A. learned of the second French leukemia case a
month ago but did not act until yesterday because it wanted to study the
situation.

   "We know the impact of F.D.A. taking an action like this," he said. "We
didn't want to do this without doing a very thorough evaluation of all the risks
and benefits."

   Dr. Daniel R. Salomon, associate professor at the Scripps Research Institute
and chairman of the F.D.A. advisory panel for gene therapy, said the F.D.A. was
right to be cautious. "This definitely is not the way we would have written it
out had we had our fantasyland going," he said. "But this is dealing with
reality."

   Dr. Salomon and Dr. Glorioso said there were techniques that could make gene
therapy safer.

   Dr. Glorioso described the setback as "bumps in the road that happen when you
develop new therapies." He added: "I don't think it will kill the field. I think
it will cause us to work harder and engineer our way out of the problem."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             948 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                   January 15, 2003 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 222 words

HEADLINE: FDA suspends gene trials after a second leukemia case

BYLINE: By Thomas H. Maugh 2d; Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration suspended more gene-therapy trials yesterday
after the agency learned that a second French child had developed leukemia after
receiving the promising, yet highly experimental, treatment.

   The agency had halted three trials in October after the revelation that a
child had developed the potentially fatal cancer. The suspension was broadened
to include an additional 27 trials yesterday "because of unanswered questions
about what is going on," said Dr. Philip Noguchi, who is in charge of
gene-therapy issues at the FDA.

   Noguchi cautioned that participants in the programs should not be unduly
alarmed, because an intensive study has revealed no other cases of leukemia
outside the French program.

   An emergency meeting has been called for Friday by the Office of
Biotechnology Activities at the National Institutes of Health to discuss the
problem. The FDA has also scheduled a meeting Feb. 28 at which some of the
trials could be reinstated.

   Gene therapy seeks to replace defective genes with healthy genes to reverse
genetic disorders. The suspension of trials represents another setback for a
field in which researchers have been criticized for promising more than they
have been able to deliver and for rushing into clinical trials before most
potential problems have been worked out.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             949 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   January 15, 2003 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-1

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: FDA PUTS BRAKES ON GENE THERAPY TRIALS

BYLINE: ANDREW POLLACK, THE NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration yesterday suspended 27 gene therapy trials
involving several hundred patients after learning that a second child treated in
France had developed a condition resembling leukemia.

    The agency said it was not aware that any of the patients treated in the 27
U.S. trials had suffered illnesses similar to that of the infants in France but
was nevertheless taking precautions.

    "We see no evidence that the subjects in these 27 trials are actually at
risk," said Dr. Philip Noguchi, acting director of the agency's office of
cellular, tissue and gene therapies.

    The temporary halt -- the largest such action involving gene therapy trials
-- represents yet another setback to the fledgling field, which usually involves
introducing healthy genes into patients to treat diseases caused by defective
ones. The field is still shaken from the 1999 death of a teenager undergoing
gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania and from the first case of
leukemia in an infant in France last year.

    The treatments in France had been considered the only unequivocal success
for gene therapy after a decade of failures. Nine of 11 young boys treated for a
fatal immune deficiency widely known as bubble-boy disease were able to leave
the hospital and take up nearly normal lives. But now two of them have developed
the condition resembling leukemia.

    "The exciting thing was that it was working," said Dr. Joseph C. Glorioso,
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy and the chairman of molecular
genetics and biochemistry at the University of Pittsburgh. "The horrible thing
is that a shadow has been cast over that success."

    Last September, after the first child in France was found to have the
leukemia-like disease, the FDA halted three clinical trials that involved a
similar treatment for immune deficiencies. Yesterday, it decided to halt all
trials involving the technique used in the French trial, regardless of the
disease being treated. That technique uses a type of virus known as a retrovirus
to ferry genes into blood-producing stem cells.

    The 30 trials halted represent about 15 percent of the 200 gene therapy
trials under way and half of the 60 trials involving retroviruses. The other
trials using retroviruses insert the genes into cells other than blood stem
cells. The trials involving stem cells are considered more risky because those
cells proliferate, and leukemia is a disease in which blood cells proliferate
out of control.

    Some of the trials being halted are intended to treat AIDS and cancer,
Noguchi said. The agency will consider lifting the suspensions in individual
cases for these life-threatening diseases if doctors fully inform the patients
of the risk and then monitor them carefully, he said.

    Retroviruses are only one of several types of viruses used to deliver genes
into cells. But they are considered both particularly promising and risky
because the genes they carry become a permanent part of the target cell's DNA.
That means that when the cells divide, the inserted genes remain in the daughter
cells. Without that permanent insertion, scientists said, gene therapy might
have to be performed over and over.

    But scientists also knew there was a theoretical risk that a retrovirus
would lodge near a cancer-causing gene and turn it on. Scientists say that is
what happened in the first leukemia case in France. The cause of the second case
has not been announced but some scientists say they have heard the cause is
similar.

    But until the second case, scientists believed that the risk was very low.
There have been perhaps 40 or 50 trials involving more than 100 patients in the
United States that involved using retroviruses to insert genes into stem cells,
said Dr. Donald B. Kohn, professor of pediatrics at the University of Southern
California and a physician at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles. Most had
limited or no success, but none had caused a cancer-like complication.

    "The big question is why are we seeing this all of a sudden in two patients
in this trial, but not all these previous patients?" said Kohn, who was
conducting two trials affected by the FDA's suspension. He said one explanation
could be that gene transfer has become more efficient. Another is that there
could be something specific to the disease treated or to the gene used in the
French experiment.

    The American Society of Gene Therapy, which endorsed the FDA's precautionary
measure, yesterday said it would set up a committee to study the situation. The
National Institutes of Health's gene therapy advisory committee will meet Friday
to consider the situation, and an FDA advisory committee will meet Feb. 28.

    Glorioso described the setback as "bumps in the road that happen when you
develop new therapies." He added: "I don't think it will kill the field. I think
it will cause us to work harder and engineer our way out of the problem."

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             950 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          January 15, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1004 words

HEADLINE: French case leads FDA to halt 27 gene-therapy trials; Child has
developed cancerlike disease

BYLINE: Andrew Pollack; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 The Food and Drug Administration yesterday suspended 27 gene-therapy trials
involving several hundred patients after learning that a second child treated in
France had developed a condition resembling leukemia.

   The agency said it was not aware that any of the patients treated in the 27
U.S. trials had suffered illnesses similar to that of the infants in France, but
was nevertheless taking precautions.

   "We see no evidence that the subjects in these 27 trials are actually at
risk," said Dr. Philip Noguchi, acting director of the agency's office of
cellular, tissue and gene therapies.

   The temporary halt, the largest such action involving gene-therapy trials,
represents another setback for the fledgling field, which usually involves
introducing healthy genes into patients to treat diseases caused by defective
ones.  The field is still shaken from the 1999 death of a teen-ager undergoing
gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania and from the first case
resembling leukemia in an infant in France last year.

   The treatments in France had been considered the only unequivocal success for
gene therapy after a decade of failures.  Nine of 11 young boys treated for a
fatal immune deficiency known as bubble-boy disease were able to leave the
hospital and lead nearly normal lives.  But now two of them have developed the
condition resembling leukemia.

   "The exciting thing was that it was working," said Dr. Joseph C. Glorioso,
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy and the chairman of molecular
genetics and biochemistry at the University of Pittsburgh.  "The horrible thing
is that a shadow has been cast over that success."

   Last September, after the first child in France was found to have the
leukemia-like disease, the FDA halted three clinical trials that involved a
similar treatment for immune deficiencies.  Yesterday it decided to halt all
trials involving the technique used in the French trial, regardless of the
disease being treated.  That technique uses a type of virus known as a
retrovirus to ferry genes into blood-producing stem cells.

   The 30 trials halted represent about 15 percent of the 200 gene-therapy
trials under way and half of the 60 trials involving retroviruses.  The other
trials using retroviruses insert the genes into cells other than blood stem
cells.  The trials involving stem cells are considered more risky because those
cells proliferate, and leukemia is a disease in which blood cells proliferate
out of control.

   Some of the trials being halted are intended to treat AIDS and cancer,
Noguchi said.  The agency will consider lifting the suspensions in individual
cases for these life-threatening diseases if doctors fully inform the patients
of the risk and then monitor them carefully, he said.

   Retroviruses are one of several types of viruses used to deliver genes into
cells.  They are considered to be both particularly promising and risky because
the genes they carry become a permanent part of the target cell's DNA. That
means that when the cells divide, the inserted genes remain in the daughter
cells.  Without that permanent insertion, scientists said, gene therapy might
have to be performed over and over.

   But scientists also knew there was a theoretical risk that a retrovirus would
lodge near a cancer-causing gene and trigger it.  Scientists say that is what
happened in the first leukemia-like case in France.  The cause of the second
case has not been announced.

   Until the second case, scientists believed the risk was very low.  There have
been perhaps 40 or 50 trials involving more than 100 patients in the United
States that involved using retroviruses to insert genes into stem cells, said
Dr. Donald B. Kohn, professor of pediatrics at the University of Southern
California and a physician at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles.  Most had
limited or no success, but none had caused a cancerlike complication.

   "The big question is why are we seeing this all of a sudden in two patients
in this trial but not all these previous patients?" said Kohn, who was
conducting two trials affected by the FDA's suspension.  He said one explanation
could be that gene transfer has become more efficient.  Another is that there
could be something specific to the disease treated or to the gene used in the
French experiment.

   The American Society of Gene Therapy, which endorsed the FDA's precautionary
measure, said yesterday that it would set up a committee to study the situation.
The National Institutes of Health's gene-therapy advisory committee will meet
Friday to consider the situation, and an FDA advisory committee will meet Feb.
28.

   Scientists said the new problems would not derail gene therapy because the
risks must be balanced against the benefits.  In this case, they said, nine
infants had been virtually cured of a terrible disease.  After the first three
trials were suspended in September, an FDA advisory committee recommended
resuming those trials on the ground that benefits outweighed the risks.  Those
trials had not yet been restarted.

   Noguchi said the FDA learned of the second French leukemia case a month ago
but did not act until yesterday because it wanted to study the situation.

   "We know the impact of FDA taking an action like this," he said.  "We didn't
want to do this without doing a very thorough evaluation of all the risks and
benefits."

   Dr. Daniel Salomon, associate professor at the Scripps Research Institute in
La Jolla and chairman of the FDA advisory committee for gene therapy, said the
FDA was right to be cautious.  "This definitely is not the way we would have
written it out had we had our Fantasyland going," he said.  "But this is dealing
with reality."

   Salomon and Glorioso said there were techniques that could make gene therapy
safer.

   Glorioso described the setback as "bumps in the road that happen when you
develop new therapies." He added: "I don't think it will kill the field.  I
think it will cause us to work harder and engineer our way out of the problem."


LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                             951 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              January 15, 2003 Wednesday 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Toughen welfare's work rules, Bush urges

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   President Bush urged the new Republican-controlled Congress on Tuesday to
stiffen welfare's work requirements, a White House initiative that died in the
Democratic-controlled Senate last year.

   Bush said Congress should take as its model a bill the Republican-run House
approved last year that would have required more people to work more hours - 40
hours a week, 10 more than current law - to receive government benefits. Of the
40 hours, 16 could be used for job training, education or drug rehabilitation.
The Senate did not pass the bill.

   RATINGS FALL: President Bush's job approval has slipped to 58 percent in a
new CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll, the first time it has fallen below 60 percent in
that poll since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. His approval was down 5
points from a week ago. Bush's job approval is still higher than those of Jimmy
Carter, Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton at this stage of their presidencies.

   SANCTITY OF HUMAN LIFE DAY: President Bush pleased antiabortion activists
Tuesday by declaring a National Sanctity of Human Life Day this Sunday. The
proclamation enacts no change in policies or programs.

Child's illness prompts

gene therapy suspension

   A second European toddler apparently suffered a leukemialike side effect from
gene therapy that cured him of the rare but deadly "bubble boy disease,"
prompting the government on Tuesday to suspend 27 more gene therapy studies
while they investigate the risk.

   The immune disorder, severe combined immunodeficiency, is the only disease
ever to be cured with gene therapy.

High court hears "any

willing provider' case

   Kentucky told the Supreme Court on Tuesday that it should be allowed to
guarantee patients a broader choice of doctors through a state law regulating
managed care companies.

   Under its "any willing provider law," Kentucky, like 24 other states,
requires health maintenance organizations to open their networks to outside
doctors, hospitals and pharmacists as long as they agree to abide by the rules
of the network.

   But the Kentucky Association of Health Plans argued that the state law
usurped the power of the federal government to regulate employee benefit plans
and violated a central tenet of managed care.

Court: Federal rules don't

cover home pet breeders

   Rejecting arguments from animal rights groups, a federal appeals court ruled
Tuesday that residential breeders of dogs and cats are not subject to federal
licensing and inspection.

   The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said people
who sell and breed animals out of their homes fall under the definition of
"retail pet stores" that are exempt from regulation under federal law.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             952 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

             January 15, 2003 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Jerry Berger Column; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: ROTHSCHILD PLANS CONDOS, LOFTS, OFFICES IN OLD POLICE STATION ON SOUTH
GRAND

BYLINE: Jerry Berger

BODY:

   IN OUR TOWN: One of the city's most popular and prolific buyers, sellers and
developers, Pete Rothschild, along with his partner, Mike Allen, have done it
again. They have acquired the former three-story police station and adjoining
stables at 2810 South Grand Boulevard and have targeted the property for rehab
into offices, condos and lofts. The 1898-vintage building, with its signature
terra cotta horse head, overlooking Tower Grove Park, will offer 16-foot high
ceilings. ... The U. City Loop's Joe Edwards has finally tracked down and
purchased the required eight bowling lanes for his proposed Pin-Up Bowl, 6191
Delmar Boulevard, four blocks east of his Blueberry Hill. Edwards found the
equipment at the Cottonwood Bowl, near Edwardsville, and hopes to bow his 1950s
alley in the fall. ... American Airlines chief Don Carty and Emily Rauh Pulitzer
have agreed to scoop up honorary degrees from the Rev. Lawrence Biondi at SLU's
May 17 commencement exercise. ... The American Society of Gene Therapy has
slated a May 2005 convention here. Other late starters, according to the St.
Louis Convention & Visitors Commission are the American Contract Bridge
Association, May 2007; the National Association of Insurance Commissioners,
September 2006; and the Juanita Bynum Ministries in August with 10,000 room
nights. ... Muny producer Paul Blake's contract expires this year (so who's
waiting in the wings?). ... Design doyenne Diane Breckenridge was toasted on her
60th natal day Saturday night at her and hub "The Don's" Sheraton City Center
ballroom (and we didn't even make the B-list).

   BOOKMARK: Lawyer-novelist Michael A. Kahn, who now plies his trade with our
town's Blackwell Sanders Peper Martin, will be on the dais with fellow
lawyer-novelist Scott Turow, at a WashU School of Law shindig Jan. 29. Turow,
penman of "Presumed Innocent," will address the question "Where have you gone,
Perry Mason?" at the law school's Public Interest Law Speaker Series. Turow's
and Kahn's paths have been intertwined since school days: They're both grads of
Harvard Law School and Amherst College. Quips Kahn, the author of "Trophy Widow"
and other legal thrillers: "The only differences between us are about 5 million
book sales and a movie deal."

   WITH THE POLS: When feisty former Webster Groves Mayor Terri Williams dropped
out of the Democratic primary for County Council in the 5th District last fall,
insiders were scratching their heads. Her withdrawal gave newcomer Tim Reardon a
free shot to oppose incumbent Republican Councilman Kurt Odenwald in a contest
Odenwald eventually won. The Dems' card game was revealed last week, when
Williams appeared at a County Council meeting as the new "Citizens Advocate" for
St. Louis County. The job is estimated to be worth about $40,000 a year. ... In
news of other "formers," Creve Coeur's former Mayor Harold Dielmann is
attempting a comeback for his old job and has sent out invites to his
fund-raising kickoff. Interesting, that the fund-raiser is being held at Kreis'
Restaurant - in Frontenac.

   MEMO TO THE DOCS: The Academy of Science of St. Louis will honor a gaggle of
notables at the St. Louis Scientists Awards Dinner April 2 at the Sheraton City
Center. Will D. Carpenter, developer of Monsanto's Roundup and its other
top-selling herbicides, will receive the Trustee's Award. He's a leader in the
fight for approval of the Chemical Weapons Convention. The Peter H. Raven
Lifetime Awards will go to Ira Hirsh, world leader in audiology at Central
Institute for the Deaf and WashU, and Nobuo Suga of WashU's biology department,
whose studies on bats have advanced understanding of human hearing. Tapped for
the Fellows Award are world pioneer in nerve transplants Dr. Susan Mackinnon,
chief of plastic surgery at WashU Med School and Barnes-Jewish Hospital, and
allergy spokesman and researcher Dr. Raymond G. Slavin of St. Louis University
School of Medicine. Donald P. Ames, an innovator in nuclear and physical
chemistry, will receive the James B. Eads Award.

NOTES:
PAGE TWO

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             953 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                   January 15, 2003, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: METRO, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 450 words

HEADLINE: USF Finds Research VP After 2-Year Search

BYLINE: JOHN VAUGHAN , jvaughan@tampatrib.com; John Vaughan can be reached at
(813) 259-7524.

BODY:

   FOR 21 YEARS, HE LED UF'S PHYSIOLOGY DEPARTMENT

   TAMPA - After two years of internal turmoil and then a two-year national
hunt, the University of South Florida has found an accomplished scientist at
another in-state school to lead its research efforts.

   M. Ian Phillips is leaving the University of Florida to start Jan. 31 as
USF's vice president for research.

   He will take over one of the region's key economic engines, an unusually
fast-growing collection of sponsored science worth more than $207 million last
year. USF wants to raise its profile by playing to strengths that range from
engineering to medicine.

   "The school is just placed so well geographically and academically to take
off," Phillips said. "That means increasing the quality of research, which
should lead to more funding, a better reputation and attracting more students."

   He also spoke of "changing the culture," recruiting "particularly new young
people" and de-emphasizing the "sibling rivalry" that colors the fight for
funding in Florida.

   "California has several fantastically good schools. But they're not thinking
of competing with each other, except perhaps in football. They're thinking only
of how good they can be," he said.

   Phillips, 64, was schooled in his native United Kingdom and has made his
research mark in hypertension and gene therapy. He led UF's physiology
department for 21 years before becoming associate vice president for research
and graduate programs in 2001.

   By then, USF was wading through its initial search to replace George Newkome,
who had resigned the previous fall after 14 years in which he led USF research
from a $22 million-a-year sideline into a multicampus crusade.

   The rapid growth vaulted USF to "the league of big-time research
universities," in the words of President Judy Genshaft - but also to another
level of challenges.

   Newkome's last two years were marred by federal and internal inquiries into
research oversight, highlighted by the case of former Professor James Rowsey, an
eye surgeon faulted by the government for experimenting on patients without
consent.

   USF quickly made progress in educating employees, computerizing records and
centralizing the professional panels that approve research. But its first search
to replace Newkome ended "without a good fit" after two of the three finalists
pulled out late, school spokesman Michael Reich said.

   With Bruce Lindsey doing "an outstanding job" as interim vice president,
Reich said, USF decided to start over. A new search began a year ago and
attracted Phillips in June.

   Phillips will be paid $250,000 a year, plus moving expenses and a monthly car
allowance of $650.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
M. Ian Phillips

   Plans on "increasing the quality of research, which should lead to more
funding, a better reputation and ... more students"

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                             954 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   January 15, 2003, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 311 words

HEADLINE: FDA halts dozens of gene-therapy trials

BYLINE: Elizabeth Weise

BODY:
The Food and Drug Administration has temporarily suspended dozens of
gene-therapy trials now that a second child in Europe has contracted a
leukemia-like illness brought on by a gene-therapy treatment.

   Gene therapy tries to cure disease by replacing damaged genes in the body
with healthy ones. Gene therapy's one success has been in treating some children
who have "bubble boy" disease, formally known as severe combined
immunodeficiency, or SCID. But in France, a leukemia-like illness struck one boy
four months ago and now a second child, representing another setback for the
experimental gene-therapy field.

   "It's likely the gene that was inserted had a major role in causing the
disease," the FDA's Philip Noguchi says.

   Both this child and another were treated for the "bubble boy" disease in
August. But in October, when the FDA learned that one of the 11 children treated
had developed the leukemia-like disease, it halted enrollment in three U.S.
trials similar to the French trial.

   Both the children have since been treated successfully for leukemia.

   Infants with the "bubble boy" disease have a gene defect that leads to a
complete lack of white blood cells that can fight infection. Without treatment,
they die during the first year of life.

   In the French study, nine of 11 children were able to lead mostly normal
lives.

   The hold imposed Monday involves gene-therapy trials that use retroviruses to
insert new genes into blood stem cells. It affects about 50 clinical trials,
including some for cancer and other infectious diseases, Noguchi says.

   The FDA's review has found no evidence of leukemia caused by the gene therapy
in U.S. cases.

   For patients with life-threatening diseases for whom there are no
alternatives, the FDA will evaluate lifting the hold on a case-by-case basis,
Noguchi says.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             955 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 732 words

HEADLINE: Second Boy Receiving Gene Therapy Develops Cancer;
FDA Responds to Event in France by Suspending 27 U.S. Studies Involving Similar
Techniques

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   For the second time in four months, a child treated with an experimental gene
therapy in France has developed a form of leukemia apparently caused by the
treatment.

   The new cancer case, in a boy who was given new genes to cure a severe immune
system deficiency, undercuts scientists' initial hopes that the first case was a
fluke, and calls into question the value of the radical treatment, which had
been promoted as the first successful use of DNA to cure a disease.

   In response, the Food and Drug Administration yesterday suspended as "a
precautionary measure" more than two dozen U.S. gene therapy studies that
involve techniques similar to those in the French experiment. Three U.S. gene
therapy studies that even more closely resemble the French experiment had
already been on hold since the first leukemia case came to light in September.

   The new cancer case is a serious blow for an experimental field that has
struggled for a dozen years to produce its first cure and which suffered a
terrible setback in 1999 with the death of an American patient, Arizona teenager
Jesse Gelsinger. The approach involves the delivery of new genes to take over
for missing or broken ones.

   Gelsinger died in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania
that was later heavily criticized by the FDA for violating basic safety rules.
But until the recent leukemia cases, gene therapy had at least seemed safe when
used in accordance with approved protocols. Now, scientists said, that sense of
safety has been undermined.

   "When the first leukemia showed up, we as a community were certainly upset
and concerned about the patient," said Joe Glorioso, president of the American
Society of Gene Therapy and chairman of molecular genetics and biochemistry at
the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. "But when the second event
happened, that really is a red flag."

   Nonetheless, Glorioso and others noted, no cases of leukemia have been
documented in any of the thousands of other people who have received some form
of gene therapy, which suggests that the risk may be specific to this particular
disease or treatment plan. Researchers said they held out hope that they will
learn how to modify the treatment so it can still be used in children born with
the boys' life-threatening disorder -- severe combined immunodeficiency, or
SCID. Affected children can die from even minor infections, and the only cure --
a bone marrow transplant from a well-matched donor -- is unavailable for many.

   "We continue to see gene therapy as a promising therapy for all those who
have not benefited from current technologies," said Philip Noguchi, acting
director of the FDA's office of cellular, tissue and gene therapies, which
regulates gene therapy experiments in this country.

   Noguchi praised the leader of the French study, Alain Fischer of the Necker
Hospital in Paris, for promptly informing the FDA about the new leukemia case
last month. The setback became public yesterday when the FDA placed a "clinical
hold" on all U.S. gene therapy experiments that, like the French experiment, use
retroviruses to deliver new genes into blood stem cells. The FDA hold demands
that studies already underway be stopped and enrollment of new patients be
suspended.

   Noguchi estimated that 27 such trials have been approved in this country and
are at various stages of patient enrollment or testing. The agency will assess
the latest data at a Feb. 28 meeting, he said, but it may lift the hold on some
studies before then if it believes patients are more likely to be harmed by the
shutdown of a study.

   Few details about the new case were available yesterday. The boy was one of
about 11 children treated by Fischer in the past several years, nine of whom
Fischer has said appear to be cured of their immune system disease. The
treatment uses retroviruses to deliver a crucial immune system gene to blood
cells.

   Glorioso said yesterday he had been told that the latest leukemia case
involved a boy who was admitted to a hospital in Louisiana, suggesting he may be
an American who was treated in Paris.

   In both leukemia cases, tests showed that the cancer was apparently triggered
when the newly delivered gene disrupted a nearby gene whose job is to help
prevent cancer.

   Both boys have been treated for their leukemia and are "stable," Noguchi
said.

   Staff researcher Lucy Shackelford contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                             956 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     January 14, 2003 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 031

LENGTH: 302 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme is ahead in Fabry drug OK

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp.'s experimental Fabry disease treatment reduced some blood
vessel blockage in the kidneys of patients with the rare metabolic disorder, a
U.S. Food and Drug Administration panel said yesterday.

   Meanwhile, an FDA staff review reported that a treatment for the same disease
developed by competitor Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. worked no better than a
placebo on some measures.

   The companies are vying to be first to win approval of their Fabry disease
treatments to be eligible for orphan drug status. That designation, sometimes
given to developers of rare disease, comes with seven-year market exclusivity.

   An advisory panel that heard from Genzyme yesterday voted 14-1 to tell the
FDA that Genzyme research showed a reduction in abnormal fatty desposits in the
kidneys, an indication that the drug may work, Bloomberg News reported.

   FDA staff members previously said more research is needed to show whether
Genzyme's Fabrazyme helps prevent organ damage. The company is conducting that
study.

   TKT will present its research on its treatment, Replagal, to the FDA panel
today.

   "We believe Replagal is safe and effective and we are fully committed to
working with the FDA to make Replagal available to patients," said Dr. Richard
F. Seldon, TKT chief executive.

   The FDA staff review said the drug didn't work better than a placebo in
studies of pain levels and heart and kidney function.

   TKT has done detailed analyses of data from studies of about 115 patients
hoping to show that its drug works. The company has been looking for signs that
Replagal protects patients' internal organs over time.

   The staff review, which didn't make a recommendation on the drug, said some
of the measurements suggested a benefit, but questioned the reliability of an
analysis from so few patients.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003


                             957 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 14, 2003, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 975 words

HEADLINE: FDA PANEL DEEMS OK FOR GENZYME DRUG 'APPROPRIATE'

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. - A Food and Drug Administration panel yesterday voted 14 to 1
that it would be "appropriate" to approve Genzyme Corp.'s drug to treat a rare
inherited disorder, Fabry disease, based on the primary measure the Cambridge
firm used to evaluate the drug's effectiveness in clinical trials.

   But in an unusual turn of events, the panel was not asked to make a formal
recommendation to the FDA about whether the drug, Fabrazyme, should actually be
approved, leaving investors, physicians, and patients at a loss about when - and
even if - the drug will reach the market.

      "In the end, it was a very confusing episode," said Dr. Roscoe Brady,
chief of the developmental and metabolic neurology branch of the National
Institutes of Health and a renowned researcher into genetic diseases such as
Fabry. "The discussion went from one extreme to another. I think ultimately the
drug will get approved. But it's hard to predict what will happen."

   The daylong debate sparked yet another round of speculation in a 2 1/2-year
review process that has been marked by delays and uncertainty. Genzyme and its
cross town rival, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., submitted applications within
weeks of each other in June 2000 to market virtually identical drugs to treat
the same disorder, a situation that the FDA has never before faced and could
turn the competition into a winner-take-all proposition.

   FDA rules require that only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease such
as Fabry, which affects only a few thousand people worldwide. The "orphan drug"
act gives a company seven years to sell its drug unhindered by competition in
exchange for being the first to develop a drug to treat a rare disease. The
panel, which is expected to review TKT's application today, did not address the
orphan drug issue.

   If the approval of one drug is delayed or denied, however, the other drug may
be barred from the US market, estimated to be worth $300 million to $400
million. In such a scenario, the loss would be far more devastating to TKT.
Replagal would be TKT's first marketed product in the United States, whereas
Fabrazyme would represent a relatively modest percentage of Genzyme's US sales.

   TKT's application has been riddled with setbacks in recent months, casting
doubt on its chances of ever winning approval. The FDA called a portion of its
data on pain, the primary goal of the company's clinical trial,
"uninterpretable," and took issue with other clinical data that TKT hoped would
bolster its application.

   Trading of shares in both Genzyme and TKT was halted yesterday to give the
markets time to digest the FDA's deliberations.

   "It's going to be a political decision from the FDA even if the panel is
positive tomorrow on Replagal," said Dr. Yaron Werber, an analyst with SG Cowen.

   Patients with Fabry disease lack an enzyme known as alpha-galactosidase that
breaks down certain fatty lipids in the body. The buildup of those lipids causes
intense pain in hands and feet and an inability to sweat, and eventually causes
kidney failure, heart attack, or stroke, usually killing its victims around age
40.

   The sticking point in yesterday's discussion came late in the afternoon.
Panel members had already agreed that Fabrazyme, a recombinant form of the
enzyme missing in Fabry patients, cleared the buildup of the fatty lipid from
certain cells in the kidney and the blood, skin, and other tissues. But the
clearance of that fat from tissue does not necessarily translate into improved
outcomes for patients.

   Genzyme's clinical trials offered no conclusive evidence that the drug would
slow the deterioration of the kidneys or heart. The FDA could approve the drug,
however, under a process known as accelerated approval, requiring Genzyme to
later show that the drug does prevent organ damage. If it failed to prove the
long-term benefit, however, the drug would be pulled from the market.

   Given the rarity of the disease, however, panel members expressed grave
concerns about the ability to prove the drug's effectiveness in a clinical trial
once it was on the market. Typically, studies compare the performance of
patients on a drug compared to those on a placebo.  Genzyme has begun such a
study, but if Fabrazyme were approved, patients on a placebo would be unlikely
to remain in the study.

   "If we think this is an agent that will provide true benefit to patients,
then we have to keep the study intact," said Thomas R. Fleming, a panel member
and chair of the department of biostatistics at the University of Washington in
Seattle.

   Keeping the study intact, however, would require delaying the drug's approval
until at least January 2004 when the study is due to be completed. Results from
the study would not be ready until months later, potentially pushing the drug's
approval into 2005. Analysts and patient advocates said that given the panel's
comments, they believe it would be difficult for the FDA to wait another year to
approve the drugs. Both Fabrazyme and Replagal are marketed outside the United
States.

   "They can't," said Abbey Meyers, president of the National Organization for
Rare Disorders. "The pressure from patients would be too great.

   Despite their concerns, several panel members expressed their belief that the
drug should be approved, saying patients desperately needed a drug and they had
confidence in the ability of the FDA and the company to find another way to
study the drug's effectiveness over the long term.

   "We are making a trade-off, but it's a trade-off I'm willing to make," said
Dr. David S. Schade, a panel member and professor of medicine and chief of
endocrinology at University of New Mexico School of Medicine. "I feel a great
urgency to get a treatment on the market for patients who have this disease."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Donald Rubin of Harvard University yesterday described the
testing of Genzyme Corp.'s drug to treat a rare inherited disorder, Fabry
disease, before a Food and Drug Administration advisory panel in Bethesda, Md. /
AP PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003


                             958 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2003 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                    January 14, 2003 Tuesday No dot Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 359 words

HEADLINE: A golden glow crowns Fisher Building auto show gala

BYLINE: Michael H. Margolin

BODY:

   DETROIT -- Thrill seekers on the charity circuit had more than the North
American International Auto Show preview and its spawn of afterglow events to
choose from last weekend. Swingtime 2003, Fanclub Arts Foundation's annual
fund-raiser, played to a sell-out crowd of 1,200 and raised $50,000 to support
arts education.

   For the second- floor colonnade of the Fisher Building lobby, VIPs paid $100,
double the general admission. The event drew snazzy socialites, the old guard,
and would-be fashionistas.

   One of these was Laura Raisch, president of the newly established auxiliary,
Fan Club Professional League. She brought her dog Pumpernickel who, like most,
indulged in the offerings of 30 restaurants.

   What's coming up

   Visions to Remember: Eyes on Antiques -- Antiques Show &; Sale Preview Party
is Feb. 7 at the Edsel &; Eleanor Ford House Activities Center in Grosse Pointe
Shores. Special $100 and $150 preview tickets include a presentation at 6 p.m.
($50 preview tickets also available for entrance at 6:30 p.m.) Proceeds will
benefit the Detroit Institute of Ophthalmology. Call (313) 824-4710.

   Sixth Red Heart Blues ... and All That Jazz! The fund-raiser is 6 p.m. Feb. 8
at the Ford Motor Co. Conference and Event Center in Dearborn. The evening will
feature dinner, dancing, a live and silent auction and an awards presentation.
Tickets are $250 patron, $350 benefactor, $500 gold and $1,000 platinum.
Proceeds will benefit research and treatment for the prevention and cure of
cardiovascular disease, with emphasis on molecular gene therapy. Call (313)
876-9259.

   Snow Ball, black-tie dinner presented by Variety -- the Children's Charity,
will be at 6:30 p.m. Feb. 22 at the Townsend Hotel Ballroom in Birmingham. The
theme, Moulin Rouge, will feature an evening of 19th Century Paris frivolity
with French cuisine, a live auction, floor show, dancing, festivities and
musical entertainment. Tickets are $225 per person, $300 per patron, and $500
per benefactor. A Patron Party will be held Feb. 6 at the home of Janie and
Michael Roth in Bloomfield Hills. Call (248) 258-5511.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2003


                             959 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Health & Fitness; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1415 words

HEADLINE: A CONVERSATION WITH: CHARLIE TOLCHIN;
Beating the Odds, With New Lungs and a Zeal for Life

BYLINE:  By JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   When Charlie Tolchin, born with the lung-destroying disease cystic fibrosis,
received two healthy lungs from a 13-year-old accident victim at the University
of North Carolina on April 13, 1997, he entered a world that was alternately
triumphant and life-threatening.

        For the first time in years, Charlie, then 29, was free of the many
hours a day of mucus-clearing physical therapy and perpetual rounds of
antibiotics that kept him alive and breathing.

    But with the transplant came new problems. To keep his body from rejecting
his new lungs, he relied on a minipharmacy to suppress his immune system's
reaction to the foreign organs.

   Four years later, as a consequence of the immune-suppressing drugs, he
developed lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system. His life then depended on
chemotherapy, which cured his cancer but scarred his new lungs.

   That damage, compounded by gradual chronic rejection for which there is no
established treatment, has left him dependent on a round-the-clock external
supply of oxygen.

   Charlie was 5 when his parents learned that he had cystic fibrosis, a genetic
disease that clogs the lungs and pancreas with incapacitating mucus. Cystic
fibrosis, the most common lethal inherited disease among people of European
descent, can result in severe breathing and digestive difficulties.

   By the time he was 5, Charlie was already having trouble gaining weight and
growing normally. The doctors at Johns Hopkins Hospital, where the diagnosis was
made, told his parents that he would probably live about three more years.

   But thanks to a remarkable series of medical achievements, Charlie and tens
of thousands of others have far outlived those odds. Today, even without a lung
transplant, children with cystic fibrosis can look forward to a life of 30 years
or more.

   Even from the beginning, Charlie and his family knew that the double lung
transplant was neither a cure nor a guarantee of longevity. The transplant team
made it clear that all transplanted lungs from unmatched donors were eventually
rejected. Perhaps, the team told him, a transplant would buy him an additional
five years.

   But is Charlie complaining? Not now and not ever, despite countless painful
tests, treatments and crises.

   "He's never said, 'Why me?' " his father, Martin Tolchin, said. "He's never
said, 'This is too much for a human being to bear.' "

   Charlie completed high school and college, earning good grades, serving as
class president and playing various sports. He ultimately graduated from George
Washington University with a degree that propelled him into the world of
advertising.

   A year after his transplant, he wrote a book, "Blow the House Down,"
describing his experiences before and after the transplant to inform and
encourage the tens of thousands of children and young adults with cystis
fibrosis and the health professionals who treat them.

   He has received hundreds of e-mail messages (at Blowthehousedown@aol.com)
from people sharing their experiences with cystic fibrosis and other chronic
ailments. At AOL, where he manages ad campaigns, he received the company's
personal achievement award last year, despite undergoing chemotherapy.

   Charlie also conducts grand rounds at the National Institutes of Health and
at Georgetown University Hospital, teaching the medical staffs about genetics
and rehabilitation medicine, as well as ways to deal with very sick patients. He
also lectures to students studying medicine, nursing and physical therapy.

Q. You've now lived 26 years longer than the doctors had originally predicted.
To what do you attribute your longevity?

A. A bunch of parents organized themselves, formed the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation and pushed through what most people didn't think was possible. New
generations of antibiotics were developed to treat dangerous infections as the
bugs became resistant to the old drugs.

   Mucolytic agents were developed to thin the mucus in the lungs, and
improvements were made in respiratory physical therapy so that parents no longer
have to do what mine did -- clap on my chest for hours a day to loosen the
mucus. Now a vibrating vest and a flutter device can do the job.

   There have also been improvements in the digestive enzymes we have to take.
At first, they were sprinkled on my food in powder form and made everything
taste awful. Now they're easily swallowed before every meal.

   And at the suggestion of a doctor friend, I learned all I could about my
disease and how to remain as healthy and strong as possible.

   I learned to eat five times a day. I did weight lifting and aerobic training,
and I took up ice hockey. I played ice hockey six days before my transplant.

Q. Ice hockey seems like a very challenging activity for someone with limited
lung capacity. How has ice hockey helped you?

A. It helped me get into really good shape. I built muscles, strength and
aerobic endurance. It also kept me engaged in life when I had nothing else to do
but wait for my transplant.

Q. You've also used sports as a visualization device. How?

A. When undergoing a long difficult medical procedure, I mentally removed myself
from the room.

   I imagined myself on the golf course. I could smell the air and the grass and
see the shots -- first hole, second hole and so on. Sometimes you need to be
thinking about something fun, not what's happening at the moment.

Q. What has the transplant meant to you?

A. I had the opportunity to live life as a truly healthy person, with 100
percent healthy lungs, for four good years. I got back into advertising. I went
skiing in Utah at 12,000 feet. I could live without spending five hours a day on
my health.

Q. Right now many more people die waiting for transplants than receive them.
What can be done so that more people can have the opportunity you've had to gain
a second lease on life?

A. There are nearly 80,000 people in the United States alone waiting for organ
transplants.

   If everyone willing to be a donor became one, there wouldn't be an organ
shortage. We need legislation that requires people to say they don't want to be
a donor, so that all potential donors become donors.

   Meanwhile, if you want to be an organ donor, make sure your family knows
that.

   My donor, a 13-year-old girl killed by a drunken driver, had talked to her
family about being a donor. So when she died, her parents donated all her usable
organs.

Q. How did your parents' reaction to your disease influence you and your
expectations?

A. They made it clear that I should lead a full life. They sent me to sleep-away
camp. They encouraged me to play sports -- soccer, swimming, tennis. They taught
me how to be an advocate for myself, to speak up to doctors when things were not
right.

Q. You talk in your book about taking control of one's self-definition, defining
yourself as something other than a sick person. How important is this to the
quality of your life?

A. Pursuing what interests you in life keeps you sane. If I were to sit here
thinking about the next treatment or that I'm going to get sicker, I'm not going
to do well.

Q. You seem to have had lots of friends and more than your share of girlfriends.
How has your self-definition affected your social life?

A. I've been really blessed with great friends. My relationship with them is
real friendship. It's not based on my health. I don't view myself as different
and I don't expect people to treat me differently.

Q. Your lung capacity is now at 28 percent of normal, the same as before your
lung transplant. Are you considering a second transplant?

A. I'm currently being evaluated to see if I'm a good candidate for another
transplant. Second transplants are not as successful as first ones. There's a
lot of scarring, which makes the surgery more difficult. Also, I'm concerned
about taking away a chance from someone else who needs new lungs.

Q. If a successful gene therapy is developed, would you be a candidate?

A. Gene therapy would probably be most applicable for younger kids. My lungs no
longer have cystic fibrosis. So gene therapy would not help me. The biggest
challenge is the same as with organ transplants, getting the genes in without
activating the immune system. But I think they'll figure out how to do it.

Q. What is your message to people facing life-threatening health problems like
cystic fibrosis or cancer?

A. Don't believe there's nothing you can do. I tell doctors to think twice
before they tell a patient that nothing can be done. I think about the odds of
all the things that came together to make it possible for me to be here today.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charlie Tolchin has an external supply of oxygen to combat lung
damage. (Susana Raab for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003


                             960 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Health & Fitness; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1178 words

HEADLINE: PERSONAL HEALTH;
Scientists Plot Tactics to Outmaneuver Cystic Fibrosis Gene

BYLINE:  By JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   More than 10 million people in this country carry in all their cells one copy
of a defective gene that regulates the movement of sodium, chloride and water in
and out of cells.

        These people are, on the surface, perfectly healthy. But when two such
carriers of this defective gene have children, they have a 25 percent chance
that each child will inherit an abnormal gene from each parent and will be born
with cystic fibrosis.

    The result of a defective protein, cystic fibrosis is a chronic, progressive
and ultimately fatal disease that clogs the lungs and pancreas with thick,
sticky mucus.

   About 30,000 people in the United States have cystic fibrosis, the most
common life-shortening genetic disease among Caucasians worldwide. It occurs in
1 in 3,300 live births among whites, with a lower incidence in other groups. The
incidence is highest, 1 in 2,500 births, among descendants of Northern European
whites and Ashkenazi Jews.

   How has such a lethal gene survived the throes of evolution? Just as carriers
of the sickle cell gene have a survival advantage because their abnormal gene
offers some protection against malaria, some scientists believe that carriers of
the cystic fibrosis gene were better able to survive the often fatal diarrhea
caused by cholera.

   At least 800 different defects, or mutations, are known to occur in this
critical gene, which causes a cell to create a protein called the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator, or C.F.T.R. Different mutations
cause different disruptions of the regulator's role, and, as a result, different
degrees of severity of cystic fibrosis.

   The most common mutations disrupt the movement of C.F.T.R. from its point of
origin to its site of operation and cause a severe and ultimately fatal disease.


Life-Lengthening Progress

   As recently as 25 years ago, most children born with cystic fibrosis died in
early childhood and few survived to their teenage years. Today, most can expect
to live past 30. Many finish high school and college, get jobs and have
families.

   The difference stems from productive research, the results of persistent
fund-raising efforts and pressure from parents, who established the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation in 1955.

   The research led to an understanding of the way cystic fibrosis causes
life-threatening damage through a chain of events that involves damaged genes,
abnormal tissues and malfunctioning organs.

   This understanding, in turn, has led to the development of preventive
techniques and treatments that can attack every stage of the disease process.
New treatments now in development promise even further gains.

   Some experts predict that within a decade, the lung damage from cystic
fibrosis will be limited by periodic gene therapy in children and young adults.

   Better yet, some say, will be the application of techniques already
technically feasible to correct the defect genetically even before a child is
born, or soon enough afterward to prevent tissue damage. Only then might
researchers begin to talk cautiously of cure.

A Host of Therapies

   Meanwhile, a host of therapies to forestall complications have become the
focus of survival for patients with cystic fibrosis.

   Respiratory physical therapy done two or more times a day to loosen the
thickened mucus, enabling it to be coughed up, is essential to maintaining the
ability of the lungs to transfer oxygen and carbon dioxide.

   In years past, clapping on the chest, back and sides was the only method. Now
the job can be done by inhaled nebulizers, vibration vests and a flutter device
that is blown into, freeing a patient from daily dependence on a lay or
professional therapist.

   Because the thickened mucus is a breeding ground for bacteria, antibiotics
are another critical factor in maintaining pulmonary health. With mucus coating
the small airways in the lungs, the hair cells are unable to clear out invading
bacteria.

   The trick has been staying ahead of the ability of micro-organisms to develop
resistance by continually finding new antibiotics to which they are still
susceptible. The potentially deadly infections mean frequent hospitalizations
for many cystic fibrosis patients. Some have a central line implanted to aid in
the frequent administration of antibiotics.

   Malnutrition is a constant risk because ducts clogged by mucus are unable to
move digestive enzymes to sites where food is broken down and absorbed.

   Thus, enzyme-packed pills to aid digestion and fat-soluble vitamin
supplements (A, D, E and K) are other daily requirements for maintaining the
health of people with the disease.

   Another problem is consuming enough calories to compensate for the effort
expended in breathing with congested lungs.

   Dehydration is yet another risk because the defective gene causes an abnormal
absorption of sodium, dehydrating the lungs and making them more susceptible to
infection. So people with cystic fibrosis have to be even more devoted to water
bottles than aerobics instructors.

   Experts on cystic fibrosis emphasize two other important factors in coping
with the illness: building and maintaining physical stamina and obtaining
psychological support for patients and their families.

   The stronger people are, physically and emotionally, the better able they are
to handle the complications and treatments for the disease.

   But eventually, despite the best therapy available, the lungs of people with
cystic fibrosis become too damaged to sustain life. When that critical time
appears on the horizon, a growing number of patients seek a double-lung
transplant, an operation as risky as a heart transplant.

   Both lungs are needed to prevent the transplanted one from becoming diseased.

   When kidneys fail, dialysis can substitute for kidney function, but nothing
similar exists for the lungs.

   There is no telling when lung failure will occur, necessitating a transplant.
For some, like Stefanie Allen, it happened at age 11. For Charlie Tolchin, it
was 28. For Michael Maggio, it was 40.

   About 3,700 patients are on a lung transplant waiting list nationwide. But
each year only about 1,000 receive transplants. The problem stems from an acute
shortage of viable organs and a limited number of medical centers with staff
members skilled at the procedure.

   The lungs have to be big enough to sustain the recipients. For some patients
who are small, it is possible to use part of the lungs from two live donors,
usually relatives.

   The operation is expensive and risky: 5 percent of patients do not survive
it. Three years after a transplant, 62 percent of the patients are still alive.
The main problem is chronic rejection, which can occur despite the constant use
of complication-prone immune-suppressive drugs. One complication is the
development of lymphoma, a cancer of the lymph system that can be fatal, as it
was for Mr. Maggio at 49.

   Those seeking more information or referrals to cystic fibrosis care centers
throughout the country can contact the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation at 6931
Arlington Road, Bethesda, Md. 20814, by phone at (301) 951-4422 or (800)
344-4823, or check the foundation's Web site, www.cff.org.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart/Diagram: "Cystic Fibrosis"A genetic disease, it affects about
30,000 children and adults in the United States. Faulty transport of salt in and
out of cells lining the lungs and pancreas causes abnormally thick mucus to clog
organs. RESPIRATORY SYSTEMLungs become clogged, leading to recurring lung and
sinus infections and difficulty breathing. PANCREASDucts become obstructed,
preventing digestive enzymes from reaching the intestines. This leads to poor
absorption of nutrients, making it difficult to gain or maintain weight.
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMThick cervical secretions in women may block sperm entry.
Males are almost always sterile because they produce relatively few or no sperm.
Diagram of the Respiratory system and the Pancreas. (Source: Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003


                             961 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: A Genzyme Drug Wins Qualified Support

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Genzyme's experimental drug for Fabry disease won qualified support yesterday
from an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration, increasing the
probability that the drug will be approved.

        The committee was not asked to vote on whether the drug should be
approved. But it did vote, 14 to 1, that the effect observed in clinical trials
made it reasonably likely that patients would be helped by the drug.

    Genzyme is vying with Transkaryotic Therapies, usually called TKT, to win
approval for the first treatment for Fabry disease, a rare hereditary disorder.
Under the Orphan Drug Act, which is intended to spur development of drugs for
rare diseases, the first company to win approval might have the market to itself
for seven years.

   The committee will discuss TKT's drug today. In an analysis released
yesterday, the F.D.A. staff said that the drug, Replagal, did not show a benefit
compared with a placebo in reducing patients' pain or heart or kidney damage.
The F.D.A. staff members found numerous problems in the way TKT conducted its
trial.

   There are about 5,000 people in the world with Fabry disease, a deficiency of
an enzyme. Without that enzyme, a lipid known as GL-3 builds up in the body. The
disease causes pain and heart and kidney problems; patients often die by age 50.

   Both companies use genetic engineering to produce the enzyme that the
patients lack. But Genzyme gives a much higher dose of the enzyme.

   The two companies also conducted their clinical trials differently.

   TKT tried to show that its drug actually decreases pain and kidney and heart
damage, but, according to the F.D.A., did not succeed.

   The trial by Genzyme also showed limited effect on pain and organ damage,
according to the F.D.A. staff. Genzyme's main objective, however, was to show
that its drug, known as Fabrazyme, reduced the levels of the GL-3 lipid in cells
that line certain blood vessels in the kidneys.

   Presumably, keeping the lipid from building up would, over the long run, mean
less pain and organ damage, though that is not a given because the disease is
not well understood. So a chief question for the advisory committee was whether
lowering levels of the lipid was reasonably likely to help patients in the long
run.

   The committee's positive vote on that question could clear the way for
Genzyme to win so-called accelerated approval, in which the F.D.A. grants
permission to sell a drug based on what is known as a surrogate marker. For
instance, AIDS drugs are approved if they reduce the levels of H.I.V. in the
blood because it is presumed that such a reduction will help patients live
longer.

   Still, if such accelerated approval were granted, Genzyme would have to do
more studies to confirm that Fabrazyme actually does decrease pain or organ
damage. Several committee members expressed concern that if the drug were
approved too quickly, a clinical trial that Genzyme is now conducting to answer
those questions could be jeopardized because patients, wanting the drug, would
drop out of the trial so they would not risk receiving a placebo. So there was
some sentiment among committee members that approval be delayed until that trial
progressed further.

   Dan Quinn, a spokesman for Genzyme, said the company was "extremely pleased
with the outcome of the meeting."

   But Dennis Harp, an analyst with Deutsche Bank Securities, said the panel
"certainly fell short of saying the product should be approved today." Mr. Harp,
who attended the meeting, follows TKT and his firm has done investment banking
work for the company.

   Both drugs have been approved in Europe, and American patients have
complained that the F.D.A. has taken too long.

   Trading was halted yesterday in shares of both Genzyme and TKT; both
companies are based in Cambridge, Mass.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003


                             962 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     January 11, 2003 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 021

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: 'Orphan drug' status worth sharing, Transkaryotic says; FDA to review
Fabry medicines

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   As two Cambridge biotechs go head-to-head at the Food and Drug
Administration, each hoping to get exclusive rights to sell a drug to treat rare
Fabry disease cases, one company suggested yesterday that they could share the
U.S. market.

   Responding to Fabry sufferers' concerns, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it
would be willing to share "orphan drug" status with nearby rival Genzyme
General.

   The unusual move came on the eve of an FDA panel's review of Genzyme's
Fabrazyme drug on Monday. Transkaryotic's drug Replagal is slated for a similar
review on Tuesday.

   Both hearings will focus on the safety and efficacy of the drugs and not
whether either would be granted "orphan drug status." That status confers
monopoly rights for seven years to the favored provider.

   A company may get orphan drug status if it is the first to win approval for a
treatment of a rare disease. Fabry disease affects only about 5,000 people in
the world.

   But Fabry patients expressed concern that the orphan drug battle was
interfering with getting a treatment approved and said they want access to both
drugs.

   Transkaryotic "is willing to discuss with the FDA and Genzyme measures to
speed the availability of Replagel to patients with Fabry disease, and that
includes sharing orphan drug exclusivity," a spokeswoman, Justine Koenigsberg,
told Bloomberg News.

   Genzyme responded with a statement that making a drug available takes top
priority.

   "We have been assured by the FDA at every step of this process that both
products are being reviewed on their own merits, and that the orphan drug law is
not in any way slowing down approval of a treatment," the statement said. "We're
focusing all of our attention on getting Fabrazyme approved so that a treatment
will be available to patients soon."

   The companies are also in a court battle over related patents.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2003


                             963 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 11, 2003, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 69 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF / THE REGION;
DRUG FIRM MAKES OFFER

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it is willing to share the US market for
its Fabry disease treatment, Replagal, with rival Genzyme Corp.'s Fabrazyme.
Patients had asked the firms to drop their competing Food and Drug
Administration bids for exclusive US sales of the medicine, said a Transkaryotic
spokeswoman, in order to speed availability of the drugs. An FDA panel will
review both drugs next week.


LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2003


                             964 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 09, 2003, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 26 Medicine

LENGTH: 546 words

HEADLINE: FOCUS: BREAST CANCER;
REPLACING MUTANT GENES;
Drug that attacks cells in tumors is showing promise in study

SOURCE: Special to the Chronicle

BYLINE: DEBORAH MANN LAKE

BODY:

   A gene therapy drug that attacks cancerous tumor cells has shown early
positive results in reducing the size of breast cancer tumors in advance of
surgery or radiation treatment.

   The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center is now studying the drug,
Advexin, in combination with standard chemotherapy treatment.

   "We've had promising results in the 12 patients enrolled in the trial so
far," said Dr. Massimo Cristofanilli, assistant professor in M.D. Anderson's
department of breast medical oncology and the study's principal investigator.
"All have had some sort of response. One important thing is that it's safe.
There are no problems with toxicity because it's not systemic."

   Cancer occurs when defects in genes tell cells to divide uncontrollably until
they can no longer function correctly.

   "It's like removing the brakes in a car," said Dr. Jack Roth, M.D. Anderson
professor and chair, thoracic and cardiovascular surgery, and director of the
W.M. Keck Cancer Center for Cancer Gene Therapy. "Because cancer is a genetic
disease, we try to put back in normal genes."

   A modified cold virus is used to carry the healthy genes into the body.

   "The virus attaches to the cell and delivers the payload," Roth said.

   Advexin, injected directly into the tumor site, replaces damaged
tumor-suppressing p53 genes with healthy genes which researchers believe can
immediately destroy cancer cells as well as attack future ones.

   It has already shown positive results in trials with head and neck cancers.

   "P53 is a very important gene that acts as a guardian and allows the cell to
repair damage to the genes," Roth said. "In addition to killing breast cancer
cells, it may stimulate the immune response to the cancer."

   The breast cancer trial is sponsored by the drug's Houston-based developer,
Introgen Therapeutics Inc.

   "Cancerous tumor cells can become resistant to chemotherapy, so replacing the
mutated p53 gene makes the tumor more sensitive to chemotherapy," Cristofanilli
said. "P53 tells the tumor cells to stop growing."

   The trial will eventually recruit 60 patients with locally advanced breast
cancer, which includes a tumor between 2 and 5 centimeters and cells that have
spread to the lymph nodes.

   Locally advanced breast cancer accounts for up to 15 percent of newly
diagnosed cases. Research has shown that it has a high frequency of damaged p53
genes, which has been associated with decreased survival rates.

   "Generally at that stage, surgery alone or chemotherapy and surgery don't
control the tumor very well," Roth said.

   Patients receive the chemotherapy drugs Taxotere and Taxol with Advexin
during four treatment cycles spaced three weeks apart.

   Houstonian Maxine Johnson, diagnosed with breast cancer in June, said she
didn't hesitate to join the trial after it was explained to her by
Cristofanilli. Breast cancer runs in her family and she has already lost a
sister to the disease.

   "I'm very happy to be part of the trial. The tumor has shrunk an awful lot. I
told Dr. Cristofanilli that I'm his miracle lady," Johnson said.

   The most difficult part of gene therapy is applying results in the lab to the
patient, Cristofanilli said. "This trial is proving the concept that gene
therapy can enhance chemotherapy treatment."


GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Nurse Constance Curvey, left, changes the dressing on Maxine
Johnson's catheter. Johnson was diagnosed with breast cancer in June and is
taking part in a study of the gene therapy drug Advexin, which is being
sponsored by the drug's Houston-based developer, Introgen Therapeutics Inc.; 2.
Dr. Massimo Cristofanilli, assistant professor at M.D.  Anderson's department of
breast medical oconolgy, is the principle investigator in the Advexin study.;
Photos by Karen Warren / Chronicle

NOTES: For information on how to be a participant in the Advexin study, call
713-792-4124.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2003


                             965 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 09, 2003, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 01

LENGTH: 118 words

HEADLINE: INSIDE

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   LOSING IT, PART IV


    Resistance-training devices, such as hand weights, can be an inexpensive way
to update your workout.

   Houston


    SHOOTING CONTROVERSY


    Constable Victor Trevino says his deputies are sure they shot the right man
outside a nightclub last weekend.

   Page 17A


    LATEST IN CANCER WAR


    Doctors at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center say a test of a gene therapy drug
that attacks cancer cells has shown "promising results."

   Page 26A


    MAKING A CASE


    Mickey Herskowitz explains why Elvin Bethea belongs in the Hall of Fame.

   Sports


    FRAUD DOESN'T PAY


    New federal guidelines increase prison sentences for corporate executives
guilty of ripping off investors.

   Business

GRAPHIC: Photo: Weights (color)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2003


                             966 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    January 8, 2003 Wednesday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2D BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 1294 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:

   In the Region

   GenVec Inc. reports disappointing results in gene therapy trial

   GenVec Inc. said yesterday that its gene therapy for treatment of poor blood
flow in the legs did not appear to help patients more than a placebo in a Phase
II clinical trial.

   The Gaithersburg company said it is unlikely to continue development of the
drug, BioBypass-PAD, for peripheral vascular disease but will fully analyze
results before deciding.

   GenVec said it remains optimistic about development of BioBypass CAD, the
name of the same gene therapy when it's used in the heart. Recent Phase II
results for BioBypass CAD showed that patients with severe coronary artery
disease achieved statistically significant improvement in electrocardiogram
results six months after taking it -- an indication that the drug holds promise
for treating heart patients.
POK starts construction on headquarters expansion

   POK of North America Inc., a Cambridge company that makes firefighting
equipment for the fire, marine and hazardous environment industries, has begun
work on a 20,000-square- foot expansion of its headquarters that will house a
new product line and provide jobs for 35 new employees.

   POK will receive a $50,000 training assistance grant from the Maryland
Department of Business and Economic Development to aid the expansion. In return,
POK has pledged to triple its total employment at the Cambridge site by the end
of next year.

   POK, which reported a 35 percent increase in sales for 2001, also has
facilities in France, Germany, Brazil and Japan.
Gilden Integrated receives $4 million marketing pact

   Gilden Integrated said yesterday that it has won a $4 million contract from
UbiquiTel Inc., which provides Sprint digital wireless personal communication
services to midsize markets in the West and Midwest.

   UbiquiTel, based in Conshohocken, Pa., hired the Baltimore agency to handle
all marketing and public relations efforts to increase Sprint brand awareness
among the 11.1 million people covered by the wireless network. The promotions
will target customers in markets in California, Nevada, Washington, Idaho,
Montana, Wyoming, Utah, Indiana, Kentucky and Tennessee.
Schmidt Baking gives store to Shenandoah University

   Schmidt Baking Co. Inc. of Baltimore has given its former Martinsburg, W.Va.,
bakery and retail store property to Shenandoah University. The gift is worth an
estimated $1.3 million.

   The bakery was closed shortly after H&S Bakery Inc., also of Baltimore,
bought a majority stake in Schmidt Baking in 1999 and began consolidating
operations in a bid to boost profits. Short-term plans call for the university,
in Winchester, Va., to lease the retail store and about 17,000 square feet of
space in the former bakery back to Schmidt. The company uses space in the bakery
for warehouse and distribution purposes.

   Eventually, university officials hope to lease the rest of the space to other
tenants or possibly seek a buyer for the property, said Bradley C. Snowden,
director of planned and major gifts for the university. Proceeds would be used
to pay for university programs.

   Elsewhere
Chrysler decides against renewal of Stewart ad pact

   DaimlerChrysler AG's Chrysler Group has decided not to extend an advertising
agreement with Martha Stewart's media company and will enlist Canadian singer
Celine Dion to help the automaker sell vehicles.

   Chrysler has been running a 12-page advertising and editorial insert in the
magazine Martha Stewart Living.

   Chrysler spokesman James Kenyon said yesterday that the company made the
decision to end its agreement with Stewart before the scandal emerged.
Chrysler's contract with Stewart ends in March.

   The Justice Department is investigating whether Stewart lied to congressional
investigators about her sale of nearly 4,000 shares in ImClone Systems Inc. on
Dec. 27, 2001 -- the day before the FDA publicly said it would not review
ImClone's application for its colon cancer drug, Erbitux. The home decorating
entrepreneur, who has not been charged, has denied wrongdoing.
Oracle would consider dividend if taxes lifted

   Oracle Corp.'s board of directors would consider paying a regular dividend if
taxes on them were lifted, Jeffrey Henley, chief financial officer of the
database software giant, said yesterday.

   Oracle, which has more than $5 billion in cash and short-term investments,
has never paid a dividend. It has used excess cash to repurchase shares, since
stock buybacks were "more tax efficient," Henley said.

   "It's quite likely (the board) will have to reconsider our policy," Henley
said at an investor conference in New York. "I think (eliminating the dividend
tax) would have a significant impact on our thought process."
United, US Airways begin sharing passengers

   United Airlines and US Airways, both restructuring in bankruptcy court,
became partners in the sky yesterday when they began sharing passengers on 192
daily flights.

   The code-sharing arrangement, which comes two years after a failed merger
attempt by the two, is aimed at raising badly needed revenue and keeping rivals
from moving in on the struggling carriers' business.

   The partnership allows the airlines to sell tickets on each other's flights,
coordinate schedules and offer reciprocal perks such as frequent flier miles and
use of either carrier's airport lounges.
Chrysler Group announces vehicle financial incentives

   DaimlerChrysler AG's Chrysler arm revealed its latest round of incentives
yesterday, after similar announcements from Ford Motor Co. and General Motors
Corp.

   Starting yesterday, Chrysler began offering zero percent financing for five
years or cash back on some 2003 models, including the Concord, Intrepid, 300M
and Durango; zero percent financing for three years or cash back on models such
as the Jeep Grand Cherokee, the Liberty and Wrangler; and 3.9 percent financing
for 72 months on the Caravan and Town & Country minivans. The cash-back offers
range from $1,500 to $3,000.

   The incentives end Feb. 28.
CEO of Filene's Basement resigns post held since '00

   The chief executive of Filene's Basement has resigned, apparently because of
differing views with its parent company over how the discount retailer should be
run.

   Alan R. Schlesinger, who stepped down Monday, was tapped as the CEO in 2000
after Columbus, Ohio-based Value City Department Stores bought the famed
discount chain. Schlesinger helped return Filene's Basement to profitability
after it filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 2000.

   The parting was amicable, said James A. McGrady, Value City's chief financial
officer, who noted that Schlesinger's resignation was not related to holiday
sales.
Honeywell buys supplier of aircraft cabin services

   Honeywell International Inc. said yesterday that it acquired the assets of
Baker Electronics Inc., a supplier of aircraft cabin services, for an
undisclosed sum.

   Honeywell said the company will be named Honeywell Cabin Management Systems &
Services and will provide business jet passengers with inflight offerings, such
as high-speed Internet access and audio/video conferencing. It will continue to
be based in Sarasota, Fla.
Cracker Barrel workers get setback in bias lawsuit

   A federal magistrate has recommended that class action status be denied in a
lawsuit filed by black Cracker Barrel restaurant employees who say they were
segregated from white workers and generally received "back of the house"
assignments such as cook and dishwasher.

   The decision, filed in U.S. District Court in Rome, Ga., is another setback
for workers who filed lawsuits against the Lebanon, Tenn.-based chain.

   This column was compiled from reports by Sun staff writers, the Associated
Press and Bloomberg News.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2003


                             967 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 8, 2003, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BIOTECHNOLOGY; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: IN THE PIPELINE;
TKT SHARES FALL 18% ON PATENT RULING

BYLINE: BY JEFFREY KRASNER and GLOBE WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge fell $1.79, or nearly 18
percent, to close at $8.21 after a US Appeals Court upheld an earlier ruling
that TKT's Dynepo anemia drug infringed on two patents from Amgen Inc., the
California biotech giant. However, TKT won the right to challenge allegations it
infringed on other Amgen patents. The ruling upheld a lower court's decision
that Amgen's patents cover a method of processing a human protein from mammal
cells. In a statement, Dr. Richard F. Selden, TKT's president and chief
executive, called the decision "encouraging" adding, "We believe it represents a
major step in the right direction towards making Dynepo available to patients
who can benefit from our therapy." Shares in Amgen slipped 3 cents to close at
$50.24.

    BIOGEN LOOKS TO HIKE EARNINGS 20%

   Biogen Inc., whose Avonex drug is used to treat relapsing multiple sclerosis,
plans to increase earnings by an average of 20 percent over the next three years
by improving operating margins. Cambridge-based Biogen, which had $1.04 billion
in sales in 2001, is trying to double revenue over the next three years, chief
executive James Mullen said.

   Cambridge-based Biogen had net income of $272.7 million in 2001 and hasn't
yet reported 2002 full-year results.    NITROMED, MERCK IN DEVELOPMENT DEAL

   NitroMed Inc. of Bedford said it formed a collaboration with drug giant Merck
& Co. to develop medicines based on nitric oxide. Merck, of Whitehouse Station,
N.J., will pay NitroMed an undisclosed upfront fee, payments for research
milestones, and royalties on any possible drug sales. Merck will handle
commercialization of any possible products. NitroMed's Bidil, a treatment
intended to help African-American patients with heart failure, is in pivotal
clinical trials.  PFIZER, CURAGEN IN SCREENING VENTURE

   Pfizer Inc. of New York will collaborate with CuraGen Corp. of New Haven to
screen compounds being developed by Pfizer. Under the deal, Pfizer will use two
of CuraGen's drug screening tools. One helps predict whether prospective drugs
will create toxic side effects for patients before expensive, clinical trials
are conducted. A second tool looks at how drugs work within the body to identify
alternative targets that could provide safer or more effective treatments. Terms
of the deal were not disclosed.  OXIGENE BEGINS TRIALS OF TUMOR DRUG

   OxiGene Inc. of Watertown said it began a phase 1 and 2 trial of a drug
candidate intended to block the flow of blood to malignant tumors, thereby
denying them nutrients for growth. The study will use the drug, Combretastatin
A4 Prodrug, in combination with radiation therapy in patients with advanced
cancer of the lung, head, neck, and prostate. Several other trials of the drug
candidate are also underway.  GENZYME QUARTERLY REVENUE UP 12%

   Genzyme Corp. chief executive Henri Termeer said fourth-quarter revenues from
the General Division rose 12 percent, in part because of sales of Cerazyme
treatment for Gaucher disease and Fabrazyme for Fabry disease. Revenue rose to
$297 million from $265 million in the same period the prior year. Full financial
results for the quarter will be announced March 5.  CARDIOTECH WOUND PRODUCT
WINS OK

   CardioTech International Inc. of Woburn said it received marketing approval
from the Food and Drug Administration for its unique hydrogel wound-dressing
antibiotic. The dressing is designed to absorb fluid from wounds without
adhering directly to the skin.  SIDEBAR: BIOTECH 20 DEC. 31-JAN. 7 PLEASE REFER
TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2003


                             968 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2003 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           January 8, 2003 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEW JERSEY; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 733 words

HEADLINE: Heart patient tries a new route

BYLINE: ANGELA STEWART, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Hemendra Shah of East Brunswick had undergone both angioplasty and quadruple
bypass surgery to help relieve his chest pain. He got relief - but only
temporarily. After suffering a heart attack last summer, the 56-year-old Shah
was told by his doctors at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New
Brunswick that further surgery would not help.

   Believing he had nothing to lose, Shah agreed to enroll in a national gene
therapy experiment designed to help heart patients whom traditional therapies
have failed. Called Ad5FGF-4, the gene product is designed to stimulate the
body's natural ability to grow new blood vessels in the heart, providing
alternate paths for oxygen-rich blood to flow around narrowed or blocked
arteries.

   "If it works, I think it will be very exciting. It's a natural way of growing
something that's not foreign to the body," said Abel Moreyra, director of the
Heart Center at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital and a professor of
medicine at the UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School.

   Shah called it a "win-win" situation, even if it does not necessarily mean a
successful outcome for him.

    "There was really no other alternative for me," he said. "If it works and I
do grow more vessels, fine. If not, maybe a lot of other people will get
benefits out of it."

   Gene therapy, while promising, is also controversial. An investigation is
currently under way into how a 3-year-old French boy whose deadly immune system
disorder was cured by gene therapy also ended up getting a leukemia-like disease
from the treatment last year. Four years ago, an 18-year-old Tucson teenager
with a liver disorder died while enrolled in a gene therapy study being
conducted by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Shah says the patient consent process at Robert Wood for the Phase III trial
he enrolled in was very thorough, so he knew what he was getting into. He does
not recall doctors discussing any adverse outcomes associated with other gene
therapy trials, but he is not worried either.

   "They talked to me only about this protocol. That has nothing to do with
other trials," said Shah, a married former diamond wholesaler who once traveled
the country, but is now unable to work.

   Since he received the one-time injection into his heart during a procedure in
the hospital's catherization lab last month - a procedure that carried its own
risks - Shah said he has experienced no further chest pain.

   "I feel energetic," he said the other day after a checkup.

   Years from now, when the study is concluded and the results published, Shah
will learn whether he actually got the gene therapy. Because the study is double
blind, there are two groups of patients involved - those who are injected with
Ad5FGF-4 and those who get a placebo. Neither the patients nor doctors know who
is getting the real thing.

   Shah, who still takes medication for his heart, will be monitored during
regular clinical visits for one year and followed afterward to determine the
long-term effects of the therapy. Berlex Laboratories, the California
manufacturer of the gene product, has an office in Montville. It is looking to
enroll up to 450 patients in its study at about 75 centers, including hospitals
such as Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota. Robert Wood
Johnson is the only New Jersey site.

   John Rade, the lead investigator for the trial at Johns Hopkins, is
optimistic about the therapy's ability to help patients who have failed surgery.
He also feels it is unfair to compare this gene therapy trial with the French
trial involving the 3-year-old.

   "Just like there are many types of surgeries, there are many types of gene
therapies and these two were completely different," he said. "You can't say all
gene therapy is 'bad.'"

   While the case of 18-year-old Jessie Gelsinger, the Tucson liver patient, did
involve a gene product similar to the one being used in the trials at Robert
Wood Johnson and Johns Hopkins, Rade said the dosage now being used is much
lower.

   He conceded that two Johns Hopkins patients involved in earlier phases of the
trial of Ad5FGF-4 did develop cancer, although he said an investigation by
outside experts determined that the cancer was likely already present in their
bodies at the time they enrolled in the study.

   Angela Stewart writes about health care. She can be reached by e- mail at
astewart@starledger.com or by calling (973) 392-4178.

GRAPHIC: 1. Michael Cargill, cardiology research coordinator at Robert Wood
Johnson University Hospital, takes the blood pressure of Hemendra Shah of East
Brunswick after the heart patient's stress test.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             969 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           January 8, 2003 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: GenVec May Drop Leg Artery Treatment;
Therapy Could Still Aid Heart Patients

BYLINE: Michael Barbaro, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   GenVec Inc., a Gaithersberg biotechnology company, said yesterday that it is
likely to abandon an experimental treatment for poor blood circulation in the
legs after it failed to prove effective in human tests. The move would
significantly reduce the potential market for BioBypass, a gene-based product
designed to trigger new blood vessel growth.

   BioBypass did not benefit patients with inadequate blood flow significantly
more than did a placebo, the company said. The early-stage test included 107
patients who suffered from a hardening or obstruction of the leg arteries, a
painful condition that increases the risk of heart attack and stroke.

   GenVec's apparent desertion of BioBypass as a treatment for leg arteries
still leaves the company with a shot at commercializing it as a medication for
chronic heart disease, said Alexander A. Hittle, an analyst at A.G. Edwards &
Sons Inc., which has an investment banking relationship with GenVec. In
November, the company said human tests showed that BioBypass was a safe and
effective treatment for the heart condition.

   The results were less impressive for patients given BioBypass for clogged leg
arteries. Test subjects walked the same distances on a treadmill as those
treated with a placebo, said Henrik S. Rasmussen, senior vice president of
clinical research at GenVec. Endurance while walking on a treadmill -- which
produces acute leg pain in those with poor blood flow -- is the principal
measure of the treatment's success. Previous tests of BioBypass in patients with
clogged leg arteries showed encouraging results but lacked a large group of
patients who took placebos.

    "This was a large part of the cardiovascular market," said GenVec
spokeswoman Mary P. Sundeen. "Now we are left to focus on the heart."

   Before GenVec can obtain Food and Drug Administration approval for BioBypass
as a heart disease treatment, the drug will require extensive human testing,
which could take years.

   Doctors inject BioBypass directly into damaged human tissue in a process
known as gene therapy. GenVec would not release precise data from the most
recent tests but said doctors injected patients with BioBypass 20 times.

   Without BioBypass for use in the legs, GenVec will have one less treatment to
lure potential business partners. Besides BioBypass, GenVec is developing only
two other products: TNFerade for cancer and PEDF for blindness.

   With about $ 23.5 million in cash and short- and long-term investments,
according to its Sept. 30, 2002, filings with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, GenVec has about a year's worth of cash on hand. Shares of GenVec
closed yesterday at $ 2.84, down 8 percent.

   GenVec chief executive Paul H. Fischer has said the company plans to push
forward with larger human tests of BioBypass in patients with severe coronary
artery disease.

   Last year, Pfizer Inc., the world's largest drugmaker, ended an agreement
with GenVec to co-develop BioBypass. At the time, Pfizer said it was a business
decision, not a scientific one.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2003


                             970 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      January 7, 2003 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 026

LENGTH: 398 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   State Street seeing loyalty

   PHOENIX - State Street Corp. may keep more customers than expected after it
wraps up buying Deutsche Bank AG's record-keeping and securities lending unit by
March 31, said David Spina, the Boston company's chief executive.

   While analysts expected three out of four clients to leave when current
contracts expire, Spina said that customers in Europe are proving more loyal to
the Deutsche Bank name than had been anticipated. - BLOOMBERG

   Fed changes take effect

   WASHINGTON - The Federal Reserve put in place yesterday changes it unveiled
last October, announcing new rates for certain loans designed to bring to an end
the Fed practice of making emergency loans to banks at subsidized, below-market
rates, while still ensuring institutions have ready access to funds during
catastrophes. - REUTERS

   Charles River shares slip

   Charles River Laboratories International Inc. shares fell 11 percent, to $
33.70, after the Wilmington company said yesterday that it made slightly less
than estimates in October. The company, which provides animal research and
testing services to drug makers, reported a profit of $ 1.41 to $ 1.42 a share,
off by a cent. - STAFF

   Lord & Taylor stays put

   Lord & Taylor will extend its long-term lease for its Prudential Center
department store with Pru owner Boston Properties, the two companies said
yesterday.  The lease extension ends speculation that Jordan's Furniture might
take over the lease for the 125,000-square-foot store. - STAFF

   Transkaryotic loses

   A U.S. Court of Appeals ruled yesterday that an anemia treatment developed by
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. infringes on two of Amgen Inc.'s patents.  But the
higher court also said Transkaryotic can argue again that three Amgen patents
are invalid. - STAFF

   Raytheon deal modified

   Lexington-based Raytheon Co. won a $ 265.8 million contract modification from
the U.S. Army for development and testing of Excalibur precision-guided
projectiles for the United States and Sweden. - STAFF

   Tenet accepts new rules

   LOS ANGELES - Tenet Healthcare Corp., facing a federal inquiry into its
Medicare billing practices, said yesterday that it will voluntarily adopt new
guidelines for determining supplemental Medicare payments. Tenet is being
audited by federal authorities over its aggressive pricing, which has led to
above-average outlier payments. - AP

LOAD-DATE: January 07, 2003


                             971 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2003 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                    January 7, 2003 Tuesday No dot Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 529 words

HEADLINE: ;
Granholm inauguration was just the ticket to party

BYLINE: Michael H. Margolin

BODY:

   DETROIT The party to celebrate the inauguration of Michigan's 47th governor,
Jennifer Granholm, was more of a celebration than a political event.

   While a crowd of 3,000 watched, the governor danced the hustle with Detroit
Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick and U.S. Court of Appeals Judge Damon J. Keith Saturday
night at Ford Field.

   Partygoers, ranging from GenXers to octogenarians, were fueled on diverse
Michigan fare that included pierogi, duck salad with Michigan berries and fudge.

   Women are in the driver's seat

   American Woman Road &; Travel, a publication that specializes in automotive
and travel news for women, tossed a party at the Detroit Marriott to celebrate
their 2003 automotive awards.

   More than 500 guests from politics, business and the auto industry were there
as BMW's Mini Cooper received three awards including "Car of the Year."

   What's coming up

   Northeast Guidance Center Afterglow Bowling Under the Stars, 7:30 p.m. Friday
at the Country Club of Detroit in Grosse Pointe Farms. The optional black-tie
affair includes cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and dinner, '60s, '70s and '80s
entertainment and a club bowling alley. Tickets are $125. Proceeds support
Children's Services at Northeast Guidance Center. Call (313) 881-0325.

   Circle of Friends VII luncheon will be Jan. 16 at the Townsend Hotel in
Birmingham. The event, sponsored by the Child Abuse and Neglect Council of
Oakland County, begins with a reception at 11:30 a.m. Patron level tickets are
$150 ($65 for luncheon only). (248) 332-7173.

   Visions to Remember: Eyes on Antiques -- Antiques Show &; Sale Preview Party
is Feb. 7 at the Edsel &; Eleanor Ford House Activities Center in Grosse Pointe
Shores. Special $100 and $150 preview tickets include a presentation at 6 p.m.
($50 preview tickets also available for entrance at 6:30 p.m.) Proceeds will
benefit the Detroit Institute of Ophthalmology. Call (313) 824-4710.

   Sixth annual Red Heart Blues ... and All That Jazz! The fund-raiser is 6 p.m.
Feb. 8 at the Ford Motor Co. Conference and Event Center in Dearborn. The
evening will feature dinner, dancing, a live and silent auction, and an awards
presentation. Tickets are $250 patron, $350 benefactor, $500 gold and $1,000
platinum sponsorship. Proceeds will benefit research and treatment for the
prevention and cure of cardiovascular disease, with emphasis on molecular gene
therapy. Call (313) 876-9259.

   The Snow Ball, black-tie dinner presented by Variety -- The Children's
Charity, will be at 6:30 p.m. Feb. 22 at the Townsend Hotel Ballroom in
Birmingham. The theme, Moulin Rouge, will feature an evening of 19th century
Paris frivolity with French cuisine, a live auction, floor show, dancing,
festivities, and musical entertainment. Tickets are $225 per person, $300 per
Patron, and $500 per Benefactor. A Patron Party will be held Feb. 6 at the home
of Janie and Michael Roth in Bloomfield Hills. Call (248) 258-5511.

   St. Joseph's Mercy of Macomb Medallion Ball will be Feb. 22 at Penna's of
Sterling. Proceeds from the black-tie affair will benefit Women's Health
Services. Tickets are $175. Call (586) 466-9420.

CORRECTION:
Jack Pitney is general manager of Mini USA. His company was misidentified in a
photo caption on Page 3D of Tuesday's Features section. (January 9, 2003 A2)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2003


                             972 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 7, 2003 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 790 words

HEADLINE: California;
Amgen Is Dealt a Setback in Patent Infringement Dispute;
Appeals court sends Epogen case back for reconsideration,leaving door open for
the maker of a rival drug.

BYLINE: Denise Gellene, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   A federal appeals court Monday handed Amgen Inc. a setback in the
long-running dispute over patents covering Epogen, the Thousand Oaks-based
company's best-selling drug.

   The U.S. Court of Appeals returned the case to federal district court in
Boston, where Amgen prevailed over rival Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. last
January.

   In a 68-page decision, the appellate court said it agreed with the lower
court's ruling that Transkaryotic's Dynepo infringed two Amgen patents. But the
higher court said that District Judge William Young "misapplied the law" when he
declared the Amgen patents valid.

   At stake is the $2-billion-plus market for Epogen, a genetically engineered
copy of erythropoietin, the protein that spurs red blood cell production. But
the case also has been seen as a test of how much protection a company can
expect for its fundamental discoveries. Amgen has argued that if Transkaryotic
won, it could use its alternative technology to copy virtually any biotechnology
drug.

   Amgen produces its drug in hamster cells. Transkaryotic uses human cells.

   The lower-court case involved five Amgen patents. Young, in his ruling last
January, found that Transkaryotic infringed three of them. But the appeals
court, besides questioning the validity of two patents, told Young to reexamine
whether the third patent was valid and infringed.

   Among other things, the appeals court told Young to weigh discoveries that
predated Amgen's patents. One deals with a way of fusing cells to derive
erythropoietin, and another concerns the synthesis of naturally occurring
erythropoietin from human urine.

   The court decision almost certainly delays a final resolution of the dispute,
which Amgen Chief Executive Kevin Sharer described at an investors conference in
San Francisco on Monday as one of the biggest concerns facing the company.

   But time is on the side of Amgen, the world's largest biotechnology company,
which has in its arsenal a second-generation version of Epogen that is injected
less frequently. Transkaryotic isn't making money and has had regulatory
setbacks with its experimental drug for Fabry's disease, which would be its
first medication in the United States.

   Transkaryotic and its marketing partner Aventis have won approval to sell
Dynepo in some European countries, but they have not done so because
Transkaryotic's factory is in the U.S. The companies have said they won't market
in Europe until Transkaryotic's dispute with Amgen is resolved.

   Transkaryotic spokeswoman Justine Koenigsberg said the company's legal team
was reviewing the decision but was "encouraged" by it. Transkaryotic was
supported in its appeal by the Consumer Federation of America and the National
Organization for Rare Disorders, which said the public would benefit from new
technology and competitive pricing.

   Amgen Chief Financial Officer Richard Nanula and general counsel Steven M.
Odre described the ruling as a partial victory for Amgen. Odre said the appeals
court significantly narrowed the outstanding issues left to be decided in the
case and that Amgen must win on only one issue to prevail.

   In addition, he noted, the appeals court directed Young to reconsider his
previous decision that two other Amgen patents were not infringed.

   "I don't feel like we lost anything," Nanula said. "There was quite a bit
more in our favor than was not."

   The appeals court decision came after the markets closed. In regular Nasdaq
trading, Amgen closed up $1.08 at $50.27 and Transkaryotic rose 1 cent, closing
at $10. In after-hours trading, Amgen rose as high as $51.99 and Transkaryotic
fell as low as $9.

   Separately, Amgen emerged Monday as a possible candidate to partner with
Scios Inc. on an experimental drug for arthritis and other inflammatory
diseases. Scios executives said at an investors conference that the Sunnyvale,
Calif., biotechnology company had narrowed discussions to fewer than five
candidates and that the list included large pharmaceutical firms and
biotechnology companies that market arthritis medications.

   Amgen is the only large biotechnology company with such a drug. The Scios
drug is in the second of three phases of human testing required for Food and
Drug Administration approval but already is seen by analysts as a potential
multibillion-dollar drug and a formidable future competitor to Amgen's Enbrel,
which is used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.

   Sharer declined to comment when asked if Amgen was in discussions with Scios.
Analysts on Monday said Merck & Co. or Pfizer Inc. are more likely partners for
Scios, since the two big firms have expertise making medications in pill form
and market the two largest arthritis drugs. Merck markets Vioxx and Pfizer is
acquiring Pharmacia Corp., which markets Celebrex.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2003


                             973 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 7, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: A Mixed Victory for Amgen in Patent Case

BYLINE:  Bloomberg News

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6

BODY:

   A federal appeals court upheld a ruling today that stops Transkaryotic
Therapies and Aventis from selling a rival to Amgen's anemia medication Epogen,
which has sales of $2 billion a year.

        The decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit upheld a lower judge's ruling that Transkaryotic's Dynepo drug infringed
on two Amgen patents.

   But it was not a total victory for Amgen. The appeals court also said
Transkaryotic can argue again that three Amgen patents are invalid.

    A Transkaryotic spokeswoman, Justine Koenigsberg, said today: "We are very
encouraged by the opinion. Our attorneys have just received the decision. They
are reviewing it now and will have comments in the near future." Officials with
Amgen did not immediately return calls seeking comment.

   A federal district judge in Boston, William G. Young, ruled last year that
Transkaryotic's Dynepo infringed three Amgen patents and blocked its sale. The
judge invalidated a fourth patent and ruled that Transkaryotic did not infringe
a fifth patent. Both sides appealed.

   The appeals court upheld Judge Young's interpretation of the patents. When
the case returns to him, Transkaryotic can argue that there are previous
inventions that would make three patents invalid.

   The dispute centers on a method of producing the human protein erythropoietin
from mammal cells in a way that has therapeutic uses. Amgen argues that its
scientists invented the method that can be used for treating anemia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2003


                             974 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             January 6, 2003 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part 6; Features Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2039 words

HEADLINE: What's coming up in the world of new therapies;
This year, we can look forward to a host of better drugsand heart and cancer
treatments. But we're likely to pay more too.

BYLINE: Jane E. Allen and Linda Marsa, Times Staff Writers

BODY:

   Even the most astute prognosticator probably would not have predicted that
2002 would bring a cruise-ship crisis spawned by a virus called Norwalk, a
smallpox vaccination for the president and controversy over a religious sect's
claim to have produced the first human clone. Perhaps 2003 will bring even
bigger surprises.

   There are, however, a few sure bets for the year ahead: the biggest crop of
new drugs in years, a revolutionary new treatment for coronary artery disease
and spiraling medical costs that will pinch consumers' pocketbooks. Plus there's
the prospect -- many say, a very good likelihood -- that Congress may finally do
something about expanding prescription drug benefits for U.S. seniors.

   "There will continue to be a strong and ongoing concern about health-care
costs everywhere and by everybody," said Drew Altman, president of the Henry J.
Kaiser Family Foundation, a Menlo Park, Calif.-based philanthropic and health
policy organization. "Every employer and every state and county government will
do something to address rising heath-care costs."

   Rising costs will probably bring about a number of changes. Double-digit
medical inflation will mean higher insurance premiums and out-of-pocket expenses
for consumers, whether they get health coverage through their employers or
purchase it themselves. There will be increased pressure on doctors, hospitals
and other medical organizations to justify their fees, experts said, and perhaps
a legislative push to regulate fees charged by private health plans. And the
combination of higher medical costs and a still-struggling economy is likely to
swell the ranks of the state's uninsured, as smaller businesses drop coverage
for their workers and government health programs, such as Medi-Cal, face budget
cutbacks.

   In 2003, other key developments will involve new technologies and medications
for illnesses such as heart disease, depression, impotence and influenza. Here
are a few of them:

   Heart disease

   A new medical device -- a tiny drug-coated stent about the size of the spring
in a ballpoint pen -- is about to revolutionize the treatment of coronary artery
disease.

   By delivering medication directly into the arteries, this new stent promises
to make angioplasty a more effective and longer-lasting treatment for people
with severe chest pain or heart attacks.

   Although angioplasties have spared millions of patients the risks and pain of
open-heart surgery, the procedures often fail. Up to 40% of the arteries cleared
by angioplasty and propped open with standard metal mesh stents became
re-clogged with scar tissue, forcing patients to undergo repeat angioplasties --
or, in some cases, the bypass surgery they hoped to avoid.

   Hoping to overcome this problem, researchers developed a coated stent that
drastically reduces the rate of re-clogging, called restenosis, after
angioplasty. These stents are coated with medications that help to prevent the
buildup of scar tissue that may eventually impede blood flow.

   The Food and Drug Administration is expected to approve Johnson & Johnson's
Cypher stent before April. The Cypher is coated with the antibiotic rapamycin
(Sirolimus), which has been used previously to prevent rejection in kidney
transplants. In a couple of European studies, none of the cardiac patients given
Sirolimus-coated stents developed restenosis. In a U.S. study of more than 1,100
patients, the coated stents reduced re-clogging inside the stent by 91%. The
researchers also reported a 67% reduction in cardiac-related deaths, heart
attacks or subsequent artery- clearing procedures nine months after the stents
were put in place. The numbers were so good that federal health officials agreed
Medicare will pay for the coated stents.

   However, with Johnson & Johnson expected to charge about $3,200 for the
Cypher, at least $2,000 more than traditional stents, there are growing concerns
that the coated device could drive up health-care costs, even while saving money
in the long run.

   Patient safety

   As many as 20% of Americans have experienced some kind of medical error,
according to a 2002 report from the Commonwealth Fund, a nonprofit health-care
philanthropy. Several other reports have shed light on the thousands of
preventable errors in medicine and surgery that occur every year, such as
doctors amputating the wrong foot or patients dying after being given the wrong
medication.

   As of Wednesday, an influential hospital accrediting group required
health-care facilities to take steps to reduce such mistakes. The Joint
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations is requiring the
nation's more than 17,000 hospitals and health-care clinics to improve in six
major areas: identifying patients, communication among caregivers, wrong-site
surgery, medication mix-ups, problems with equipment alarms and the unsafe use
of pumps that deliver medications into the bloodstream.

   The new rules require that health-care providers double-check patient
identification to make sure they have the right person before performing blood
tests or giving medications. Those might include checking the patient's name,
home telephone number or ID number on a hospital wristband. They're supposed to
reduce the chance of surgical mix-ups by creating a verification process, such
as a checklist, before any surgery or medical procedure; by marking surgical
sites and by making sure the patient is alert and involved in the marking before
surgery proceeds.

   Drugs

   As in the past, some of the most important medical news will involve
prescription drugs -- and this is especially true this year. The Food and Drug
Administration is expected to approve 40% more new drugs in 2003 compared with
last year, said C. Anthony Butler, a drug industry analyst for Lehman Bros. in
New York.

   These drugs hold promise for millions of Americans who suffer from
depression, cancer, impotence, psoriasis and other afflictions. While it can be
tricky predicting which drugs are likely to receive FDA approval, several
breakthrough medicines have completed pre-market testing and are awaiting final
clearance.

   Two of the first drugs expected to make their debut are FluMist, the first
inhaled influenza vaccine, and Amevive, a psoriasis medication that relieves
symptoms in an entirely new way. Amevive works by halting the underlying immune
system reaction that triggers the itching, scaling and redness that typifies
this condition. Later in the year, Raptiva, a similarly acting psoriasis drug,
will probably be approved as well.

   In addition, bestselling prescription remedies, including the antibiotic
Cipro, the sleep aid Sonata, and the wrinkle cream Renova, will lose their
patent protection, which means that cheaper generic versions should be
available. And Prilosec, the popular ulcer medication that recently went off
patent, is expected to be available in an over-the-counter version.

   Here's a look at some other promising medications that, at this time, look
like good bets for approval in 2003.

   Impotence: Two new drugs, Cialis and Levitra, may finally make their debut
this year, challenging Viagra in the impotence treatment category. Cialis, which
is already approved in Europe, has been shown to last up to three times longer
than Viagra, up to 36 hours. And Levitra is said to work about twice as fast as
Viagra, in 20 minutes compared with about 40 minutes for the rival drug. Also,
both new drugs have been found to have fewer side effects than Viagra.

   Depression: For many of the 18 million Americans who suffer from depression,
drugs such as Prozac have been lifesavers. But these medications typically take
two to four weeks to become effective, and some patients get frustrated and quit
before that. Also, up to two-thirds of depression sufferers derive little or no
benefit from these treatments.

   But a new antidepressant, Cymbalta, which is expected to be available in the
first half of 2003, may help these patients. This novel antidepressant enhances
levels of two brain chemicals that regulate mood, norepinephrine and serotonin.
In contrast, popular antidepressants, like Prozac and Paxil, only boost levels
of serotonin. Cymbalta also works faster. Tests show depressed patients
experience a significant improvement in their mood within a week.

   ADHD: Medication can help children with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder, which by some estimates may affect up to 5% of school-age kids. But
parents often have a tough time getting their child to take pills twice a day,
especially given the stigma attached to the drugs normally used to treat this
disorder.

   The MethyPatch, a daily skin patch that dispenses methylphenidate (the active
ingredient in established ADHD treatments such as Ritalin), may give parents
another option. The discreet patch can be worn on the hip for 12 hours. The
patch also will enable children to control their dosages: The patch can be
removed earlier in the day if they get too edgy, or in the evening if they have
trouble sleeping.

   Cancer: Lung cancer is one of the toughest cancers to treat because it's
normally not diagnosed until the cancer is advanced. But for the 169,500
Americans expected to be diagnosed with lung cancer this year, a new drug,
Iressa, may offer some hope.

   This novel cancer drug interferes with the molecular switches responsible for
tumor growth. In studies of patients with metastatic lung cancer, whose tumors
had spread to the other lung or another organ, the medication shrank tumors by
at least half in about 10% of test subjects.

   While the results seem modest, Iressa is considered a significant advance
since few patients with metastatic disease respond to treatment. The drug is
also the first in an anticipated wave of similarly acting drugs, like ImClone's
Erbitux, that precisely target cancer cells at the molecular level, rather than
killing healthy tissues, too, like today's toxic chemotherapies.

   Contraception: A new drug called Seasonale will make birth-control pills more
convenient for many women. Seasonale is taken for 84 consecutive days, then
stopped, which induces a menstrual period. Under the regimen, women have four
periods a year instead of 13. The drug, made by Barr Laboratories, is under
review by the Food and Drug Administration. Besides the convenience of reduced
menstrual cycles, Seasonale may be helpful to women who experience disorders
related to menstruation, such as anemia, premenstrual tension and pain.

   Prescriptions: Getting prescriptions properly filled may also be easier, as
more health-care providers adopt electronic prescription systems, in which
prescriptions are sent instantly to pharmacies. This will make dispensing drugs
more efficient and eliminate medication errors caused by doctors' illegible
handwriting or confusion about similarly named drugs.

   "Technology will continue to play a more and more important role," says Viren
Mehta of Meh- ta Partners, an independent health-care advisory firm in New York.
"In the future, doctors may even have prescriptions filled in Mexico or Canada,
and then couriered over to patients, maximizing the saving opportunities."

   In other developments, gene therapy and cloning will continue to make
headlines with their promise of dramatic advances in the treatment of disease
and reproductive technology. And innovations that may find their ways into homes
and doctors' offices this year will range from the first wheelchair that can
climb stairs to a vitamin-size pill that doubles as a tiny camera to take
pictures of the small intestine. The wheelchair, called STEPS, carries an
estimated price tag of $52,000. The pill-camera, dubbed the M2A, reportedly
costs $450, plus about $1,000 for the exam.

   "Increasingly, people are going to be asked to pay for these things out of
their own pocket and that will lead to a reality check," said Dr. Mark D. Smith,
president of the California Healthcare Foundation, an Oakland-based health
philanthropy. "These shiny toys and zippy new drugs that may be 5% better than
the old ones but cost five times as much will require someone to make decisions
about whether these are new things worth payingfor. And no matter what the
decisions, someone won't like it."

   Times staff writer David Olmos contributed to this article.

GRAPHIC:  FOR ULCERS: Prilosec is expected to be available in an
over-the-counter version.
 BREAKTHROUGHS IN CARDIOLOGY: Angioplasties have spared millions of patients the
risks and pain of open-heart surgery, but a new coated stent could increase
success rates. PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press
 IRESSA: A new drug offers help for lung cancer patients. PHOTOGRAPHER: P.
BERNDT

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2003


                             975 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 5, 2003, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 4843 words

HEADLINE: THIS STORY HAS BEEN SPLIT INTO TWO PARTS BECAUSE OF ITS SIZE.  THIS IS
THE SECOND PART. Charles P. Pierce is a member of the Globe Magazine staff.;
KENNEDY UNBOUND AFTER 40 YEARS IN THE US SENATE, EDWARD M. KENNEDY HAS
TRANSCENDED THE FAMILY MYTHOLOGY AND BECOME HIS OWN MAN.

BYLINE: BY CHARLES PIERCE

BODY:

   "He's certainly the best legislator in his family," says Senator Orrin Hatch,
a Utah Republican, Kennedy's close friend, and his ideological opposite.
"Neither of those two brothers were in his league."

   How do you assess it, then, all those many lives and the real one out of
which this last one was made? How do you look at the ocean? Do you see the sum
of it, or do you see only its parts? The deep, rolling waves or the small ponds
where the ocean goes to die, brackish and foul, but the same water that
elsewhere piles itself into a torrent and changes the climate? Are there places
and lives so vast that there's room in them for every definition to be
completely true and yet to be contradicted by another, no less true than the
first?

      Fame and celebrity are cheap and useful, but history, usually and
stubbornly, finds some truth, and it is history that Edward Kennedy is playing
for now, the vast and wide sweep of it, more than his brothers ever did, more
than his brothers ever had a chance to do.

   "There have been a lot of forces and experiences," he says. "But I don't
dwell on that. I look forward to the future. I believe that, basically, it's the
need that people have for the fairness of life, the ability to have some impact
on that in a positive way.

   "Maybe there'll be time later. But that's not today."

   It has to have been a strange morning for him. The newspapers are full of
reactions to the revelations that President John F. Kennedy's White House
perhaps had a bit too much in common pharmacologically with Elvis Presley's
Graceland. And, as he talks further about the people he met at the education
center that day, his conversation returns to fits and starts. The fog moves in
off the water, enveloping the John F. Kennedy Federal Building.

   It is Friday, November 22.

   Upstairs, Edward Kennedy talks about early childhood education and about the
parents he'd met that morning. The significance of the date goes unremarked.

   What if his name had been Edward Moore?

   It was a great line, a defining line. Against any other candidate, and
especially in this age of endless political reiteration, it would've been the
knockout line. It became a cheap trope for easy newspaper columns. On August 27,
1962, at the close of their first debate prior to the Democratic senatorial
primary, Edward McCormack looked at Edward Kennedy and said, "If his name was
Edward Moore, with his qualifications - with your qualifications, Teddy, your
candidacy would be a joke."

   It bit so deeply because of the essential truth of it - the truth that, among
other things, would doom Eddie McCormack. Back then, with Jack in the White
House and Bobby as attorney general, Teddy Kennedy's candidacy for the Senate
was an act of raw dynastic power. An obscure family retainer named Benjamin
Smith held the seat until Kennedy was old enough to be elected to it. Once he
was, he was sworn in, not at the beginning of the term in January 1963 but
almost immediately after his election in November 1962, which is how he got the
jump on seniority over Daniel Inouye of Hawaii, who was elected the same year.
None of this would have happened if his name were Edward Moore.

   If his name were Edward Moore . . .

   He would not have served so long, if he'd served at all. He might not have
served with more than 350 other senators. He would not have served with all
three men - Everett Dirksen, Richard Russell, and Philip Hart - after whom the
Senate office buildings are named. He would not have had his first real fight
over the poll tax and his most recent one over going to war in Iraq. None of
this would have happened if his name were Edward Moore.

   If his name were Edward Moore . . .

   If his name were Edward Moore, Robert Bork might be on the Supreme Court
today. Robert Dole might have been elected president of the United States. There
might still be a draft. There would not have been the Civil Rights Act of 1991,
which overturned seven Supreme Court decisions that Kennedy saw as rolling back
the gains of the civil rights movement; the 1990 Americans With Disabilities
Act, the most wide-ranging civil rights bill since the original ones in the
1960s; the Kennedy-Kassebaum Bill of 1996, which allows "portability" in health
care coverage; or any one of the 35 other initiatives - large and small, on
everything from Medicare to the minimum wage to immigration reform - that
Kennedy, in opposition and in the minority, managed to cajole and finesse
through the Senate between 1996 and 1998, masterfully defusing the Gingrich
Revolution and maneuvering Dole into such complete political incoherence that
Bill Clinton won reelection in a walk. None of this would have happened, if his
name were Edward Moore.

   If his name were Edward Moore . . .

   His brothers might be alive. His life might have been easier, not having
mattered much to anyone beyond its own boundaries. His first marriage might have
survived, and, if it had not, Joan Kennedy's problems would have been her own,
and not grist for the public gossips. It might not have mattered to anyone, the
fistfight outside the Manhattan saloon, the fooz ling with waitresses in
Washington restaurants, the image of him in his nightshirt, during Holy Week
(Jesus God!), going out for a couple of pops with the younger set in Palm Beach
and winding up testifying in the middle of a rape trial. His second marriage
simply would have been a second marriage, and Vicki Kennedy would not have found
herself dragooned into the role of The Good Fairy in yet another Kennedy
epiphany narrative.

   All of this would not have mattered, if his name were Edward Moore.

   And what of the dead woman? On July 18, 1969, on the weekend that man first
walked on the moon, a 28-year-old named Mary Jo Kopechne drowned in his
automobile. Plutocrats' justice and an implausible (but effective) coverup
ensued. And, ever since, she's always been there: during Watergate, when Barry
Goldwater told Kennedy that even Richard Nixon didn't need lectures from him; in
1980, when his presidential campaign was shot down virtually at its launch;
during the hearings into the confirmation of Clarence Thomas, when Kennedy's
transgressions gagged him and made him the butt of all the jokes.

   She's always there. Even if she doesn't fit in the narrative line, she is so
much of the dark energy behind it. She denies to him forever the moral
credibility that lay behind not merely all those rhetorical thunderclaps that
came so easily in the New Frontier but also Robert Kennedy's anguished appeals
to the country's better angels. He was forced from the rhetoric of moral outrage
and into the incremental nitty-gritty of social justice. He learned to plod,
because soaring made him look ridiculous. "It's really 3 yards and a cloud of
dust with him," says his son Patrick.

   And if his name were Edward Moore, he would have done time.

   He has spent so much of his professional life draining that line of its
meaning - the defining line, what would have been the knockout line if his name
hadn't been Edward Moore Kennedy.  He went to the Senate. He respected its
traditions. He learned from its elders; his office today is in the building
named after Richard Russell, with whom, according to Adam Clymer, Kennedy first
attempted to break the ice by mentioning that Russell himself had entered the
Senate when he was 36. Yes, Russell replied, but I'd been governor of Georgia by
then, and Kennedy had had the good grace (and the good sense) to laugh.

   "At that time, I think, there was less partisanship," Kennedy says. "There
was less pettiness, and there were stronger personal relationships that
stretched across party lines. Now we're so evenly divided that little things
become big things. That demeans the institution and demeans our relationships,
and, anyway, I think the public sees through that."

   He developed a thick skin and learned to leave the heat of the argument on
the Senate floor. That's how Kennedy learned to move past that day in 1991 when,
during the debate over the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court,
his good friend Orrin Hatch appeared to summon up the Great Unmentionable.
"Anybody who believes that," said Hatch, "I know a bridge up in Mas sa chu setts
that I'll be happy to sell to them."

   To this day, Hatch maintains that any connection between his wisecrack and
Chappaquiddick was unintentional. "I was really mortified," says Hatch. "A lot
of my supporters loved it, and when I said I hadn't meant it, it drained some of
the charm, some of the glory, out of it."

   Of Kennedy, he says: "He's able to take criticism and let it wash off him
like water off a duck. He's been praised so much and criticized so much that he
just ignores it."

   For his part, Kennedy plays his cards so close to the vest that, to
paraphrase Groucho Marx, if they were any closer, they'd be behind him. "It's
basically a result of understanding how the institution is working and how
things get done and to know that intuitively," Kennedy says. "The other stuff is
just part of the deal. If you don't learn it, you might as well not bother
serving in the Senate. I can go down and fight with Orrin on fetal trans plan ta
tion and then testify with him on religious restoration when both were
white-hot, and then we can go out later.

   "Unless you work on that, there's very little left you can do. You can just
be an advocate, and there's nothing wrong with that, or you can just be an
accommodator, and you're not going to be a leader if you do that."

   And that's the key. That's how you survive what he's survived. That's how you
move forward, one step after another, even though your name is Edward Moore
Kennedy. You work, always, as though your name were Edward Moore. If she had
lived, Mary Jo Kopechne would be 62 years old. Through his tireless work as a
legislator, Edward Kennedy would have brought comfort to her in her old age.

   Stephanie Cutter, the senator's press aide, is concerned. An interview with
Michael Myers, Kennedy's chief of staff, has wandered a bit beyond the
comfortable boundaries, which are not expansive to begin with. "He said your
questions were more about what makes the senator tick," the press aide says
amiably. "You know, the senator doesn't do profiles. He's not that reflective
about the personal stuff, about his brothers and all."

   They're coddling him now, carefully monitoring how he is perceived, in the
way earlier staffs used to hold their collective breath every time he went out
of a Saturday night. (His staff went into an uproar in November over the
comparatively benign revelation that Kennedy had promised $500,000 of his own
money to help Boston win the Democratic National Convention in 2004.) "Teddy's
office is in it for the legacy now," says an aide to another senator. "That's
the focus."

   Washington is as in hos pi ta ble to that legacy as it ever has been. The
midterm elections handed Republicans effective control of all three branches of
government. Kennedy campaigned all over the country for Democratic candidates;
he was with Senator Paul Wellstone in Minnesota the morning of the day on which,
later, Wellstone was killed in an airplane crash. On the day after the party's
electoral thrashing, Myers called a number of liberal Democratic activists to
reassure them.

   "Thanks, Mike," one of them replied, "but the senator called an hour ago."

   "He'll just keep on doing what he's doing," explains US Representative John
Lewis, a Georgia Democrat whose experience with the Kennedys goes back to the
civil rights movement of the 1960s. "There's no question that he's the
embodiment of so much that we hoped for. Sometimes you have politicians come
along, and they sort of talk about it, but they don't feel it. This man feels
it."

   It never was like working for other senators, anyway. "The anniversaries of
his brothers' deaths were somber days. No one says anything to him, but it's
obvious," recalls one former Kennedy aide. "Occasionally, you'll be sitting
around with the senator, and, like a stream of consciousness, he'd tell a story
about an interaction with the president or with Bobby, and it's just in passing.
At the same time, there's the RFK awards every year, and the guy just can't get
through the remarks."

   He has not taken the deaths as a mass undifferentiated tragedy - the Kennedy
Curse, which was part of the Kennedys as public property, which he has left
behind him. But each of them clearly affects him in a different way. John
Kennedy is usually "the president" or "President Kennedy," while his other
brother is almost always "my brother Bob."

   "In 1965, when my brother Bob came to the Senate, that was a different
experience," he recalls. "I was the senior one here. That was kind of a role
reversal. But not much of one. He was still the older brother."

   So the legislative rec ord is the message, and the staff stays on it.
Historically, Kennedy's staff has been a sort of Capitol Hill legend, the New
York Yankees of policy wonkery. (Both Gregory Craig and David Boies, lawyers
famous for, respectively, defending Bill Clinton's presidency and Al Gore's
Florida recount bid, have worked for Edward Kennedy.) Perhaps the most
underrated turning point of his career came in 1980. The Democrats had lost the
Senate in the Reagan landslide, and Kennedy found himself in the minority for
the first time. He had the choice of being the ranking minority member on the
Senate Judiciary Committee or the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Kennedy
chose the latter.

   "He felt at that point that there was kind of a challenge to deal with the
Reagan agenda and that this was the best place to do that," says Myers. At that
point, his staff became not only the Senate's clearinghouse on a whole host of
health and welfare issues; it also functioned as a kind of institutional memory
at a time when politics in general seemed increasingly be reft of one.

   "This is a guy who, the first thing he did in the Senate was take on the poll
tax," says Bancroft Littlefield Jr., who was Kennedy's chief of staff through
most of the 1990s. "The first issue he sinks his teeth into is trying to make it
possible for black Americans to vote in the South. If he didn't have that
passion for the underdog and for dispossessed people in his blood, that wouldn't
have been the first thing he went after.

   "To me, when you try to figure out Ted Kennedy, you have to understand those
things he did early on, before the fancy advisers showed up," Littlefield says.
"Then look at what happened between '95 and '98, when he's in the minority. The
House passes the whole Contract With America in 100 days. All 10 bills, and
nothing gets through the Senate, because Kennedy, basically, or ganiz es the
forces of re sist ance, and piece by piece, he brings the Democrats back,
because he remembered what they stood for."

   And he did it, in part, because he had learned the etiquette of the Senate as
well as he had learned its rules. "There's one thing you can count on with Ted,"
says McCain. "He will always keep his word. There are a lot of people in
Washington who waver in their commitments, but that's not him. The Patients'
Bill of Rights was a tough fight. People were being cajoled by the special
interests and by the White House, and he never wavered."

   However, it's not a legislative laundry list that animates Kennedy, although
he's made himself a genius at the mechanics of getting legislation passed. It is
the ability to connect to the people for whom that legislation is intended ("I
met the parents today") and to the people he needs to get done what he is trying
to get done. Being a Kennedy comes into play only when it's useful.

   For example, he forged a useful relationship with Clinton by dint not only of
his legislative expertise but also through his personal charm. "Clinton was a
Kennedy junkie," recalls Littlefield. "They got a big kick out of each other,
and Kennedy was constantly worried about Clinton's progressive backbone." He
shrewdly sized up Clinton and realized that it was a capital advantage to be the
last person to see Clinton before the president made a decision.

   In 1995, worried that Clinton was going to cave in to the Republicans on the
budget, Kennedy got himself into an event at which Clinton was going to swear in
new police officers on the White House lawn. Afterward, he followed the
president across the lawn and into the Oval Office through the back entrance,
while outside the main doors, Clinton's staff had gathered to keep Kennedy out.

   Over the next two years, Kennedy maneuvered in a hostile Senate, mainly by
working the system as ably as he worked the senators themselves. He got the
Kennedy-Kassebaum Bill passed, and he won an increase in the minimum wage, even
though the Republican leadership in the House had sworn up and down that it
would never happen. And he did both of these in a bipartisan manner, because he
understood not only how the Senate worked but how senators worked as well.

   "There was a lot of self-flagellation at the time," Kennedy recalls. "And it
seemed to me that there was a real opportunity to move creatively and
aggressively."

   This sort of thing effectively demolished Bob Dole. The Kennedy-Kassebaum
Bill and the increase in the minimum wage were both enormously popular in the
country and deeply loathed within the conservative caucus that was the power
behind the Republican legislative agenda. At the time, Dole was running for
president and trying to do so as an effective Senate majority leader, and he was
so plainly impaled on the demands of these dissonant identities that he failed
to satisfy anyone, including himself. On May 15, 1996, in a speech of
breathtaking insincerity, Dole left the Senate. Bill Clinton was reelected that
fall.

   It takes a thousand little things to get this done: long, grinding sessions,
a blizzard of memos and reports, the kind of vigor that John Kennedy never had.
Learning the legislation and learning the people you need to pass it. Three
years ago, McCain (along with Feingold) was named the recipient of the John F.
Kennedy Profile in Courage Award for the work the Arizona senator had done on
campaign finance reform. The private dinner the night before the Boston ceremony
conflicted with the 11th birthday of McCain's son, Jimmy.

   "[Kennedy] said to me, 'I'll make sure he has a good time,' " McCain recalls.
"So we brought him up here, and he got a ride on a Coast Guard cutter around the
bay, and he had two different birthday cakes, and people sang 'Happy Birthday'
to him twice, and he had an unforgettable time.

   "To me, in so many ways, that epitomized Ted Kennedy - this incredible
outreach to a little boy who, I mean, what is he to Ted Kennedy? It was
remarkable to me."

   A case study, then. Actually, a case study that begins with the study of a
case.

   In 1999, an 18-year-old named Jesse Gelsinger had volunteered to participate
in a gene-therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. The researchers were
trying to find a way to replace defective genes in order to treat patients with
enzyme disorders. The genes were delivered by modified cold viruses. By the end
of the first day, Gelsinger was ill. Two days later, he was in a coma. Three
days after that, his family took him off life support. It soon became clear that
Gelsinger had died because the researchers had gone beyond the limits of their
protocols. Jesse Gelsinger's name soon found its way to Edward Kennedy's office.

   "Jesse Gelsinger - that's the kind of thing that gets to him," says a former
aide.  "I mean, he's always done this ethics stuff, but then this Gelsinger
thing happened, and he got on it like a rocket."

   It always makes a difference when there's a person involved, a face on the
issue. Kennedy picks it up from his reading, or in conversation with someone in
his vast circle of acquaintances, or he reads something that he brought home in
his briefcase, which the staff calls The Bag and treats as if it were
ambulatory, as in "The Bag is leaving now." Whatever the case, he picks up an
issue more quickly if he can put a face to it, if he knows the story behind it.

   And this was an issue that was exploding. Genetic scientists and the
biotechnology industry had thrown their science so far ahead, and had done it so
fast, that the law and the culture were scrambling just to catch up. (In 2001,
an estimated 20 million people were enrolled in medical research studies in the
United States.) As a political issue, the protection of human subjects in
medical research was the cutting edge of the cutting edge.

   One night at about 8, just as he was getting ready to go home, a young aide
on the Labor Committee named David Bowen prepared a briefing book to show to
Kennedy the next morning. He showed it to his boss, a longtime Kennedy aide
named David Nexon. There's only one thing missing, Nexon told Bowen: a
legislative history of whatever Kennedy had previously done on the subject.
Bowen went back to work.

   "At about 3 o'clock in the morning," Bowen recalls, "I came to the
realization of the depths of his involvement in these things." Kennedy had held
the first congressional hearings into the Tuskegee syphilis experiments, and
into the involuntary irradiation of patients at the Fernald School in Waltham,
and into the CIA -backed LSD experiments in the 1950s that had resulted in the
suicide of a researcher named Frank Olson.

   "I think what I realized about working here," Bowen says, "was that you get
to work for someone who was the original architect of research protections from
the get-go and who now has the opportunity to re-engineer that same set of
protections for a 21st-century research environment."

   Meanwhile, Kennedy had Littlefield organize a dinner at which the experts in
the field would come and brief him. "For these things, I might find the five
best people in the country on it, and they'd fly in," recalls Littlefield.

   "We're moving into these extraordinary breakthroughs," Kennedy says. "The
rapid expansion of clinical research has put enormous pressure on oversight.
It's basically gotten out of hand, in terms of their ability to do the job."

   It was a remarkable demonstration of institutional memory, and Kennedy put it
to work crafting legislation that was both precise and pragmatic. The regulation
of these studies was disorganized piecework done by 15 different federal
agencies. So, this fall, Kennedy proposed a new federal agency to regulate
medical consent and an in de pend ent commission that would accredit any
institution that sought to do medical research using human subjects.

   Typically, he sought out a Republican, William Frist of Tennessee, a
physician as well as a senator, as his cosponsor, the way he'd found Nancy
Kassebaum on health insurance and John McCain on the Patients' Bill of Rights.
The two had some differences - Frist wanted the accreditation procedures to be
voluntary - but they seemed to be making prog ress until Frist got caught up in
some internal politics within the Republican caucus.

   Part of it is an omnivorous curiosity, particularly in the area of medicine
and science, which became even more of a cause for him when a son, Edward Jr.,
lost his leg to cancer in 1973. The other part is his bullheaded insistence on
moving forward, one step at a time, head down - of not merely winning, which was
the original Kennedy curse, but of finding solutions.

   "Curiosity is important," he says. "Maybe it's being curious or whatever the
word might be - to be passionate about the subject matter and to have a
combination of emotions and a willingness to listen to new ideas."

   And now he's in the minority again, the way he has been for half of his
Senate career, and without a Democratic president in the White House this time.

   Kennedy is still optimistic, the way he was in 1980, when Ronald Reagan came
to town, the way he was in 1994, when Newt Gingrich drove the agenda. "We were
making good prog ress, but we weren't able to get it with Frist," he says. "I
think we'll get it next year."

   The young history professor came to the conclusion that Eddie McCormack might
be right.

   In 1962, Merrill Peterson was in his first job, teaching at Brandeis
University, and Edward Kennedy went there, campaigning for the Senate. "He came
out and made a talk and looked, frankly, like a lightweight," Peterson says. "He
didn't look to meas ure up to his brother. He didn't seem to have much under him
at all." Now a professor emeritus at the University of Virginia, Peterson is the
author of The Great Triumvirate, a magisterial study of the senatorial careers
of Daniel Webster, Henry Clay, and John C. Calhoun in the years before the Civil
War.

   "I said to a colleague recently that he might be the greatest senator of them
all," Peterson says. "Not just because of the time served but because of his
excellence, and not just because I agree with him on most issues. I can't help
with him but recall what a Philadelphia man once told Daniel Webster, when
Webster was thinking of a presidential bid. This man advised him against it. He
told Webster that he could be a senator until he died and still have a great
ca-reer. And that's what happened.

   "You know, I don't think there's much knowledge of history down in Congress
these days. I think there might be a certain amount of knowledge since the New
Deal, but that's pretty much it. History doesn't seem to inform their judgments
much."

   Look at the Senate now. Mavericks like McCain get marginalized, even by their
own parties, in favor of technocrats and bloodless pedants, Kiwanis speakers and
House members fighting far above their weight class. And there Kennedy goes,
squashed, bowed and slowed, head down, moving forward, one hand keeping the
other one still, and the place still moves. Glacially, but it moves. You play
for history and you're playing for higher stakes, and fame and celebrity are
just the $1 chips.

   "I don't know if he'll have a marble head down here" in the Capitol, says
Orrin Hatch, "but they'll find a spot for him somewhere."

   On April 27, 2001, a bus carrying band members from the Oak Hill Middle
School in Newton overturned on a highway in the Canadian Maritimes. Four
children were killed. In Washington, a man whose child went to Oak Hill boarded
an airplane in order to hurry home. He saw Edward Kennedy on the plane. The man
told him what had happened. That's where he was going, the senator had replied.

   At the school, volunteers gathered from all over Newton to help out. Along
one wall, they'd hung broad swatches of blank white paper so that the children
could express their sorrow and say their goodbyes. On the second afternoon of
the melancholy vigil, a volunteer looked out and saw Kennedy, alone in the
hallway, no aides around him and no cameras in sight. He was slowly, carefully,
reading every single message left by every grieving child.

   See him there in the hallway, alone, painfully private, and you see him as he
is, the basic material of how he's built his career. You see all he's left
behind - the life of metaphor and the life of symbol. He survived them both,
until there's just the one life, 70 years on, just as if he'd been named Edward
Moore. His tragedies are no greater or lesser than are those of the
schoolchildren and their parents - no more important, no longer gilded for
public consumption.

   He was good with death that day. He's never lost there, not even in the
deepest part of that inexhaustible mystery. His compass is true, and his touch
never less than fine. And it is, of course, familiar ground. Two siblings killed
in airplanes before he was 16 - he is the only Kennedy to survive an airplane
crash - and then the garish public deaths, two of them in less than five years.
Finally, the herculean effort of celebrating the achievements of the next
generation, and of salvaging its sad flotsam - hapless junkies and drifting
drunks, souls lost for a while or altogether.

   And the dead woman, of course. He wasn't half as good there with dying as
he's always been with death.

   His best speeches are all eulogies. In 1999, at the memorial service for the
six firefighters who died in the Worcester Cold Storage building, Kennedy gave a
tribute that left Bill Clinton looking like a third-rate saloon singer condemned
to follow Sinatra. He gave his greatest speech from a cathedral pulpit, over the
coffin of his brother Robert. It was more than a remembrance. It was a
foreshadowing of what would happen and a prayer, sort of, to be relieved of all
those burdens that once looked so very much like the most golden advantages.

   "My brother need not be idealized or enlarged in death beyond what he was in
life," he said, in a voice like that of someone choking on blood. As though that
were possible for any of them, given the lives they'd chosen to lead, but it
hung in the air like a ragged prayer, hung there with the grief and the incense,
palpable and yearning, a Pax vobiscum for so many souls, known and unknown, not
least of all his own.

GRAPHIC:  1. PHOTOGRAPH BY LANE TURNER / THE BOSTON GLOBE 2. Joseph Runci / The
Boston Globe 3. Campaign photo: Ted Dully / The Boston Globe; 4. Chappaquiddick:

  The Boston Globe; Kennedys: AP 5. ON THE COVER: US SENATOR EDWARD M. KENNEDY.
/ PHOTOGRAPH BY LANE TURNER / THE BOSTON GLOBE; HAIR AND MAKEUP BY LORI
CELEDONIA-PRESSMAN / THE ARTIST AGENCY 6. Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, 70
years old and serving his seventh term, in the Russell Senate Office Building in
Washington, D.C.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2003


                             976 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             January 5, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: Working toward the next breakthrough in cardio care

HIGHLIGHT:
DR> TODD ROSENGART, heart surgeon

BODY:


   Dr. Todd Rosengart, a heart surgeon at Evanston Hospital, wants to help
patients heal their own hearts.

   In a study Rosengart expects to finish this year, he is injecting genes into
blood-starved heart muscle to trigger blood vessel growth. In a second study,
which he expects to begin this year, Rosengart hopes to rejuvenate dead heart
muscle with stem cells.

   Rosengart is lead researcher in the gene therapy study, which includes about
12 centers. The therapeutic gene directs heart cells to produce a protein that
promotes blood vessel growth. Researchers insert the gene into a cold virus,
which delivers the gene when it infects a heart cell. (The virus is inactivated
so the patient doesn't catch cold.)

   During open-heart surgery, the doctor injects the genetically engineered
virus. For comparison, one-fourth of the patients receive injections of an
inactive placebo.

   Rosengart hopes to announce results next November at the American Heart
Association meeting. At the 2002 AHA meeting, Toronto researchers who conducted
a similar study reported that the therapy significantly relieved chest pains but
took months to take effect.

   Stem cell therapy is designed to repair heart muscle that dies after a heart
attack. If enough muscle dies, the heart becomes too weak to pump efficiently,
leading to congestive heart failure. Stem cells can develop into specialized
cells such as blood and muscle cells. In the study, Rosengart will remove about
100,000 stem cells from the patient's leg and grow them in the laboratory for
two or three weeks until the cell population reaches about 1 billion. He will
inject the cells into dead heart muscle during bypass surgery.

   It's possible the stem cells will become functioning heart muscle cells. Or
they at least could provide a form of scaffolding to stabilize the heart's
shape.

   Evanston Hospital is among the centers participating in a nationwide clinical
trial headed by the Cleveland Clinic. Rosengart hopes to enroll his first
patient during the first three months of 2003.

   Rosengart, 43, came to Evanston Hospital in 1999 from Cornell University. He
considers the operations he and other heart surgeons perform, such as bypasses
and balloon angioplasties, a form of "glorified plumbing." The new treatments
he's researching are called biological heart therapy.

   "We're allowing the heart to heal itself," he said.

GRAPHIC: See also related stories pages 9 to 13.

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2003


                             977 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      January 3, 2003 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: EntreMed receives cash infusion as it is about to run out of money;
 But Celgene deal may lead to takeover of drug firm

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   EntreMed Inc. said yesterday that it had sold rights to a line of its
experimental drugs to Celgene Corp. in a New Year's Eve deal worth about $27
million, giving the Rockville drug developer what amounted to a last-hour
reprieve as it was about to run out of cash.

   Neil J. Campbell, company president and chief operating officer, described
the licensing of EntreMed's thalidomide analogs - variations of the drug
thalidomide - as part of a plan that will lead to the company's "rebirth."

   But Ivonne E. Marondel, an analyst at Gerard Klauer Mattison, said it
appeared the company was selling off assets in a fire sale and might eventually
be taken over by Celgene.

   The Warren, N.J., pharmaceutical company will own 49 percent of EntreMed if
it converts all the stock options and warrants to be issued as part of the deal.

   "It's kind of a desperate move," said Marondel, who said she quit following
EntreMed in detail in November.

   EntreMed had warned in November that it had sufficient cash to last only
through the fourth quarter, which ended Tuesday as the Celgene deal was being
negotiated.

   EntreMed said Nasdaq granted an exemption to its rules, effectively allowing
the deal with Celgene to go through without shareholder approval.

   Shares of EntreMed gained 34 cents, or 39.5 percent, to close at $1.20
yesterday on the Nasdaq stock market, which had threatened to delist the stock.
EntreMed has appealed the delisting effort and shares continue to trade.

   The deal calls for EntreMed to get $16.75 million in cash in exchange for
giving Celgene convertible preferred stock and warrants. The preferred stock is
convertible into 16.75 million shares of common stock, while the warrants give
Celgene rights to buy 7 million more shares after six months at a price of $1.50
per share.

   Celgene also is paying EntreMed $10 million to settle lawsuits the two filed
against each other over disputed rights to thalidomide analogs.

   Celgene licensed thalidomide from EntreMed in 1998 for certain uses and now
sells it under the trade name Thalomid. Thalidomide, best known for causing
birth defects when used overseas as a morning sickness remedy by pregnant women,
is approved in this country only for leprosy.

   But doctors, exercising their right to prescribe any drug approved for one
disease as a treatment for any other, increasingly have prescribed it for
cancer.

   Thalidomide analogs are thought to be a potentially more effective cancer
treatments than thalidomide itself. EntreMed's thalidomide analog ENMD 0995
entered first-stage clinical trials in November as a potential treatment for
multiple myeloma.

   It was difficult to tell yesterday exactly how many months of cash the
Celgene deal will mean for EntreMed. The company's budget calls for it to spend
about $12 million in cash reserves this year.

   But Campbell, the company's president, declined to say how much of the
proceeds would remain after the costs of the deal are deducted. EntreMed, which
Marondel estimated had $11 million in near-term liabilities in mid-September,
also may need to pay some debts with the proceeds.

   A large chunk of its debt - EntreMed's obligation to repurchase shares held
by Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. at a cost of up to $3.8 million - was renegotiated
in mid-December. The terms have not been disclosed.

   Campbell, however, said the Celgene deal gives the company enough to address
"near-term and intermediate-term" needs.

   "This deal puts us on a firm financial footing," he said, adding that the
company continues to explore other licensing agreements for protein drugs
Endostatin and Angiostatin. "As we conclude these deals, we'll be making other
announcements just like this one."

   Clinical trials of Endostatin and Angiostatin in cancer patients continue,
though EntreMed has said it won't advance them into further trials without
finding another company willing to financially back them.

   EntreMed also is continuing to advance a third anti-cancer drug in clinical
trials, Panzem. Like Endostatin and Angiostatin, Panzem is designed to work by
blocking the formation of tiny blood vessels that feed diseases, including
cancer.

   The deal announced yesterday also calls for Celgene to get the option, for
one year, of licensing one of three EntreMed product candidates that have yet to
reach human testing. It was unclear what those product candidates might be.
EntreMed lists three proteins, three gene-therapies and a vaccine on its Web
site as being in the discovery stage.

   Celgene said in a separate release that it had paid $2.5 million to
Children's Hospital in Boston and would pay another $2.5 million by 2006 in
connection with its acquisition of rights to the thalidomide analogs, which are
based on discoveries made there.

   Celgene also said it would pay Children's $1.5 million to sponsor research at
the hospital for five years.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2003


                             978 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     January 3, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 876 words

BODY:

   Not to be presumptuous, but I imagine the Browns will wear white Sunday at
Heinz Field. White shirts, white pants, brown numbers, orange helmets. Maybe
you've seen them. If that's the case -- Steelers in black, Browns in white --
expect a close game with a final-minute resolution.

    However, if the Browns ask for and receive permission from the NFL to wear
their orange shirts -- that's right, not brown but orange shirts -- look for the
Steelers to win about 50-0.

    This is the kind of analysis you can't get just anywhere, obviously, and
it's why my salary remains among the top 200,000 columnists in America year
after year after year after year after year after ye...

    SLAP!

    Sorry.

    Perhaps Cleveland's orange jerseys escaped your notice in this hectic
football season, but in a sport where rosters change with constant fluidity and
we are essentially, as Jerry Seinfeld rightly points out, rooting for laundry,
fashion remains one of the keys to victory. Or defeat, as the case may be.

    The Browns broke out the orange against Houston at home Oct. 20 and
virtually blinded the cleverly nicknamed Texans, 34-17, but, because no one
complained loudly enough that they looked like frozen creamsicles, they got
permission to wear them again Dec. 1 at home against Carolina.

    As I might have predicted, had I been paying attention, the fashion gods had
had enough. Carolina 13, Cleveland 7. You don't think there are fashion gods?
There are baseball gods, football gods, hockey gods, but no fashion gods? C'mon,
get a fashion clue.

    Fashion is a factor in every matchup, although it is rarely commented upon.
I don't believe anyone in the analysis biz has underlined the fashion
implications of this postseason. It's no accident that of the six AFC teams that
qualified, no fewer than five have great uniforms, including the Browns when
they're not wearing orange.

    The exception is the Titans in their ridiculous powder blue-on-dark blue
jammies with the cute little swords on them. They're doomed. I know they made it
to the Super Bowl a couple of years ago, but had Kevin Dyson been wearing a
football uniform instead of flame-retardant sleepwear, he'd have scored on the
game's final play instead of being stopped a yard short.

    Elsewhere in the AFC, you'll find nothing but traditionally splendid
fashion. The New York Jets, with their retro Namath-era green and white, will
play host to the Indianapolis Colts, who wisely have not screwed up the stunning
ensemble worn by the club since the Baltimore days of Lenny Moore and Art
Donovan.

    I'll take the Jets in white, which would put the Colts in the blue they
somehow lost Super Bowl III wearing. If the Jets wear green, well, let's just
say that's the kind of mental mistake that can send you home early.

    Briefly, here are the reasons the Oakland Raiders are the top seed in their
half of the Super Bowl tournament and the Patriots, Jaguars, and Bills were not
invited. The Patriots continue to fool around with their uniforms by trying
every adjustment but the one that would keep them from looking like the Village
People. The Jaguars, who unveiled the unconscionable black shirts, black pants
look against the Steelers, promptly lost four of the last five as the fashion
gods howled. The Bills, especially in white, look like something from the
archives of the old college All-Star game. The Raiders, by calming contrast,
continue to be merely silver and blacktacular.

    Speaking of college, and poor transitions, crucial fashion errors curdled
the autumn for teams like Notre Dame and Nebraska. The Irish, not perfectly
happy being 8-0 on Nov. 2, broke out their goofy green shirts against Boston
College and were never the same, losing that one and three of the last five.
Nebraska, which had its string of 900 consecutive winning seasons snapped, fully
deserved as much because it continues to try and force black into the
traditional color scheme, which is crimson and cream, technically. They don't
want cream with their crimson. They want it black for some reason.

    The same fashion misstep has been the bane of teams all over the sports
landscape. The Knicks, the 76ers, the Eagles, the Mets, even the Cincinnati Reds
have tried to work black into a traditional scheme with disastrous results,
sartorially or competitively or both. Not even Ken Griffey Jr. can function for
the Cincinnati Black 'n' Reds. Black and Red is for Scotch, that's all.

    As for the NFC playoffs, fully half the field will be dressed beautifully in
enduring motifs, the Giants, Packers, and 49ers. I like the 49ers in red over
the Giants, for whom the gray pants look just a little like long flannel
underwear under the white shirts. If the 49ers wear white and the Giants their
blue shirts, I like the Giants. There is no hope for the Falcons at Green Bay,
where the dressmakers have made the Packers 15-point favorites against an
Atlanta franchise that long ago changed its helmet-jersey combo from red-red to
black-black.

    Top seeds Philadelphia and Tampa Bay both have dreadful football duds, but
the Buccaneers' pewter and blood get-up is absolutely unforgivable. As the
swashbucklers of the Middle Ages used to say, "You just can't take it to the
next level dressed like that."

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2003


                             979 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 2, 2003 Thursday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg.A-15

LENGTH: 747 words

HEADLINE: 007 IN THE DMZ;
 NORTH KOREA HAS NOT REALLY BEEN DEMONIZED (THOUGH IT DESERVES TO BE)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   If you haven't seen the new James Bond film, "Die Another Day," and you don't
want to know what happens, stop reading here. If you can guess what happens
anyway (hint: the good guys win) or are intrigued by the thought of a movie the
North Korean government denounced as "a dirty and cursed burlesque aimed to
slander and insult the Korean nation," then read on.

    For yes, the villain of the film is a North Korean, a renegade colonel in
possession of a newfangled weapon that can destroy the world. And yes, the North
Koreans are not the only ones offended by a film that "distorts Korea's image,"
in the words of a South Korean actor who refused to appear in it.

    Look closely at the plot, however, and it's hard to see why the Koreans,
North and South, are so upset. For although the renegade colonel does indeed
start out as a North Korean, during the course of the movie he undergoes radical
gene therapy (with the help of sinister Cuban scientists), emerging as, well, a
white man. Furthermore, it becomes clear by the end of the film that the keys to
his success are not his evil connections in North Korea but his evil connections
at Harvard.

    The hidden conspiracy revolves not around the mysterious agents of the Dear
Leader but around the lifelong friendships formed on the Harvard fencing team.
In order to make him truly hateful, in other words, the filmmakers had to
transform their North Korean villain into a fully paid-up member of the American
establishment.

    The Koreans need not feel offended. For the question posed by the film is
not why we have demonized the North Koreans but why we have so consistently
failed to demonize them. We had no trouble, in the past, inventing fictional
Russian bad guys, or in seeing the Soviet Union as a political opponent. In the
post-Cold-war era, Saddam Hussein, Slobodan Milosevic, even Gen. Mohamed Farah
Aideed have all emerged as American anti-heroes. By comparison, Kim Jong Il,
whose list of crimes against humanity may well run longer than any of the other
three, is hardly known. Why do we find it so hard to perceive the North Koreans
as a real enemy?

    I suspect that there are several answers, some political, some cultural,
some geographical. North Korea is far away, its history apparently remote.
Despite some 36,000 American lives lost there, the Korean War remains relatively
unknown to most Americans. Perhaps because its domestic impact was more limited,
the Korean conflict has been overshadowed by the Second World War before it and
by the Vietnam War, which followed.

    Until recently, North Korea hardly seemed a threat to us: Its guns are
pointed at Seoul, after all, not Washington. Until Pyongyang's nuclear program
kicked into higher gear, the North Koreans didn't have any weapons that could
reach the United States, and they haven't got much of a global terrorist reach
either. Despite our enormous military presence on the Korean peninsula, Kim's
jails and torture chambers have long seemed like someone else's problem.

    None of this is strictly true anymore, of course: North Korea's ballistic
missiles can already reach Tokyo and may someday be able to hit Alaska, if not
Los Angeles. North Korean arms dealing threatens to spread nuclear and missile
technology around the world.

    Nevertheless, politicians continue to tiptoe around North Korea, keeping the
level of rhetoric deliberately low. In his most recent radio address, President
Bush mentioned Iraq and al-Qaida but not North Korea, despite North Korea's
recent resumption of its nuclear program. Last weekend, Secretary of State Colin
Powell called North Korea a country "in deep distress," which is quite a long
way from "charter member of the axis of evil." Filmmakers can hardly be blamed
if they struggle to make the place seem bad at all.

    In the end, North Korea is simply the wrong enemy at the wrong time: There
isn't enough political energy right now to deal with it. The North Korean regime
rules through terror. It inflicts starvation upon its own people and has
cultivated an isolationism so strong that the inhabitants of Pyongyang will
cross the street rather than pass a foreigner on the sidewalk. Its concentration
camps rival those of Stalin's Soviet Union.

    Nevertheless, North Korea wasn't, in the end, responsible for 9/11 and Kim
Jong Il isn't, like Saddam Hussein, a familiar face on the evening news. Perhaps
the American imagination simply can't handle more than a couple of villains at
once.


NOTES:
Anne Applebaum is an editorial writer and columnist for The Washington Post
(www.anneapplebaum.com).

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2003


                             980 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 01, 2003, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 428 words

HEADLINE: Battle against AIDS marks advances on vaccine, gene fronts

SOURCE: Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   A cure for AIDS remains elusive, but with more than 42 million infected
people worldwide, the need for better treatments is undeniable. Recently,
researchers announced two promising, if early, developments.

   One approach, developed at the California Institute of Technology and at the
University of California, Los Angeles, uses gene therapy to keep the AIDS virus
from entering human disease-fighting cells.

   The other approach, from French researchers, uses a therapeutic vaccine to
lower the amount of virus while boosting the immune system.

   Dr. Kenneth Mayer, director of the Brown University AIDS Program in
Providence, R.I., called both experimental approaches exciting for HIV therapy
and, potentially, prevention.

   HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, is a powerful and insidious foe because it
disrupts the immune system, Mayer said.

   The two techniques represent "attempts to hijack the immune system in
positive ways. Both have a long way to go, but neither one is something that is
currently being done."

   Both techniques might be used in combination with existing antiviral drugs to
eliminate HIV from the body or keep it at bay, he said.

   The gene therapy work was led by David Baltimore, a Nobel laureate biologist
and president of Caltech, who collaborated with Irvin S.Y. Chen, director of the
UCLA AIDS Institute.

   Using a technique they compared to a Trojan horse, the researchers invaded
T-cells (human immune cells) with a harmless AIDS virus. The disabled virus then
unleashed a piece of synthetic genetic coding it had carried inside. The genetic
coding knocked out a receptor on the cell's surface, essentially locking one
door HIV uses to enter cells.

   Early results in a laboratory dish found the technique protected more than 80
percent of T-cells from HIV infection, according to the research published last
week in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   In the French research, reported in the January issue of Nature Medicine but
made available online last week, lead researcher Wei Lu of the Universite Rene
Descartes in Paris and his colleagues created a vaccine by treating immune cells
in monkeys with an AIDS-like virus altered so it couldn't reproduce.

   The researchers used dendritic cells, a type of immune cells found in monkeys
and humans. The cells can migrate from mucus membranes, where HIV infections
begin, into lymph nodes.

   When 10 macaque monkeys were vaccinated with cultures of their treated cells,
then given four booster shots in eight weeks, virus levels dropped in the blood
of seven monkeys.


LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2003


                             981 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           January 1, 2003 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: 007 in the DMZ

BYLINE: Anne Applebaum

BODY:

    If you haven't seen the new James Bond film, "Die Another Day," and you
don't want to know what happens, stop reading here. If you can guess what
happens anyway (hint: the good guys win) or are intrigued by the thought of a
movie the North Korean government denounced as "a dirty and cursed burlesque
aimed to slander and insult the Korean nation" then read on. For yes, the
villain of the film is a North Korean, a renegade colonel in possession of a
newfangled weapon that can destroy the world. And yes, the North Koreans are not
the only ones offended by a film that "distorts Korea's image," in the words of
a South Korean actor who refused to appear in it.

   Look closely at the plot, however, and it's hard to see why the Koreans,
North and South, are so upset. For although the renegade colonel does indeed
start out as a North Korean, during the course of the movie he undergoes radical
gene therapy (with the help of sinister Cuban scientists), emerging as, well, a
white man. Furthermore, it becomes clear by the end of the film that the keys to
his success are not his evil connections in North Korea but his evil connections
at Harvard. The hidden conspiracy revolves not around the mysterious agents of
the Dear Leader but around the lifelong friendships formed on the Harvard
fencing team. In order to make him truly hateful, in other words, the filmmakers
had to transform their North Korean villain into a fully paid-up member of the
American establishment.

   The Koreans need not feel offended. For the question posed by the film is not
why we have demonized the North Koreans but why we have so consistently failed
to demonize them. We had no trouble, in the past, inventing fictional Russian
bad guys, or in seeing the Soviet Union as a political opponent. In the
post-Cold-war era, Saddam Hussein, Slobodan Milosevic, even Gen. Mohamed Farah
Aideed have all emerged as American anti-heroes. By comparison, Kim Jong Il,
whose list of crimes against humanity may well run longer than any of the other
three, is hardly known. Why do we find it so hard to perceive the North Koreans
as a real enemy?

   I suspect that there are several answers, some political, some cultural, some
geographical. North Korea is far away, its history apparently remote. Despite
some 36,000 American lives lost there, the Korean War remains relatively unknown
to most Americans. Perhaps because its domestic impact was more limited, the
Korean conflict has been overshadowed by the Second World War before it and by
the Vietnam War, which followed.

   Until recently, North Korea hardly seemed a threat to us: Its guns are
pointed at Seoul, after all, not Washington. Until Pyongyang's nuclear program
kicked into higher gear, the North Koreans didn't have any weapons that could
reach the United States, and they haven't got much of a global terrorist reach
either. Despite our enormous military presence on the Korean peninsula, Kim's
jails and torture chambers have long seemed like someone else's problem.

   None of this is strictly true anymore, of course: North Korea's ballistic
missiles can already reach Tokyo and may someday be able to hit Alaska, if not
Los Angeles. North Korean arms dealing threatens to spread nuclear and missile
technology around the world. Nevertheless, politicians continue to tiptoe around
North Korea, keeping the level of rhetoric deliberately low. In his most recent
radio address, President Bush mentioned Iraq and al Qaeda but not North Korea,
despite North Korea's recent resumption of its nuclear program. Last weekend,
Secretary of State Colin Powell called North Korea a country "in deep distress,"
which is quite a long way from "charter member of the axis of evil." Filmmakers
can hardly be blamed if they struggle to make the place seem bad at all.

   In the end, North Korea is simply the wrong enemy at the wrong time: There
isn't enough political energy right now to deal with it. The North Korean regime
rules through terror. It inflicts starvation upon its own people and has
cultivated an isolationism so strong that the inhabitants of Pyongyang will
cross the street rather than pass a foreigner on the sidewalk. Its concentration
camps rival those of Stalin's Soviet Union. Nevertheless, North Korea wasn't, in
the end, responsible for 9/11 and Kim Jong Il isn't, like Saddam Hussein, a
familiar face on the evening news. Perhaps the American imagination simply can't
handle more than a couple of villains at once.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2003


                             982 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2002 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                    December 31, 2002 Tuesday No dot Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 120 words

HEADLINE: What's coming up

BYLINE: Alesia Cooper

BODY:

   Sixth annual Red Heart Blues ... and all that Jazz! The fund-raiser is 6 p.m.
Feb. 8 at the Ford Motor Co. Conference and Event Center in Dearborn. The
evening will feature dinner, dancing, a live and silent auction, and an awards
presentation. Tickets are $250 patron, $350 benefactor, $500 gold and $1,000
platinum sponsorship. Proceeds will benefit research and treatment for the
prevention and cure of cardiovascular disease, with emphasis on molecular gene
therapy. Call (313) 876-9259.

   St. Joseph's Mercy of Macomb Medallion Ball will be Feb. 22 at Penna's of
Sterling. Proceeds from the black-tie affair will benefit Women's Health
Services. Tickets are $175. Call (586) 466-9420.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2003


                             983 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            December 30, 2002 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part 6; Features Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 543 words

HEADLINE: AIDS battle advances on 2 fronts;
Gene therapy or experimental vaccine that 'hijack' theimmune system may be the
next step in fighting HIV.

BYLINE: Jane E. Allen, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   A cure for AIDS remains elusive, but with more than 42 million infected
people worldwide, the need for better treatments is undeniable. Last week,
researchers announced two promising, if early, developments.

   One approach, developed at Caltech in Pasadena and at UCLA, uses gene therapy
to keep the AIDS virus from entering human disease-fighting cells. The other
approach, from French researchers, uses a therapeutic vaccine to lower the
amount of virus while boosting the immune system.

   Dr. Kenneth Mayer, a national authority on AIDS and director of the Brown
University AIDS Program in Providence, R.I., called both approaches exciting for
HIV therapy and, potentially, prevention.

   HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, is a powerful and insidious foe because it
disrupts the immune system, Mayer said. The two experimental techniques
represent "attempts to hijack the immune system in positive ways. Both have a
long way to go, but neither one is something that is currently being done."

   Both techniques might be used in combination with existing antiviral drugs to
eliminate HIV from the body or keep it at bay, he said.

   The gene therapy work was led by David Baltimore, a Nobel laureate biologist
and president of Caltech, who collaborated with Irvin S.Y. Chen, director of the
UCLA AIDS Institute. Using a technique they compared to a Trojan horse, the
researchers invaded T-cells (human immune cells) with a harmless AIDS virus. The
disabled virus then unleashed a piece of synthetic genetic coding it had carried
inside. The genetic coding knocked out a receptor on the cell's surface,
essentially locking one door HIV uses to enter cells.

   Early results in a laboratory dish found the technique protected more than
80% of T-cells from HIV infection, according to the research published last week
in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   In the French research, reported in the January issue of Nature Medicine but
made available online last week, lead researcher Wei Lu of the Universite Rene
Descartes in Paris and his colleagues created a vaccine by treating immune cells
in monkeys with an AIDS-like virus altered so it couldn't reproduce. The
researchers used dendritic cells, a type of immune cells found in monkeys and
humans. The cells can migrate from mucus membranes, where HIV infections begin,
into lymph nodes.

   When 10 macaque monkeys were vaccinated with cultures of their treated cells,
then given four booster shots in eight weeks, virus levels dropped in the blood
of seven monkeys.

   Their viral levels stayed low over the next 34 weeks, the authors wrote, but
it remained unclear how long the effects will last. In the remaining three
monkeys, the virus started to increase after the first immunization.

   "If the approach is confirmed in monkeys and successfully adapted in humans,
it may represent a major new therapeutic approach," Dr. Bruce D. Walker,
director of the Division of AIDS at Harvard Medical School, said in an
accompanying Nature Medicine commentary.

   The Caltech-UCLA work was supported by the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases and the Damon Runyon-Walter Winchell Fellowship. The French
research was supported by the Institute for Research Into Vaccines and AIDS and
Cancer Immunotherapy.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2002


                             984 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      December 30, 2002 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 04G

LENGTH: 401 words

HEADLINE: Consent forms promise no cure

BYLINE: LINDA A. JOHNSON Associated Press

BODY:

   While cancer patients participating in studies of experimental drugs may
mistakenly expect benefits without risks, it's probably not because of the
consent forms, federal researchers say.

   Their study found that the forms nearly always say the goal is to test the
medicine's safety, not to help patients.

   "If there is a misunderstanding . . . there's probably another reason," such
as patients' desperate hopes, said lead researcher Christine Grady of the
clinical bioethics department at the National Institutes of Health's Warren G.
Magnuson Clinical Center.

   Her review of 272 consent forms was reported in the New England Journal of
Medicine.

   It showed that fewer than 5% of forms said a cure was possible, while about
80% stated that severe or permanent harm was possible; about two-thirds
mentioned death as a risk.

   Grady said the main problem is that forms used the word "treatment" without
saying "experimental."

   "It's possible that people reading the documents with the term 'treat' used
over and over get the idea this is a more established treatment."

   Ethicists and government officials have been concerned whether potential
risks have been played down or benefits overstated to get patients with advanced
cancer to participate in human tests of new drugs.

   The so-called Phase 1 trials mainly determine a safe dose for a new compound
or drug combination. The patients recruited generally have advanced cancer. Few
benefit from the brief treatment.

   Researchers at the Magnuson center reviewed consent forms for Phase 1 cancer
experiments conducted in 1999. Most came from top cancer research centers
supported by the National Cancer Institute; 10% were from six pharmaceutical
companies.

   Arthur Caplan, chairman of the department of medical ethics at the University
of Pennsylvania, said the unexpected deaths of several patients in cancer and
gene therapy experiments over the past decade have led to better consent forms.

   He said the terms "therapy" and "treatment" should "be off limits" in consent
forms, as well as news releases and media reports about experiments.

   Caplan thinks patients don't always read the forms carefully, and some don't
understand them because of language or cultural barriers, undiagnosed mental
problems or fear of their disease.

   ------------

   New England Journal of Medicine: www.nejm.org National Cancer Institute:
www.nci.nih.gov/

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2002


                             985 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                           December 26, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy cancer tests in humans seen in 2003

BYLINE: Jim Ritter Researchers who have cured cancer in mice hope to begin
testing their novel gene therapy in humans next year.

BODY:


   Cancer treatments that work in animals often fail in people. Still, the
researchers at Northwestern University and several other centers say they're
encouraged by how the therapy boosted the immune systems in the mice, helping to
kill cancer cells.

   The treatment cured 70 percent of the mice with melanoma cancer and 80
percent of those with prostate cancer. There was zero survival among mice that
had the same cancers but did not get the treatment.

   The study was done by researchers at Northwestern, the National Cancer
Institute, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mayo Clinic and Baylor
College of Medicine. Results were published in the journal Cancer Research.

   If the treatment succeeds in people, it could be used on breast, prostate,
colon, lung and other solid-tumor cancers, said Northwestern researcher Chung
Lee.

   Cancer cells produce large amounts of a substance called TGF-beta that
shields the cancer cells from attack by immune-system cells. In the new therapy,
a mutated gene is inserted in the immune cells. This mutation enables immune
cells to penetrate the shield and kill the cancer cells, Lee said.

   Here's how the treatment would work in a human patient:

   Doctors would remove some immune cells from the patient's bone marrow and
insert the mutated gene into those cells. The patient would then receive high
doses of radiation to kill the remaining immune cells that weren't removed. The
mutated, cancer-fighting immune cells then would be put back in the patient.

   The treatment, in effect, would give the patient a new immune system. Besides
attacking cancer cells, the new immune system also might attack healthy organs
and tissue. The patient would need further therapy--perhaps a second bone-marrow
transplant--to treat this autoimmune disease.

   The researchers plan further animal studies before beginning a clinical trial
in humans. Even if all goes well, it will take about three years to determine
whether the therapy works in people. They have not yet begun recruiting
patients, but people interested in finding out more from them can call (312)
908-2004.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2003


                             986 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 26, 2002, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: Consent forms for cancer trials not misleading, researchers say

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: LINDA A. JOHNSON

BODY:

   While cancer patients participating in studies of experimental drugs may
mistakenly expect benefits without risks, it's probably not because of the
consent forms, federal researchers say.

   Their study found the forms nearly always say the goal is to test the
medicine's safety, not to help patients.

   "If there is a misunderstanding . . .  there's probably another reason," such
as patients' desperate hopes, said lead researcher Christine Grady of the
clinical bioethics department at the National Institutes of Health's Warren G.
Magnuson Clinical Center. Her review of 272 consent forms was reported in
today's New England Journal of Medicine.

   It showed that less than 5 percent of forms said a cure was possible, while
about 80 percent stated that severe or permanent harm was possible; about
two-thirds mentioned death as a risk.

   Grady said the main problem is that forms repeatedly used the word
"treatment" without saying it is "experimental."

   "It's possible that people reading the documents with the term 'treat,'
'treat,' 'treat' over and over get the idea this is a more established
treatment," she said.

   Ethicists and government officials have been concerned whether potential
risks have been played down or benefits overstated to get patients with advanced
cancer to participate in the first human tests of new cancer drugs.

   The so-called Phase 1 trials mainly determine a safe dose for a new compound
or drug combination. The patients recruited generally have advanced cancer and
little hope, and few benefit from the brief treatment.

   Researchers at the Magnuson center reviewed consent forms for Phase 1 cancer
experiments conducted in 1999. Most came from top cancer research centers
supported by the National Cancer Institute; 10 percent were from six
pharmaceutical companies.

   Arthur Caplan, chairman of the department of medical ethics at the University
of Pennsylvania, said the unexpected deaths of several patients in cancer and
gene therapy experiments over the past decade have led to better consent forms.

   But he said the terms "therapy" and "treatment" should "be off limits" in
consent forms and news reports about such experiments.

   Caplan said patients don't always read the forms carefully, and some don't
understand them.


LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2002


                             987 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               December 26, 2002 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 323 words

HEADLINE: DRUG STUDY CONSENT FORMS DON'T MISLEAD, RESEARCHERS SAY

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   While cancer patients participating in studies of experimental drugs may
mistakenly expect benefits without risks, it is probably not because of consent
forms, federal researchers say.

   Their study found that the forms almost always say the goal is to test the
medicine's safety, not to help patients.

   "If there is a misunderstanding ... there's probably another reason," such as
the patients' desperate hopes, said the lead researcher, Christine Grady, of the
clinical bioethics department at the National Institutes of Health's Warren G.
Magnuson Clinical Center.

   Her review of 272 consent forms was reported in today's New England Journal
of Medicine.

   It showed that fewer than 5 percent of forms said a cure was possible and
that about 80 percent stated that severe or permanent harm was possible. About
two-thirds mentioned death as a risk.

   Grady said the main problem was that forms repeatedly used the word
"treatment" without explaining that it was experimental. "It's possible that
people reading the documents with the term 'treat, treat, treat' over and over
get the idea this is a more established treatment."

   Ethicists and government officials have been concerned whether risks have
been played down or benefits overstated to recruit patients with advanced cancer
for tests of new cancer drugs.

   The so-called Phase 1 trials mainly determine a safe dose for a new compound
or drug combination. The patients recruited generally have advanced cancer, and
few benefit from the treatment.

   Researchers at the Magnuson center reviewed consent forms for Phase 1 cancer
experiments conducted in 1999.

   Arthur Caplan, chairman of the department of medical ethics at the University
of Pennsylvania, said the unexpected deaths of several patients in cancer and
gene therapy experiments over the past decade had led to better consent forms.
But, he said, the terms "therapy" and "treatment" should "just be off limits."

NOTES:
HEALTH & SCIENCE

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2002


                             988 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2002 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           December 26, 2002 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 408 words

HEADLINE: Researchers find cancer patients misunderstand consent forms

BYLINE: LINDA A. JOHNSON, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   While cancer patients participating in studies of experimental drugs may
mistakenly expect benefits without risks, it's probably not because of the
consent forms, federal researchers say.

   Their study found that the forms nearly always say the goal is to test the
medicine's safety, not to help patients.

   "If there is a misunderstanding . . . there's probably another reason," such
as patients' desperate hopes, said lead researcher Christine Grady of the
clinical bioethics department at the National Institutes of Health's Warren G.
Magnuson Clinical Center.

   Her review of 272 consent forms was reported in today's New England Journal
of Medicine.

   It showed that less than 5 percent of forms said a cure was possible, while
about 80 percent stated that severe or permanent harm was possible. About
two-thirds mentioned death as a risk.

    Grady said the main problem is that forms repeatedly used the word
"treatment" without saying it is "experimental." "It's possible that people
reading the documents with the term "treat," "treat," "treat" over and over get
the idea this is a more established treatment," she said.

   Ethicists and government officials have been concerned whether potential
risks have been played down or benefits overstated to get patients with advanced
cancer to participate in the first human tests of new cancer drugs.

   The so-called Phase 1 trials mainly determine a safe dose for a new compound
or drug combination. The patients recruited generally have advanced cancer and
little hope, and few benefit from the brief treatment.

   Researchers at the Magnuson center reviewed consent forms for Phase 1 cancer
experiments conducted in 1999. Most came from top cancer research centers
supported by the National Cancer Institute; 10 percent were from six
pharmaceutical companies.

   Arthur Caplan, chairman of the department of medical ethics at the University
of Pennsylvania, said the unexpected deaths of several patients in cancer and
gene therapy experiments over the past decade have led to better consent forms.

   But he said the terms "therapy" and "treatment" should "just be off-limits"
in consent forms, as well as news releases and media reports about such
experiments.

   Caplan thinks patients don't always read the forms carefully, and some don't
understand them because of language or cultural barriers, undiagnosed mental
problems or fear of their disease.

   "Studies show people are much more influenced by what the doctor says," he
added.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             989 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2002 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           December 26, 2002 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 408 words

HEADLINE: Researchers find cancer patients misunderstand consent forms

BYLINE: LINDA A. JOHNSON, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   While cancer patients participating in studies of experimental drugs may
mistakenly expect benefits without risks, it's probably not because of the
consent forms, federal researchers say.

   Their study found that the forms nearly always say the goal is to test the
medicine's safety, not to help patients.

   "If there is a misunderstanding . . . there's probably another reason," such
as patients' desperate hopes, said lead researcher Christine Grady of the
clinical bioethics department at the National Institutes of Health's Warren G.
Magnuson Clinical Center.

   Her review of 272 consent forms was reported in today's New England Journal
of Medicine.

   It showed that less than 5 percent of forms said a cure was possible, while
about 80 percent stated that severe or permanent harm was possible. About
two-thirds mentioned death as a risk.

    Grady said the main problem is that forms repeatedly used the word
"treatment" without saying it is "experimental." "It's possible that people
reading the documents with the term "treat," "treat," "treat" over and over get
the idea this is a more established treatment," she said.

   Ethicists and government officials have been concerned whether potential
risks have been played down or benefits overstated to get patients with advanced
cancer to participate in the first human tests of new cancer drugs.

   The so-called Phase 1 trials mainly determine a safe dose for a new compound
or drug combination. The patients recruited generally have advanced cancer and
little hope, and few benefit from the brief treatment.

   Researchers at the Magnuson center reviewed consent forms for Phase 1 cancer
experiments conducted in 1999. Most came from top cancer research centers
supported by the National Cancer Institute; 10 percent were from six
pharmaceutical companies.

   Arthur Caplan, chairman of the department of medical ethics at the University
of Pennsylvania, said the unexpected deaths of several patients in cancer and
gene therapy experiments over the past decade have led to better consent forms.

   But he said the terms "therapy" and "treatment" should "just be off-limits"
in consent forms, as well as news releases and media reports about such
experiments.

   Caplan thinks patients don't always read the forms carefully, and some don't
understand them because of language or cultural barriers, undiagnosed mental
problems or fear of their disease.

   "Studies show people are much more influenced by what the doctor says," he
added.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             990 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    December 25, 2002 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 063

LENGTH: 1031 words

HEADLINE: Our Man has gifts of gab; All present and accounted for

BYLINE: By JIM BAKER

BODY:

   'Twas the night before Christmas,

   When all through the house,

   Not a creature was stirring,

   Not evena mouse!

   The stockings were hung,

   By the chimney with care,

   And look what St. Nicholas

   Left With A Glare

   ********

   TOM HEINSOHN: A nice, quiet time with wife Helen watching the Celtics on Ch.
5 tonight (6 p.m.) - and a lump of coal for the NBA ref who called here to vow
the next time Tom sounds off about him on FSNE, "he'll be sent into the stands
to sit with the rest of the fans."

   BOB LOBEL: He's already in the Yuletide spirit with that shiny red nose, but
he'd like more Ch. 4 visits with 20-year ex-teammate Bob Neumeier. They looked a
lot better on "Sports Final" after Sunday's Patriots swoon than did the Patsies
on Ch. 5.

   GIL SANTOS and GINO CAPPELLETTI: They have one well-deserved gift - a glowing
vote of confidence from the Krafts with WBCN-FM's 10-year Pats renewal. Now all
they ask is a playoff prayer answered Sunday - the Pats upending Miami and the
Packers grounding the Jets.

   PAUL O'CONNELL: We'll let this veteran viewer from East Sandwich deliver a
Yuletide message to CBS' Phil Simms before he analyzes Dolphins-Pats. O'Connell
writes: "Can someone have that Phil Simms just plain shut up? He talks through a
whole game. I am 80 years old. Been involved with football all my life - high
school, semi-pros, Navy, college official, commissioner, ran the college clock
20 years. Please say something in your column." Just did, Paul. And Phil says
Merry Christmas.

   EDDIE ANDELMAN: A ringside seat for the WWZN talkmaster so he gets an
oft-stated wish: the sight of ever-gushing, never-probing Hub sportswriters
bathing Theo Epstein.

   DICK ENBERG: The longtime ex-Angels voice - and, hopefully, late owner Gene
Autry looking down with glee - already realized a long-wanted dream: a World
Series victory for the Angels.

   MIKE KELLOGG: For WWZN's GM, the granting of two wishes - an agreement with
the TV station that wants to take over his 10-to-noon block and a stronger 1510
signal so Norwood, among several towns, can be included in "The Zone."

   MARTHA BURK: A rendezvous with Ben Wright - and Hootie!

   BILL GRIFFITH: Another blizzard of faxes from ESPN (he can have mine too).

   BILL PARCELLS and JERRY JONES: Each other.

   JERRY GLANVILLE: He's back working a couple of NFL games on CBS and, for him,
that's the greatest gift of all.

   SEAN McDONOUGH: Assurance from Sox brass that not including him in even one
of NESN's 122-125 Sox telecasts was nothing personal, that they were just
pinching pennies. At least the Ch. 4-38 gang (where he'll call 30 games and be
reunited with Jerry Remy and baseball coordinator Russ Kenn) likes him.

   BOB and JONATHAN KRAFT: Another TV-radio show - to go with "Patriots
All-Access," "Patriots Weekly," "Patriots GameDay," "Patriots Monday," Patriots
specials galore, "Fifth Quarter," network pregames, network games and I'm sure
I've forgotten one or two. Whew!

   TNT OFFICIALS: An alibi for that dreadful flick, "Second String," with an
impossible premise of the Bills' first string being wiped out by bad oysters,
but second-stringers giving the team its first Super Bowl success after buying
(then replacing in the big game) a hot-shot sub quarterback. Bills voice Van
Miller was so embarrassed by appearing in this reject, he never mentioned it in
a recent interview. Star Jon Voight should be far more embarrassed. So should
Doug Flutie, who also was involved.

   JOHN ELWAY: He so craves TV time now, he'll play golf in NBC's taped  "Skills
Challenge" at 4 both weekend days. If he's honest, Elway would probably admit
he'll watch Packers-Jets instead Sunday. Wouldn't you?

   BOB COSTAS: Not much has been special about HBO's "Inside the NFL" since he
took over and longtimers Nick Buoniconti and Len Dawson were jettisoned, but his
"On the Record" year-ender at 8 Friday night is special. Among appreciation
tributes, he gets ex-Prez George Bush honoring Ted Williams, Al Michaels on
Chick Hearn, John Goodman on Jack Buck, director Barry Levinson on Johnny Unitas
and Robert Wagner on Sam Snead. There's also Serena Williams, Tiger Woods and a
roundtable with Howie Long, Tim McCarver and Charles Barkley.

   CHARLES BARKLEY: A tranquilizer. Those who take literally the title of $ 1.5
million TNT analyst's "Listen Up!" show listened in horror as Sir Charles said
the only way Chicago Bulls GM Jerry Krause keeps his job is "he's got a picture
of (Bulls owner) Jerry Reinsdorf having sex with a monkey."

   ANDY BRICKLEY, GORD KLUZAK and BOB BEERS: The monkey's off their backs. Their
gift was the Bruins finally ended their winless skein. So now they won't have to
hear critics wonder why they, and NESN's between-periods analysts, were so kind
to losers.

   BOSTON COLLEGE FOLKS: They get their BIGgift tomorrow - the Motor City Bowl
called by the only national female football voice, Pam Ward (ESPN, 5).  Holy
Toledo!

   NESN FOLKS: A better Sox slogan than "The Year To Be Here." It wasn't.

   ESPN FOLKS: An excuse for greeting phone callers with an unsolicited promo
for "The Junction Boys," the movie that featured Tom Berenger (as Bear Bryant)
slipping in and out of a Dixie accent. Also, ESPN needs an excuse for inviting
the public to view Providence-BC hoop Jan. 2 on pay-per-view when it's on NESN.

   CHRIS BERMAN: A healthy kneecap so he really "could go all the way!"

   CHARLIE MOORE: A meeting with NESN officials - immediately. What are they
trying to tell the "Mad Fisherman" when they pick Christmas Eve for a six-hour
Moore Marathon?

   GENE LAVANCHY: More offbeat "Gene Therapy" - not an elixir for having to put
up with Fred Smerlas on Ch. 7's "Sports Xtra" but more offbeat Thursday-at-5
pieces such as those on Zamboni drivers and the answer to that riveting
question: Can two basketballs fit in a hoop at the same time?

   PAM OLIVER: The interview this Foxy NFL sideliner and her rival-network
counterparts ought to demand - Andy Rooney.

   SARAH HUGHES: Happiness at Harvard - and more skating gold.

   KAYLA BAKER: At 16 months, just happiness - a Yuletide wish from "Bompa."

   *********

   And they heard him exclaim,

   As he drove out of sight,

   Merry Christmas to all,

   And don't get uptight!

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2002


                             991 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            December 23, 2002 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS MAIN NEWS; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2023 words

HEADLINE: The Nation;
Advisors Put Under a Microscope;
The Bush team is going to great lengths to vet members ofscientific panels.
Credentials, not ideology, should be the focus,critics say.

BYLINE: Aaron Zitner, Times Staff Writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   When psychologist William R. Miller was asked to join a panel that advises
the National Institute on Drug Abuse, he thought he had been selected for his
expertise in addiction. Then a Bush administration staff member called with some
unexpected questions.

   Did Miller support abortion rights? What about the death penalty for drug
kingpins? And had he voted for President Bush?

   Apparently, Miller said, he did not give enough right answers. He had not,
for example, voted for Bush. He was never appointed to the panel.

   Researchers are complaining with rising alarm that the Bush administration is
using political and ideological screening to try to ensure that its scientific
consultants recommend no policies that are out of step with the political agenda
of the White House.

   Administration officials say they are merely doing what their predecessors
have always done: using appointment powers to make sure their viewpoints are
well-represented on the government's scientific advisory boards, an important if
unglamorous part of the policy-making process. There are more than 250 boards
devoted to public health and biomedical research alone, composed of experts from
outside the government who help guide policy on gene therapy, bioterrorism,
acceptable pollutant levels and other complex matters.

   But critics say the Bush administration is going further than its
predecessors in considering ideology as well as scientific expertise in forming
the panels. A committee that merely gives technical advice on research
proposals, as opposed to setting policy, has even been subject to screening,
something the critics say was unheard of in previous administrations.

   "I don't think any administration has penetrated so deeply into the advisory
committee structure as this one, and I think it matters," said Donald Kennedy,
past president of Stanford University and editor of Science, the premier U.S.
scientific journal. "If you start picking people by their ideology instead of
their scientific credentials, you are inevitably reducing the quality of the
advisory group."

   Many of the complaints concern agencies within the Department of Health and
Human Services.

   On Dec. 10, the Food and Drug Administration rejected a nominee for an
advisory board who is known for his support of human cloning in medical
research.

   Also recently, HHS Secretary Tommy G. Thompson's staff rejected a nominee to
a board of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health who
supports federal rules to curtail repetitive stress injuries in the workplace.

   The nominees had been chosen by officials within the FDA and occupational
health agency but were then rejected by more senior officials. No specific
reasons were given, but Bush opposes human cloning and last year signed a
rollback of Clinton-era rules designed to limit repetitive stress injuries.

   Those rejections followed incidents this fall in which public health
advocates and Democratic lawmakers alleged that the administration had placed
people sympathetic to industry on two panels at the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. One panel advises CDC officials on the prevention of lead
poisoning in children. The other makes recommendations on issues ranging from
environmental toxins to bioterrorism preparations.

   "They're stacking committees to get the advice they know they want to hear,
which is a charade," said David Michaels, a professor of public health at George
Washington University, who served in the Clinton administration. "Why have an
advisory panel if you know what everyone is going to say, and they agree with
you?"

   Some critics also complain that Thompson has added an ideological cast to the
mission of some advisory panels.

   To the applause of antiabortion groups, the administration in October
directed a panel to study what protections are offered to embryos during medical
experiments, using language that equated embryos with "human subjects." Health
officials said their intent was to add protections to pregnant women who
participate in experiments.

   Bill Pierce, a spokesman for the Health and Human Services Department, said
Bush and Thompson were trying to add balance to the committees.

   "This whole idea of a grand conspiracy here or a litmus test -- it's just not
true," Pierce said. "When you look at the totality of any of these committees,
you'll find that they are highly qualified and represent a broad section of the
thinking, so that you have a spirited discussion of the issues."

   Others said that some of the complaints may reflect a difference in style
between Thompson, who as former governor of Wisconsin is familiar with using all
the levers of power, and his predecessor in the federal government's top health
slot, Donna Shalala.

   "This is a four-term governor. This is not an academic, as Dr. Shalala was,"
said Dr. John Howard, director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health. "This secretary scrutinizes appointments."

   But Thomas Murray, president of the Hastings Center, a New York bioethics
center, said he saw a pattern in the rejection of nominees to health panels,
including his own nomination to the Biological Response Modifiers Advisory
Committee, an FDA panel that considers protein drugs, gene therapy and other
matters.

   "The fact that they would even bother to blacklist me is ... deeply sad,"
Murray said. "It portends a distortion of the process of determining what the
facts are on a health topic or in environmental policy."

   Of all the incidents, several scientists say the most disconcerting involved
a panel at the occupational safety agency.

   Known as the Safety and Occupational Health Study Section, the panel reviews
applications for research grants, ranking them based on their scientific merit.
The process is known as peer review.

   Dana Loomis, a professor at the University of North Carolina who is chairman
of the panel, said Thompson's office gave no reason when it rejected three
proposed members several months ago. The nominees had been chosen last year by
Loomis, the panel staff and other officials, and they were approved by the
then-director of the occupational safety institute.

   But the reasons "seem clear enough in at least one case: One of the rejected
nominees is a respected expert in ergonomics who has publicly supported a
workplace ergonomics standard," Loomis wrote this month in a letter to Sen.
Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.). Bush last year repealed such a rule, which was
aimed at requiring employers to do more to reduce repetitive stress and related
injuries.

   That nominee, Laura Purnett, a professor at the University of Massachusetts
in Lowell, wrote to Kennedy that she had been subjected to "an ideological
litmus test" that presumed she could not be objective in her panel work.

   A second nominee, Catherine Heaney, an associate professor of public health
at Ohio State University, said she had no clue why she was rejected. But she
noted that her most recent research has focused on ergonomics.

   In a related incident, a researcher who was nominated to the panel more
recently said a member of Thompson's staff called her in an apparent attempt to
gauge her views on ergonomics and other issues.

   "I took a neutral view" on ergonomics, said Pamela Kidd, a specialist in
workplace injury prevention at Arizona State University in Tempe, who is now a
member of the panel.

   A range of scientists and research advocates said they were particularly
disturbed that the administration would ask such questions of nominees to a
peer-review panel. These panels do not set policy or make funding decisions,
they said, but merely determine whether scientists who want federal funding have
designed credible experiments that can truly answer the questions they are
studying.

   "The goal here is to fund the best science, the best-designed experiments,"
said Anthony Mazzaschi, an assistant vice president at the Assn. of American
Medical Colleges. "To stack peer-review panels based on political preferences
rather than scientific competency is doing everyone a disservice."

   Loomis, the panel chairman, said the screening "tends to stifle the
scientific spirit."

   "Regardless of what the intention was, this creates the appearance that
review panel members are being politically scrutinized, which is directly
opposed to the philosophy of peer review, which is supposed to be nonpolitical
and transparent," Loomis said in an interview.

   Lawmakers and public health advocates have been vigorously complaining about
changes to the two CDC advisory panels.

   They challenged several new appointments to the Advisory Committee on
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention, saying the new members were too closely
aligned with industry interests and might weaken protections for children
against lead poisoning. The new appointees included Dr. William Banner Jr., an
Oklahoma physician who, according to critics, has testified that lead is harmful
only at levels well beyond the government's current standards.

   Another member, Dr. Sergio Piomelli of Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center
in New York, announced at the committee's first meeting in October that he was
nominated to be on the committee by "someone from the lead industry," whose name
he could not remember. But Piomelli, a pediatric hematologist, also said he had
conducted studies that were criticized by the lead industry.

   "Advisory committees are supposed to give the government and the public
expert, unbiased advice based on the best possible science," Sen. Kennedy said.
"By stacking these important committees with right-wing ideologues instead of
respected scientists, the administration is putting the health and well-being of
the American public at risk."

   This summer, the administration chose not to reappoint 15 of the 18 members
of the National Center for Environmental Health Advisory Committee whose terms
had expired. The committee advises the Centers for Disease Control on a range of
issues, including bioterrorism preparedness and safe drinking water standards.

   One of the new appointees is a former president of a research firm funded by
the chemical industry, and another "has made a career countering claims of links
between pollutants and cancer," said Sens. Kennedy and Hillary Rodham Clinton
(D-N.Y.) in a letter to Thompson.

   Thomas Burke, an environmental health specialist at Johns Hopkins University
in Baltimore who until recently was chairman of the committee, said: "I
understand that this is the political process, and the pendulum swings. This is
definitely a swing of the pendulum."

   Pierce, the Health and Human Services Department's spokesman, said the
critics were singling out the few panel members whose views differ from their
own, "and then attributing to them some superhuman ability to overwhelm everyone
else on the committee."

   Pierce also said that the staff member who queried Miller, the addiction
researcher, is no longer with the department. "To my knowledge," he added, "'we
do not ask those questions."

   Miller, a professor of psychology and psychiatry at the University of New
Mexico in Albuquerque, said he received a call early this year asking whether he
would serve on the National Advisory Council on Drug Abuse, which guides funding
and policy decisions at a unit of the National Institutes of Health.

   Then came the call from someone at Thompson's office.

   "The first question he asked me was, 'Are you sympathetic to faith-based
initiatives?' I said yes, and he said, 'OK, you're one for one.' "

   Then the caller asked Miller about his views on needle exchange programs, the
death penalty for drug kingpins and abortion, keeping a running tally of where
his views agreed with those of the White House. Finally, the caller asked
whether Miller had voted for Bush. When Miller said he had not, the caller asked
him to explain.

   "You have to admire the audacity," Miller said last week. "It seemed rather
clear that the White House wanted to make sure they wouldn't receive any advice
inconsistent with their own positions."

   "In an ideal world, you'd choose people based on their scientific
credentials, their knowledge of the literature," he said. "Maybe that's too
ideal a world."

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2002


                             992 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     December 23, 2002 Monday, Final / All

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 649 words

HEADLINE: Doctor's sleuthing uncovers cause of rare skin disorder

BYLINE: Roger Mezger, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   HEALTH

   All his life, Bill D'Amore felt the stares and tolerated the rude questions.

   Why don't you have any hair on your body?

   What are those bumps all over your face?

   "I didn't have a clue," said D'Amore, 47, who lives in Struthers, near
Youngstown. "I didn't know what to say."

   Doctor after doctor could not tell him what was wrong.

   Then in August, Dr. Paradi Mirmirani, a University Hospitals of Cleveland
dermatologist who specializes in hair disorders, solved the mystery. D'Amore,
she discovered, is one of only five people in the world known to have a rare
genetic disorder that causes the strange appearance.

   The medical name for D'Amore's affliction is generalized atrichia with
papules. Translated, that means an absence of hair compounded by cysts that form
under the skin where hair follicles are supposed to be.

   Researchers reported in 1998 that a defect in a gene called the human
hairless gene causes the abnormality. Since then, scattered additional cases
have surfaced.

   Despite its name, a normally functioning hairless gene sends a signal that
triggers hair growth. When Mirmirani first laid eyes on D'Amore, she immediately
suspected that a haywire hairless gene was the culprit.

   First, though, she had to learn more about the phenomenon.

   That research led her to an even more obscure condition that turned out to be
what plagued D'Amore.

   Mirmirani knew that D'Amore had had bouts with rickets when he was a child.
Rickets develops when a lack of vitamin D keeps calcium salts from fortifying
the bones, leaving them soft and bowed.

   She sent off a sample of D'Amore's blood for genetic testing. Results showed
that D'Amore's hairless gene was fine. But another gene, called the vitamin D
receptor gene, was not.

   In her research, Mirmirani had come across a year-old report by Pennsylvania
dermatologists describing a patient remarkably like D'Amore: hairless except for
eyelashes and a few other facial hairs, covered with cysts and a history of
rickets.

   Like D'Amore, the Pennsylvania patient had a normal human hairless gene but
an abnormal vitamin D receptor gene. The doctors who wrote the report said it
was the first time that generalized atrichia with papules had been linked to a
defect in the vitamin D receptor gene rather than the hairless gene.

   "These two genes must in some way be very related, because the people who
have these two different [mutated] genes look very much the same," Mirmirani
said.

   "You wouldn't think of vitamin D as being important in hair growth, and yet
apparently it is."

   After Mirmirani found out about the Pennsylvania patient and diagnosed
D'Amore's condition, she learned that doctors also have linked the cases of
three members of an Israeli family to faulty vitamin D receptor genes.

   Now D'Amore knows that there are at least a few others in the world who share
his disfiguring condition.

   "It was really quite dramatic for him to get this diagnosis and then to
realize that it's so very rare," said Mirmirani, who works at UH's Chagrin
Highlands Medical Center in Orange.

   It was quite painful, too. Keratin, a protein in hair and skin, builds up and
hardens in the cysts "like a pearl," Mirmirani said. Over many months, she is
breaking open the cysts one at a time, cleaning out the deposits and hoping that
they don't come back.

   Because researchers are just starting to identify and learn about the genes
that are involved in regulating hair growth, it will be years before a gene
therapy is available to correct the condition.

   Reports on D'Amore and the three Israelis likely will appear soon in a
medical journal. In addition, Mirmirani will set up a display describing the
apparent connection between the vitamin D receptor gene and the hairless gene at
Case Western Reserve University's Research ShowCASE 2003 in April.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   rmezger@plaind.com, 216-999-4446

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2002


                             993 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    December 20, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 931 words

BODY:

   There are easily a half dozen sports topics worthy of today's harangue, but
as is our policy, we shall resolutely avoid them in our intrepid pursuit of the
completely inane. We will not, for example, lose any literary traction over the
news that the head football coach at New Mexico State -- go ahead, name the
score of one New Mexico State game, in history -- got himself an official
university reprimand for punching the team's video coordinator in an argument
over the team's highlight film.

    It's barely worth a mention because everybody already understands the huge
irony involved, specifically that nothing in the New Mexico State highlight film
could compare with, say, 30 seconds of the coach and the film guy slapping each
other. You can keep your footage of that 14-yard catch on third-and-13 against
Idaho.

    Similarly, we're not going anywhere near the conflagration in New Zealand,
where talk show callers are reportedly apoplectic over the ramp-up to the
America's Cup. "Stan, Guy, love the boat." Can the Swiss swipe the Cup from New
Zealand? They apparently will if Swiss billionaire Ernesto Bertarelli has
anything to do with it. Where do you apply for that Swiss billionaire gig
anyway?

    There'll be no discussion here about ESPN's rumored plan to televise a
series of preschool recesses involving 4-year-old Antuwaneous Jackson of
Detroit, whom talent evaluators say can play at the next level right now. ESPN
officials estimate that the prime time telecast of Jackson's debut in the
combined recess with crosstown rival Hunnybunnies Day Care will outperform
"Nightline" in at least six markets.

    Nor will this column take a position on the question of whether Suzy Whaley
should be able to hit from the forward tees. We don't care if she plays the
Greater Hartford Open on horseback. We're leaving that to the U.N. Security
Council.

    Likewise, we will expend no effort this morning trying to crystallize what
Washington Redskins' cornerback Darrell Green meant when he told USA Hooray that
the scary thing about the decline of that franchise is that "everyone seems to
be brain-swirly." Let's just say that it can't be good, unless it's served in
16-ounce cans of Brain-Swirly Light.

    Most of all, this column will be careful to avoid any presentation of the
NFL playoff scenarios as they are simply too arcane for the light of day. The
Oakland Raiders, for example, can clinch the AFC West title this weekend with a
win or a tie, or, if Denver and San Diego lose, a win or a tie or a belt and a
nice pair of cufflinks.

    All that aside, this column's primary purpose is the imperative to establish
that this great nation really started sliding toward the abyss when it began
allowing its sports teams to assume singular names. Do we mean that all the
suffering and violence and instability of the entire geopolitical stage can be
blamed on the emergence of the Los Angeles Galaxy? Well, sure.

    For my money, there are few things more depressing to read about, other than
the Bush Administration, than that the Columbus Crew defeated the Indiana Fever,
especially when you consider that the Crew is affiliated with Major League
Soccer and the Fever is in the WNBA. But the point remains.

    We built this American sports culture on Lions and Tigers and Bears (go
ahead), on Packers and Raiders and Steelers, on Yankees and Dodgers and Pirates,
on 76ers and Celtics and Knickerbockers, on Blackhawks and Red Wings and even
Penguins.

    We remain amazingly uncomfortable with things like the Orlando Miracle. To
us, the Orlando Miracle is the largely unattainable notion of getting the family
out of Disney World without dropping $7,000 on a six-day park hopper vacation.
Or is that the Orlando Magic? I forget.

    In my own fractured memory, the singular sports nickname first surfaced in
the old World Football League, circa 1975. There was a Chicago Fire, I believe,
and there was definitely something called the Philadelphia Bell. The Bell played
at semi-dearly departed Municipal Stadium, which sat near miles and square miles
of South Philadelphia oil refineries, the perpetual flames above which filled
the neighborhood with a slimy throat-squeezing aroma. Thus, the Philadelphia
Smell would have been a better name, but not as good a name as the Philadelphia
Swirling Airborne Carcinogens. At least that ends in an 's' .

    Thankfully, the singular nickname has begun to appear doomed by simple
arithmetic. When you consider that the number of points now scored on any
particular night by Yao Ming (of the good ol' Houston Rockets) generally exceeds
the number of American cities that still don't have an NBA franchise, you can
understand that viable singular nicknames are becoming depleted.

    Singular nicknames that somehow convey the strength or nobility of naturally
occurring phenomena are running short. It's barely workable as it is to have the
Colorado Avalanche, the Minnesota Wild, the Tampa Bay Lightning, the Miami Heat,
and the St. John's Red Storm, but what's left for expansion to bring us? The
Shreveport Mudslide? The Birmingham Smog? The Atlanta Sink Hole? The Iowa Cold
Snap? The Tulsa Golf Ball-Sized Hail?

    A similar problem faces the teams in the NSL, the Negative Stimuli League,
your Charlotte Sting, your Detroit Shock, your Indiana Fever, and your Dallas
Burn. You can't go the other way -- the St. Louis Massage? The Denver Pedicure?

    Basically it's this: Stick to naming your teams after animals, but even if
your team is named after laundry, plural is better. Chicago White Sox good,
Memphis Wind Sock bad.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2002


                             994 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    December 19, 2002 Thursday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: GenVec hires Wright as COO, once was Guilford's president;
 He helped launch Synagis, MedImmune's big seller

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   GenVec Inc., a Gaithersburg developer of gene therapies, said yesterday that
it has hired veteran biopharmaceuticals industry executive David P. Wright as
its president and chief operating officer.

   Wright, 55, most recently was president of Baltimore's Guilford
Pharmaceuticals Inc. But he made his reputation in an earlier position as
executive vice president of MedImmune Inc., where he helped launch the
blockbuster drug Synagis.

   "We wanted someone who has gone through the biotech experience and launched a
biotech drug," GenVec spokeswoman Mary Sundeen said, noting that Wright knows
what it's like to work with the small budgets and high stress common at
companies that have yet to put a drug on the market.

   Wright was MedImmune Inc.'s executive vice president from 1990 to 2000, when
the company developed and launched Synagis. The drug, which is used to prevent a
severe respiratory infection in infants, accounted for more than 80 percent of
MedImmune's $618.7 million in revenue last year.

   Before joining MedImmune, Wright held marketing and sales positions at such
companies as Glaxo Inc. and G.D. Searle.

   Wright said he joined GenVec because "it gave me an opportunity to really
expand what I was doing and become more involved in a company I felt I could
bring something to."

   The job puts Wright in charge of more areas of the company than he had at
Guilford, where he also was president but primarily functioned as chief business
officer.

   At GenVec, he will oversee manufacturing, business development and drug
development. He also will work with new GenVec marketing and sales Vice
President David Robinson, a former GlaxoSmithKline manager.

   Wright said other reasons he left Guilford for GenVec include his longtime
industry ties to members of GenVec's board (MedImmune Chairman Wayne T.
Hockmeyer is on it), the depressed state of Guilford's stock relative to the
price of his Guilford stock options and the belief that GenVec is in some ways
"closer to building the promise (of its drugs) than Guilford is."

   GenVec's BioBypass treatment for circulatory problems may soon be in Phase
III clinical trials, the final stage of Food and Drug Administration-required
human testing, Wright said. He said TNFerade, a gene therapy designed to enhance
the anti-tumor effects of radiation, "will be in Phase III in less than 18
months, with any luck."

   Guilford markets the brain-cancer treatment Gliadel, but has struggled with a
number of recent setbacks.

   GenVec's shares lost 8 cents yesterday to close at $3.59.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), David P. Wright announced Dec. 3 that he was quitting as
presi dent of Baltimore's Guilford Pharmaceuticals.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2002


                             995 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2002 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                    December 17, 2002 Tuesday No dot Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 3E

LENGTH: 346 words

HEADLINE: Hour by Hour, guests enjoy magazine gala

BYLINE: Michael H. Margolin

BODY:

   ROYAL OAK -- Hour Detroit magazine's annual holiday party at the Detroit Zoo
was a mob scene. More than 500 guests showed up.

   "People from all over Metro Detroit, from hair salons to casinos," was how
Ann Duke, Hour's advertising director, described the crowd. Many of the guests
were advertisers in the magazine, now in its sixth year. Hour thanked them with
gin -- Tanqueray Ten -- and music by Intrigue and a trio.

   Women project hope around the world with holiday luncheon

   A luncheon and the chance to look over merchandise from more than 30 vendors
was the drawing card for the Women's Division of Project HOPE's "Holiday
Luncheon and Boutique" at the Oakland Hills Country Club in Bloomfield Hills.

   First things first: Member Ellie Tholen made sure that there was no confusion
with Focus:HOPE, Detroit's urban social force that feeds pregnant moms and
seniors and trains the disadvantaged to become skilled industrial workers.
Project HOPE -- Health Opportunities for People Everywhere -- enables a medical
ship to take supplies and health education to needy populations around the
world. The current efforts focus on maternal and pediatric health in central
Asia.

   The Metro Detroit women's division holds this sold-out annual event, which
drew 200 paying guests and donates about $30,000 to the national Project HOPE
organization.

   What's coming up

   Sixth annual Red Heart Blues ... and all that Jazz! fund-raiser is 6 p.m.
Feb. 8 at the Ford Motor Co. Conference and Event Center in Dearborn. The
evening will feature dinner, dancing, a live and silent auction, and an awards
presentation. Tickets are $250 patron, $350 benefactor, $500 gold and $1,000
platinum sponsorship. Proceeds will benefit research and treatment for the
prevention and cure of cardiovascular disease, with emphasis on molecular gene
therapy. Call (313) 876-9259.

   St. Joseph's Mercy of Macomb Medallion Ball will be Feb. 22 at Penna's of
Sterling. Proceeds from the black-tie affair will benefit Women's Health
Services. Tickets are $175. Call (586) 466-9420.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2002


                             996 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      December 17, 2002 Tuesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 741 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS SCAN MINDS OF MICE FOR ROOTS OF FEAR

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Fear creates an indelible and lasting impression, and a group of researchers
say they have found a genetic explanation for the primitive emotion's lasting
impact.

   Researchers at Harvard University and Columbia University, including Nobel
Prize winner Eric Kandel, compared genes from cells taken from areas of mice
brains known to be involved in learning fear and cells taken from areas not
known to play a role in the process.

      They said the work may help with understanding, and eventually treating, a

variety of mental diseases.
   In the current issue of the journal Cell, the researchers noted that the
gene GRP, for gastrin-releasing protein, seems to be highly active in the
lateral nucleus, which feeds auditory signals to the amygdala, the area of the
brain central to fear processing.
    Researchers bred "knockout" mice lacking the gene needed to process GRP.
They subjected the genetically altered mice and normal mice to musical tones
and electric shocks and measured how long they froze -- an indication of how
well they had learned fear.
    "When we compared the mouse strains, we saw a powerful enhancement of
learned fear in the knockout mice," Kandel said.
    The mice showed no greater sensitivity to pain or instinctive fear,
suggesting that the gene has specific responsibility in the learning of fear.

   Memory Masters
   People are not born with a good memory but apparently learn how to memorize
well.
    In good news for people who can't remember names or to pick up milk on the
way home, researchers at University College of London found little difference
in the physiology of brains of normal people and high-ranking competitors at
World Memory Championships held in London.
   Imaging tests did reveal greater activity in brain areas associated with
memory among the champion memorizers than among their more forgetful peers,
according to a study published Monday in the online edition of Nature
Neuroscience.
   When interviewed later, the skilled memorizers all said they used certain
mnemonic strategies, including the trick of placing items to be memorized on
an imaginary path where they can be more easily retrieved later.
   The study suggests that the memory-impaired can improve, although the study
authors noted that the super memorizers might possess subtle physiological
differences that went undetected by brain scans.

   Toothless Risk
   Men who lose their teeth have a greater risk of stroke than those who keep
their choppers, according to Harvard University researchers.
   The researchers looked at health records of more than 41,000 male,
predominately white, health professionals.
   They found that men with 17 to 24 teeth had a 50 percent greater risk of
having a stroke than those with 25 to 32 teeth. The association between tooth
loss and stroke held even when the presence of periodontal disease was
factored out.
   The findings were published in the current issue of Stroke: Journal of the
American Heart Association.
   There are many risk factors for stroke, including age, poor income,
periodontal disease and smoking, the researchers noted.
   So they said they could not explain their finding that the nonsmokers with
tooth loss seemed to be at greater risk of stroke than smokers.

   Corralling Cancer?
    A gene therapy technique that unleashes a robust immune system response
has helped destroy cancer tumors in laboratory mice.
    In the current issue of the journal Cancer Research, researchers at the
National Cancer Institute, Northwestern University, the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Baylor College of Medicine reported that they
achieved a 70 percent survival rate in mice injected with melanoma cells and
80 percent survival in those injected with prostate cells.
    All the mice injected with cancer cells but not receiving gene therapy
died.
    The approach involves introducing genes that alter immune system cells so
they can block the effects of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta), a
powerful suppressor of the immune system that helps cancer evade the body's
defenses.
    In the past, approaches that have cured cancer in mice have proved to be
disappointing when applied to human patients. Researchers said they were
optimistic that gene therapy trials on people might begin soon.






GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: (b&w)

COLUMN: MEDICAL FRONTIERS

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2002


                             997 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 17, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1352 words

HEADLINE: Biotechs get snubbed; Investors send a message as many local companies
trade below cash value

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 With a $196.1 million bankroll, Arena Pharmaceuticals is sitting on one of the
largest cash hoards of any of San Diego County's money-losing public
biotechnology companies.

   Traditionally, most biotechs feel lucky if they have two years of cash in
reserve.  Arena has enough to fund operations and drug discovery efforts for
about five years, according to Arena officials.

   So why is Wall Street eyeing Arena with such pronounced disdain?

   Arena's stock, which soared as high as $47 when the company went public
during the genomics boom of 2000, now trades at a valuation slightly below the
cash on the company's balance sheet.  That means investors have placed a
negative value on both the company's technology and the drug candidate it plans
to begin testing in humans next year.

   The company's cash alone is worth $7.08 a share, compared with the actual
price of $6.99 when the stock closed Friday.

   Arena isn't alone in experiencing such snubs.  As of Friday, seven out of San
Diego's 24 local drug-research biotechs -- or 29 percent -- have stocks that
trade below, and sometimes far below, the value of cash on hand.

   "When a biotech is selling below cash it means in the investors' view that
cash is stagnant, the company won't create value with the money, they will just
continue to burn it," said John McCamant, editor of the Berkeley-based Medical
Technology Stock Letter.  "And if you look at those who are selling at or below
cash you will usually find a hiccup -- an event that wasn't positive."

   Technically, disgruntled investors could buy the outstanding shares of a
biotech trading below its cash value, liquidate the company, and turn a profit
just by distributing the money to shareholders.

   Though an unlikely scenario, it underscores how vulnerable some biotechs have
become to hostile takeover bids, or pressure to buy or be bought by other
companies that might boost shareholder value.

   "We are a tempting target," acknowledges Jack Lief, chief executive of Arena,
which recently put in place a "poison pill" plan to discourage any potential
takeover.  "Our stock is cheap.  We have a great technology, but it is not being
valued by the marketplace.  It's valued at zero."

   Arena already appears to be under pressure from one stakeholder.
Chicago-based BVF Partners has been buying Arena shares over the year,
ultimately scooping up a 28 percent stake.

   BVF said in an Oct. 11 filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission
that it is seeking representation on the Arena board of directors and plans
"constructive input regarding measures intended to maximize shareholder value."

   BVF officials declined to comment about their plans.

   A few weeks after the BVF filing, Arena's board of directors approved the
poison pill plan.  Lief declined to discuss whether BVF has requested a seat on
the Arena board or has pressured the company to make changes.

   "I've been through the wars many times, and people don't get very far by
pressuring me," Lief said.  "We have a cordial relationship with BVF, but where
that goes is hard to tell.  They could say I'd like to take over this company,
who knows?  We live in interesting times."

   Other San Diego biotechs trading below cash include "platform" or "tool"
companies, which have technologies to aid other companies to discover drugs but
a less clear pathway for generating profits for themselves.

   Among those companies are Sequenom, Nanogen, and Applied Molecular Evolution.
Sequenom and Nanogen have developed systems for analyzing variations in genes,
while Applied Molecular uses a gene-tweaking technology to create improved
drugs.

   Though tool and genomics companies were red-hot with Wall Street in 2000, the
chill set in as it became apparent that the genomics revolution will take years
to produce viable drugs.

   "All of the platform companies received tons of cash when the market was hot,
and now no one wants them," said Caroline Copithorne, an analyst with Morgan
Stanley.  "With platform companies that are trading less than cash value,
investors are saying the productivity on that money is so far out that it's less
than the cash, or there is so much risk associated that it's not worth it."

   Some drug discovery companies are also taking a hit.  In most cases they are
companies that have handed investors bad news -- drug trial failures or a
rejection from the Food and Drug Administration.

   As of Friday, Corvas International, whose stock is down 78 percent from its
52-week high of $7.35, traded at $1.59. This year, Corvas announced that its
experimental drug to treat strokes failed in a midstage clinical trial to
benefit patients.

   That failure came on top of a disappointment last year, when Corvas stopped
development of an anti-clotting medicine after federal regulators demanded more
tests.

   The company has cut 42 of its 109 employees to conserve cash and is focusing
on the only experimental drug left in its pipeline -- a treatment for angina
that is in Phase 2 testing.

   Corvas has $71.2 million in the bank, enough to last it more than three years
at its average burn rate.  But Wall Street isn't impressed.  The company's cash
alone is worth $2.58 a share, compared with the stock's closing price of $1.59
on Friday.

   Randall Woods, chief executive of Corvas, acknowledges that his company is
looking for other companies to merge with or acquire to boost its drug pipeline
and restore its ailing stock price.

   "I think investors believe we are doing the responsible things we can be
doing," Wood said.  "There would probably be more pressure on us if Corvas were
the only company trading at a discount to cash and everyone else was doing well,
but we have plenty of company."

   That company includes San Diego biotechs Maxim Pharmaceuticals and Vical.
Maxim, whose lead skin cancer drug was rejected by federal regulators last year,
has resumed testing of the drug, but results won't be in for a few more years,
according to the company.

   On Friday, Maxim closed at $2.71. The company's $115.9 million in cash is
worth $4.97 for each share outstanding, which means Maxim is trading at a 45
percent discount to cash.

   Investors have also lost patience with Vical.  Founded in 1991, the San Diego
gene therapy company has yet to get a drug on the market.  Earlier this year,
Vical said its skin cancer vaccine failed to benefit patients in a Phase 3
clinical trial.

   Vical is now retesting its therapeutic vaccine at a higher dosage, but
investors aren't registering much enthusiasm for the company's stock.  The
company's cash is worth $5.79, compared with Friday's closing price of $3.41 --
a 41 percent discount to cash.

   Arena, though not as deeply devalued as some biotechs, has also had its share
of problems.  An experimental Alzheimer's disease drug the company licensed from
a Japanese company in 1998 fizzled in early human testing, and collaborations
that some Wall Street analysts counted on to make the company profitable last
year failed to materialize.

   Arena focuses on discovering drugs that target G protein-coupled receptors,
known as GPCRs. The company developed a technology to discover chemical
compounds that act on GPCRs, and has found potential drug candidates in the
areas of obesity and schizophrenia.

   Lief blames impatient investors who have an excessively short-term take on
the drug discovery process for some of the company's stock price woes.

   "Most investors don't know the difference between a receptor and a toaster,"
Lief said.  "GPCRs are very valuable.  The problem is investors look at research
costs, shrug, and say, 'That means the company is spending money in a bad
market, so I'll trash the stock.'"

   Though there is some truth to that argument, it isn't that simple, counters
McCamant.

   "I hate to say it, but at one level it all falls on management," McCamant
said.  "When a company is selling below cash value, investors are not only
unhappy about the product but management's ability to create value.  It is a
vote of no confidence."

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; 1,2,3. K.C. Alfred / Union-Tribune photos; 1. Jack Lief, chief
executive of Arena Pharmaceuticals, has helped the company raise a healthy $196
million bankroll to weather the current downturn in the stock market. 2. Arena
scientists work with laboratory samples. 3. Marc Decaine works in the chemistry
lab at Arena Pharmaceuticals. (C-5)

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2002


                             998 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 17, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1326 words

HEADLINE: Biotechs get snubbed;
Investors send a message as many local companies trade below cash value

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   With a $196.1 million bankroll, Arena Pharmaceuticals is sitting on one of
the largest cash hoards of any of San Diego County's money-losing public
biotechnology companies. Traditionally, most biotechs feel lucky if they have
two years of cash in reserve.

   Arena has enough to fund operations and drug discovery efforts for about five
years, according to Arena officials. So why is Wall Street eyeing Arena with
such pronounced disdain? Arena's stock, which soared as high as $47 when the
company went public during the genomics boom of 2000, now trades at a valuation
slightly below the cash on the company's balance sheet.

   That means investors have placed a negative value on both the company's
technology and the drug candidate it plans to begin testing in humans next year.
The company's cash alone is worth $7.08 a share, compared with the actual price
of $6.99 when the stock closed Friday. Arena isn't alone in experiencing such
snubs.

   As of Friday, seven out of San Diego's 24 local drug-research biotechs -- or
29 percent -- have stocks that trade below, and sometimes far below, the value
of cash on hand. "When a biotech is selling below cash it means in the
investors' view that cash is stagnant, the company won't create value with the
money, they will just continue to burn it," said John McCamant, editor of the
Berkeley-based Medical Technology Stock Letter.

   "And if you look at those who are selling at or below cash you will usually
find a hiccup -- an event that wasn't positive." Technically, disgruntled
investors could buy the outstanding shares of a biotech trading below its cash
value, liquidate the company, and turn a profit just by distributing the money
to shareholders. Though an unlikely scenario, it underscores how vulnerable some
biotechs have become to hostile takeover bids, or pressure to buy or be bought
by other companies that might boost shareholder value. "We are a tempting
target," acknowledges Jack Lief, chief executive of Arena, which recently put in
place a "poison pill" plan to discourage any potential takeover.

   "Our stock is cheap.

   We have a great technology, but it is not being valued by the marketplace.

   It's valued at zero." Arena already appears to be under pressure from one
stakeholder. Chicago-based BVF Partners has been buying Arena shares over the
year, ultimately scooping up a 28 percent stake. BVF said in an Oct. 11 filing
with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it is seeking representation on
the Arena board of directors and plans "constructive input regarding measures
intended to maximize shareholder value." BVF officials declined to comment about
their plans. A few weeks after the BVF filing, Arena's board of directors
approved the poison pill plan.

   Lief declined to discuss whether BVF has requested a seat on the Arena board
or has pressured the company to make changes. "I've been through the wars many
times, and people don't get very far by pressuring me," Lief said.

   "We have a cordial relationship with BVF, but where that goes is hard to
tell.

   They could say I'd like to take over this company, who knows?

   We live in interesting times." Other San Diego biotechs trading below cash
include "platform" or "tool" companies, which have technologies to aid other
companies to discover drugs but a less clear pathway for generating profits for
themselves. Among those companies are Sequenom, Nanogen, and Applied Molecular
Evolution.

   Sequenom and Nanogen have developed systems for analyzing variations in
genes, while Applied Molecular uses a gene-tweaking technology to create
improved drugs. Though tool and genomics companies were red-hot with Wall Street
in 2000, the chill set in as it became apparent that the genomics revolution
will take years to produce viable drugs. "All of the platform companies received
tons of cash when the market was hot, and now no one wants them," said Caroline
Copithorne, an analyst with Morgan Stanley.

   "With platform companies that are trading less than cash value, investors are
saying the productivity on that money is so far out that it's less than the
cash, or there is so much risk associated that it's not worth it." Some drug
discovery companies are also taking a hit.

   In most cases they are companies that have handed investors bad news -- drug
trial failures or a rejection from the Food and Drug Administration. As of
Friday, Corvas International, whose stock is down 78 percent from its 52-week
high of $7.35, traded at $1.59. This year, Corvas announced that its
experimental drug to treat strokes failed in a midstage clinical trial to
benefit patients. That failure came on top of a disappointment last year, when
Corvas stopped development of an anti-clotting medicine after federal regulators
demanded more tests. The company has cut 42 of its 109 employees to conserve
cash and is focusing on the only experimental drug left in its pipeline -- a
treatment for angina that is in Phase 2 testing. Corvas has $71.2 million in the
bank, enough to last it more than three years at its average burn rate.

   But Wall Street isn't impressed.

   The company's cash alone is worth $2.58 a share, compared with the stock's
closing price of $1.59 on Friday. Randall Woods, chief executive of Corvas,
acknowledges that his company is looking for other companies to merge with or
acquire to boost its drug pipeline and restore its ailing stock price. "I think
investors believe we are doing the responsible things we can be doing," Wood
said.

   "There would probably be more pressure on us if Corvas were the only company
trading at a discount to cash and everyone else was doing well, but we have
plenty of company." That company includes San Diego biotechs Maxim
Pharmaceuticals and Vical. Maxim, whose lead skin cancer drug was rejected by
federal regulators last year, has resumed testing of the drug, but results won't
be in for a few more years, according to the company. On Friday, Maxim closed at
$2.71. The company's $115.9 million in cash is worth $4.97 for each share
outstanding, which means Maxim is trading at a 45 percent discount to cash.
Investors have also lost patience with Vical.

   Founded in 1991, the San Diego gene therapy company has yet to get a drug on
the market.

   Earlier this year, Vical said its skin cancer vaccine failed to benefit
patients in a Phase 3 clinical trial. Vical is now retesting its therapeutic
vaccine at a higher dosage, but investors aren't registering much enthusiasm for
the company's stock.

   The company's cash is worth $5.79, compared with Friday's closing price of
$3.41 -- a 41 percent discount to cash. Arena, though not as deeply devalued as
some biotechs, has also had its share of problems.

   An experimental Alzheimer's disease drug the company licensed from a Japanese
company in 1998 fizzled in early human testing, and collaborations that some
Wall Street analysts counted on to make the company profitable last year failed
to materialize. Arena focuses on discovering drugs that target G protein-coupled
receptors, known as GPCRs. The company developed a technology to discover
chemical compounds that act on GPCRs, and has found potential drug candidates in
the areas of obesity and schizophrenia. Lief blames impatient investors who have
an excessively short-term take on the drug discovery process for some of the
company's stock price woes. "Most investors don't know the difference between a
receptor and a toaster," Lief said.

   "GPCRs are very valuable.

   The problem is investors look at research costs, shrug, and say, 'That means
the company is spending money in a bad market, so I'll trash the stock.'" Though
there is some truth to that argument, it isn't that simple, counters McCamant.
"I hate to say it, but at one level it all falls on management," McCamant said.

   "When a company is selling below cash value, investors are not only unhappy
about the product but management's ability to create value.

   It is a vote of no confidence." Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237;
penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Jack Lief, chief executive of Arena
Pharmaceuticals, has helped the company raise a healthy $196 million bankroll to
weather the current downturn in the stock market. 2. Arena scientists work with
laboratory samples. 3. Marc Decaine works in the chemistry lab at Arena
Pharmaceuticals. (C-5); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3. K.C. Alfred / Union-Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             999 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       December 16, 2002, Monday , METRO

SECTION: S.A. LIFE; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1291 words

HEADLINE: ;Future with cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Richard A. Marini


BODY: Whenever the doctors or nurses at Christus Santa Rosa Children's Hospital
want to offer encouragement to a young child with cystic fibrosis (or to the
child's family), they call in Matt Wright.

    "The kids look at Matt and they're, like, 'wow,' says Dr. Donna
Willey-Courand, a pediatric pulmonologist at the hospital's Cystic Fibrosis and
Chronic Lung Disease Center.

    What prompts this wow-factor are Wright's broad chest and David
Robinson-like biceps, the result of three years of serious weight-lifting. Not
bad for a 24-year-old whose parents were told he wouldn't survive to his teens.



    But Wright is fairly typical of many of today's cystic fibrosis patients in
that, due to new drugs and therapies, he's living a longer, healthier life than
could have been imagined even a few short years ago.

    "CF is no longer a death sentence," says Robert Beall, president and chief
executive officer of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "Today, the median age of
CF patients is about 331/2, and almost 40 percent of our patients are 18 and
older."

    However, this good news has been tempered by a host of problems - both
medical and financial - unimagined 20 years ago when many CF patients did not
survive to school age.

    The breakthrough leading to today's situation occurred in 1989, with the
discovery of the defective gene that causes the disease.

    "That accelerated the pace of research as we began to figure out how the
disease was manifested by the body," says Beall. "We don't have a cure yet, but
it's allowed us to develop more effective therapies to treat patients and help
them live longer."

    These therapies include:

    Standardized care. About 90 percent of CF patients are treated at one of 117
centers accredited by the CF Foundation. Patients in these centers are cared for
by a team of experts, including a physician (usually a pulmonologist or a
gastroenterologist), nurse with CF experience, social worker and nutritionist.
Patients are seen by a doctor at least once a quarter - more often if their
condition warrants it.

    "CF is a progressive disease, so we want them in here even if they're
feeling good," says clinical nurse Mattie Jennings. "They're may be getting
worse, but their body has adjusted, and they don't notice the deterioration."

    San Antonio has three accredited CF centers. In addition to Christus
Children's Hospital, there's one at the Methodist Children's Hospital (which is
an affiliate of the Christus program) and one at Wilford Hall.

    Aggressive use of antibiotics. Although this strategy fell out of favor for
a time, it's now back in vogue. That's because new drugs, particularly
tobramycin, and new techniques, such as aerosolized drugs that are inhaled,
allow physicians to more effectively reduce the population of the bacterium
pseudomonas aeruginosa . This is a particularly tenacious bug that colonizes the
lungs and is virtually impossible to eradicate completely.

    Even with these new treatments, many CF patients still need to undergo
what's known as an "IV clean-out," during which they're hospitalized for two
weeks to receive intravenous antibiotics. Wright, for example, goes for a
clean-out every two to three months.

    New drugs. The mucous-thinner dornase alfa (brand name, Pulmozyme) reduces
lung infections and makes breathing easier. Other drugs include azithromycin
(Zithromax), a common antibiotic that reduces lung inflammation. In trials, the
drug improved breathing by 6 percent and reduced hospitalizations by almost
half. The pain killer ibuprofen also has been shown to reduce lung inflammation
in children.

    Gene therapy also remains a promising, if frustrating, field of study. In
October, researchers announced that, after introducing copies of the normal CF
gene into the lungs of patients, lung function improved - albeit only
temporarily.

    "The effects lasted for about 30 days," explains Beall. "But this is the
first indication in nine years of gene therapy trials that adding the normal
gene can correct the defect that causes CF."

    Advances in lung transplants are also promising, although the waiting lists
are long and this only "cures" the disease in the lungs. The disease can still
play havoc with the liver, pancreas, intestines, sinuses and other organs.

    While they're living longer, adult CF patients must contend with any number
of complications that were not a consideration when most people with the disease
died in childhood.

    For example, CF patients are more susceptible to diabetes, which, if not
controlled, can cause a significant decline in lung function, or the ability to
breath easily. The body's inability to fully absorb nutrients such as calcium, a
symptom of both CF and long-term antibiotic use, can lead to osteoporosis. Other
common problems include liver disease and infertility.

    To deal with these added burdens, many physicians have, in recent years, had
to undergo unexpected on-the-job training.

    "When I was in medical school training to be a pulmonologist, they didn't
even teach us about CF because the average patient lived only to about 6," says
Dr. Carlos R. Orozco. "Over the past few years, we've seen a dramatic increase
in the number of older CF patients we follow."

    Of the 80 or so patients being treated at the Christus center, for example,
22 are adults, according to Jennings.

    "Our oldest patient right now is 45 years old, and we had a man who was 48
when he died last year," she says. "You go to conferences and you hear people
talking about treating patients in their 50s and 60s."

    Still, while CF patients are living longer, it's still a difficult life.

    A patient may have to take as many as 15 different pills, including
medications, vitamins and enzymes every day. They also have to submit to chest
physiotherapy, which essentially means being pounded on the back and chest to
loosen the phlegm in the lungs. These regimens can easily take an hour or more,
sometimes several times a day.

    Equally draining is the financial burden. Having a physical therapist come
in to do chest physiotherapy twice a day can cost as much as $15,000 annually.
Enzymes necessary for digestion will run $1,500 to $3,000 a year. This doesn't
even take into account hospitalization several times a year for two weeks at a
time for an IV clean-out.

    Yet, once patients reach 18 (or, in some cases, 21), they're no longer
covered by their parents' insurance. If they get a job at a company that offers
medical insurance, they're usually denied coverage because CF is a pre-existing
condition.

    Most patients are forced to go on Medicaid. But that program pays for a
maximum of three medications a month, so they also rely on Children with Special
Health Care Needs, a program of the Texas Department of Health that, despite its
name, also covers adult CF patients.

    But there's talk that the program's budget may be cut during the next
legislative session, according to Orozco.

    Still, physicians say they welcome such problems, if only because it means
their patients are living longer. "It's truly a double-edged sword," says
Willey-Courand. "I tell my 18-year-old patients I've cured them from being a
pediatric CF patient, but that now they're an adult patient."

    While the search for a cure for cystic fibrosis continues, experts say such
a breakthrough is probably a long way off. So they'll continue their work
developing long-term management strategies.

    "A one-time cure is the home run we're all looking for," says Beall.
"Advances like tobramycin and Pulmozyme are the singles and doubles we're going
to continue trying to hit."

    rmarini@express-news.net.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: EDWARD A. ORNELAS/STAFF SAN ANTONIO EXPRESS-NEWS : PHOTO: FOR SA
LIFE - Matt Wright, 24 who has cystic fibrosis, does incline bench presses
Monday Dec. 9, 2002 at the Racquetball & Fitness Club in the 9200 block of
Guilbeau. FOR RICH MARINI STORY. PHOTO BY EDWARD A. ORNELAS/STAFF; PHOTO: FOR
SALIFE - Matt Wright, 24 who has cystic fibrosis, bench presses Monday Dec. 9,
2002 at the Racquetball & Fitness Club in the 9200 block of Guilbeau as his
workout partner Conrad Dalton spots him. FOR RICH MARINI STORY. PHOTO BY EDWARD
A. ORNELAS/STAFF

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2002


                             1000 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       December 16, 2002, Monday , METRO

SECTION: S.A. LIFE; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1291 words

HEADLINE: ;Future with cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Richard A. Marini


BODY: Whenever the doctors or nurses at Christus Santa Rosa Children's Hospital
want to offer encouragement to a young child with cystic fibrosis (or to the
child's family), they call in Matt Wright.

    "The kids look at Matt and they're, like, 'wow,' says Dr. Donna
Willey-Courand, a pediatric pulmonologist at the hospital's Cystic Fibrosis and
Chronic Lung Disease Center.

    What prompts this wow-factor are Wright's broad chest and David
Robinson-like biceps, the result of three years of serious weight-lifting. Not
bad for a 24-year-old whose parents were told he wouldn't survive to his teens.



    But Wright is fairly typical of many of today's cystic fibrosis patients in
that, due to new drugs and therapies, he's living a longer, healthier life than
could have been imagined even a few short years ago.

    "CF is no longer a death sentence," says Robert Beall, president and chief
executive officer of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "Today, the median age of
CF patients is about 331/2, and almost 40 percent of our patients are 18 and
older."

    However, this good news has been tempered by a host of problems - both
medical and financial - unimagined 20 years ago when many CF patients did not
survive to school age.

    The breakthrough leading to today's situation occurred in 1989, with the
discovery of the defective gene that causes the disease.

    "That accelerated the pace of research as we began to figure out how the
disease was manifested by the body," says Beall. "We don't have a cure yet, but
it's allowed us to develop more effective therapies to treat patients and help
them live longer."

    These therapies include:

    Standardized care. About 90 percent of CF patients are treated at one of 117
centers accredited by the CF Foundation. Patients in these centers are cared for
by a team of experts, including a physician (usually a pulmonologist or a
gastroenterologist), nurse with CF experience, social worker and nutritionist.
Patients are seen by a doctor at least once a quarter - more often if their
condition warrants it.

    "CF is a progressive disease, so we want them in here even if they're
feeling good," says clinical nurse Mattie Jennings. "They're may be getting
worse, but their body has adjusted, and they don't notice the deterioration."

    San Antonio has three accredited CF centers. In addition to Christus
Children's Hospital, there's one at the Methodist Children's Hospital (which is
an affiliate of the Christus program) and one at Wilford Hall.

    Aggressive use of antibiotics. Although this strategy fell out of favor for
a time, it's now back in vogue. That's because new drugs, particularly
tobramycin, and new techniques, such as aerosolized drugs that are inhaled,
allow physicians to more effectively reduce the population of the bacterium
pseudomonas aeruginosa . This is a particularly tenacious bug that colonizes the
lungs and is virtually impossible to eradicate completely.

    Even with these new treatments, many CF patients still need to undergo
what's known as an "IV clean-out," during which they're hospitalized for two
weeks to receive intravenous antibiotics. Wright, for example, goes for a
clean-out every two to three months.

    New drugs. The mucous-thinner dornase alfa (brand name, Pulmozyme) reduces
lung infections and makes breathing easier. Other drugs include azithromycin
(Zithromax), a common antibiotic that reduces lung inflammation. In trials, the
drug improved breathing by 6 percent and reduced hospitalizations by almost
half. The pain killer ibuprofen also has been shown to reduce lung inflammation
in children.

    Gene therapy also remains a promising, if frustrating, field of study. In
October, researchers announced that, after introducing copies of the normal CF
gene into the lungs of patients, lung function improved - albeit only
temporarily.

    "The effects lasted for about 30 days," explains Beall. "But this is the
first indication in nine years of gene therapy trials that adding the normal
gene can correct the defect that causes CF."

    Advances in lung transplants are also promising, although the waiting lists
are long and this only "cures" the disease in the lungs. The disease can still
play havoc with the liver, pancreas, intestines, sinuses and other organs.

    While they're living longer, adult CF patients must contend with any number
of complications that were not a consideration when most people with the disease
died in childhood.

    For example, CF patients are more susceptible to diabetes, which, if not
controlled, can cause a significant decline in lung function, or the ability to
breath easily. The body's inability to fully absorb nutrients such as calcium, a
symptom of both CF and long-term antibiotic use, can lead to osteoporosis. Other
common problems include liver disease and infertility.

    To deal with these added burdens, many physicians have, in recent years, had
to undergo unexpected on-the-job training.

    "When I was in medical school training to be a pulmonologist, they didn't
even teach us about CF because the average patient lived only to about 6," says
Dr. Carlos R. Orozco. "Over the past few years, we've seen a dramatic increase
in the number of older CF patients we follow."

    Of the 80 or so patients being treated at the Christus center, for example,
22 are adults, according to Jennings.

    "Our oldest patient right now is 45 years old, and we had a man who was 48
when he died last year," she says. "You go to conferences and you hear people
talking about treating patients in their 50s and 60s."

    Still, while CF patients are living longer, it's still a difficult life.

    A patient may have to take as many as 15 different pills, including
medications, vitamins and enzymes every day. They also have to submit to chest
physiotherapy, which essentially means being pounded on the back and chest to
loosen the phlegm in the lungs. These regimens can easily take an hour or more,
sometimes several times a day.

    Equally draining is the financial burden. Having a physical therapist come
in to do chest physiotherapy twice a day can cost as much as $15,000 annually.
Enzymes necessary for digestion will run $1,500 to $3,000 a year. This doesn't
even take into account hospitalization several times a year for two weeks at a
time for an IV clean-out.

    Yet, once patients reach 18 (or, in some cases, 21), they're no longer
covered by their parents' insurance. If they get a job at a company that offers
medical insurance, they're usually denied coverage because CF is a pre-existing
condition.

    Most patients are forced to go on Medicaid. But that program pays for a
maximum of three medications a month, so they also rely on Children with Special
Health Care Needs, a program of the Texas Department of Health that, despite its
name, also covers adult CF patients.

    But there's talk that the program's budget may be cut during the next
legislative session, according to Orozco.

    Still, physicians say they welcome such problems, if only because it means
their patients are living longer. "It's truly a double-edged sword," says
Willey-Courand. "I tell my 18-year-old patients I've cured them from being a
pediatric CF patient, but that now they're an adult patient."

    While the search for a cure for cystic fibrosis continues, experts say such
a breakthrough is probably a long way off. So they'll continue their work
developing long-term management strategies.

    "A one-time cure is the home run we're all looking for," says Beall.
"Advances like tobramycin and Pulmozyme are the singles and doubles we're going
to continue trying to hit."

    rmarini@express-news.net.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: EDWARD A. ORNELAS/STAFF SAN ANTONIO EXPRESS-NEWS : PHOTO: FOR SA
LIFE - Matt Wright, 24 who has cystic fibrosis, does incline bench presses
Monday Dec. 9, 2002 at the Racquetball & Fitness Club in the 9200 block of
Guilbeau. FOR RICH MARINI STORY. PHOTO BY EDWARD A. ORNELAS/STAFF; PHOTO: FOR
SALIFE - Matt Wright, 24 who has cystic fibrosis, bench presses Monday Dec. 9,
2002 at the Racquetball & Fitness Club in the 9200 block of Guilbeau as his
workout partner Conrad Dalton spots him. FOR RICH MARINI STORY. PHOTO BY EDWARD
A. ORNELAS/STAFF

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2002
