
                             1201 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 15, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 821 words

HEADLINE: ImClone's net loss grew in second quarter

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 ImClone Systems Inc. said yesterday its second-quarter loss widened as higher
administrative, research and development costs offset higher payments from
co-developers of its cancer drug.

   ImClone, whose former chief executive, Sam Waksal, pleaded not guilty to
securities and bank fraud charges earlier this week, said its net loss widened
to $43.1 million, or 59 cents a share, from $29.5 million, or 44 cents, a year
ago.

   Revenue rose to $11.6 million from $3.9 million a year ago on increased
milestone and licensing payments from partners Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. and
Merck KGaA for the development of ImClone's cancer drug Erbitux.

   Also, yesterday, the company said it sued Waksal to recover $7 million in
severance payments he collected before his indictment on insider trading charges
last week.

   ImClone said it is suing Waksal because he ordered others to destroy
documents that investigators sought earlier this year.  Waksal resigned as
president and CEO in May in a mushrooming scandal that has damaged his friend,
homemaking guru Martha Stewart, and the company she heads, Martha Stewart Living
Omnimedia Inc.

   ImClone, now run by Waksal's brother, Harlan, said it brought the suit
because Sam Waksal breached his duty to the company.

   Local earnings

   Dickie Walker Marine Inc., an Oceanside company that makes marine-themed
clothing, reported sales of $1 million for the quarter ended June 30, compared
with $362,000 in same period a year ago when the company had newly introduced
products.

   Dickie Walker, which went public in May, raising $5.3 million, reported a net
loss of $147,000, or 5 cents per share, for the quarter, compared with a net
loss of $247,000, or 11 cents per share, a year ago.

   The company, which sells most of its products through West Marine outlets,
said it has enough working capital to fund operations through 2003. It was
founded by Gerald Montiel, a co-founder of golf-shirt maker Ashworth Inc.

   Overland Storage reported a net loss of $625,000, or 6 cents per share, for
its fourth quarter ended June 30, compared with a net loss of $1.5 million, or
14 cents per share, for the same period last year.

   The San Diego hardware and software storage company reported $35 million in
revenue for the quarter, down from $37.4 million a year ago.

   For the full year, Overland reported net income of $4.5 million, or 40 cents
a share, compared with $2.5 million, or 23 cents a share, a year ago.  The
company reported $163.4 million in revenue for the year, compared with $155.7
million for the 2001 fiscal year.

   SpaceDev, a Poway company working on commercial space projects, reported
sales of $862,638 for its second quarter ending June 30, compared with $940,928
for the same period in 2001.

   For the quarter, the company had a net loss of $87,596 compared with a net
loss of $428,804 a year ago.

   The company attributed the narrower loss to increased revenues on a contract
for a proprietary development program, as well as lower general and
administrative expenses.

   Aqua Care Systems Inc. of Vista reported a loss of $1.2 million, or 37 cents
per share, for the first half of 2002, compared with a loss of $2.4 million, or
82 cents per share, for the same period the prior year.

   Sales for the first half were $3.8 million, a 37 percent decrease from the
prior year.

   The company said it is in discussions regarding a potential acquisition, but
it is questionable when or if this acquisition will be consummated.

   Aqua Care makes water purification and filtration systems.

   SVI Solutions Inc., which makes software for retailers, reported sales of
$5.3 million for the quarter ended June 30, compared with $7.5 million for the
same period last year.

   SVI lost $2 million, or 7 cents a share, for the quarter, compared with a
loss of $3.5 million, or 9 cents a share, the prior year.

   The company slashed selling and administrative expense to narrow the loss.
It also paid down debt, which cut its interest expense by 62 percent.

   GenStar Therapeutics reported a loss of $2.9 million, or 12 cents per share,
in the second quarter ended June 30, compared with a loss of $3 million, or 13
cents per share, in the same period last year.  Revenue was $172,000, compared
with $40,000 a year ago.

   The San Diego gene therapy company had $10.4 million in cash and short-term
investments at the end of June.

   Gen-Probe reported profits of $550,000, or 2 cents per share, in the second
quarter ended June 30, compared with a loss of $346,000, or 1 cent per share, in
the same period a year ago.  Revenue rose 12 percent to $34.9 million.

   The San Diego developer of diagnostic tests is slated to become an
independent, publicly-traded company next month after it is spun off from its
parent company, Japan's Chugai Pharmaceutical.


LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2002


                             1202 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 15, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: ImClone's net loss grew in second quarter

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   ImClone Systems Inc. said yesterday its second-quarter loss widened as higher
administrative, research and development costs offset higher payments from
co-developers of its cancer drug. ImClone, whose former chief executive, Sam
Waksal, pleaded not guilty to securities and bank fraud charges earlier this
week, said its net loss widened to $43.1 million, or 59 cents a share, from
$29.5 million, or 44 cents, a year ago. Revenue rose to $11.6 million from $3.9
million a year ago on increased milestone and licensing payments from partners
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. and Merck KGaA for the development of ImClone's cancer
drug Erbitux. Also, yesterday, the company said it sued Waksal to recover $7
million in severance payments he collected before his indictment on insider
trading charges last week. ImClone said it is suing Waksal because he ordered
others to destroy documents that investigators sought earlier this year.

   Waksal resigned as president and CEO in May in a mushrooming scandal that has
damaged his friend, homemaking guru Martha Stewart, and the company she heads,
Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia Inc. ImClone, now run by Waksal's brother,
Harlan, said it brought the suit because Sam Waksal breached his duty to the
company. Local earnings Dickie Walker Marine Inc., an Oceanside company that
makes marine-themed clothing, reported sales of $1 million for the quarter ended
June 30, compared with $362,000 in same period a year ago when the company had
newly introduced products. Dickie Walker, which went public in May, raising $5.3
million, reported a net loss of $147,000, or 5 cents per share, for the quarter,
compared with a net loss of $247,000, or 11 cents per share, a year ago. The
company, which sells most of its products through West Marine outlets, said it
has enough working capital to fund operations through 2003. It was founded by
Gerald Montiel, a co-founder of golf-shirt maker Ashworth Inc. Overland Storage
reported a net loss of $625,000, or 6 cents per share, for its fourth quarter
ended June 30, compared with a net loss of $1.5 million, or 14 cents per share,
for the same period last year. The San Diego hardware and software storage
company reported $35 million in revenue for the quarter, down from $37.4 million
a year ago. For the full year, Overland reported net income of $4.5 million, or
40 cents a share, compared with $2.5 million, or 23 cents a share, a year ago.
The company reported $163.4 million in revenue for the year, compared with
$155.7 million for the 2001 fiscal year. SpaceDev, a Poway company working on
commercial space projects, reported sales of $862,638 for its second quarter
ending June 30, compared with $940,928 for the same period in 2001. For the
quarter, the company had a net loss of $87,596 compared with a net loss of
$428,804 a year ago. The company attributed the narrower loss to increased
revenues on a contract for a proprietary development program, as well as lower
general and administrative expenses. Aqua Care Systems Inc. of Vista reported a
loss of $1.2 million, or 37 cents per share, for the first half of 2002,
compared with a loss of $2.4 million, or 82 cents per share, for the same period
the prior year. Sales for the first half were $3.8 million, a 37 percent
decrease from the prior year. The company said it is in discussions regarding a
potential acquisition, but it is questionable when or if this acquisition will
be consummated. Aqua Care makes water purification and filtration systems. SVI
Solutions Inc., which makes software for retailers, reported sales of $5.3
million for the quarter ended June 30, compared with $7.5 million for the same
period last year. SVI lost $2 million, or 7 cents a share, for the quarter,
compared with a loss of $3.5 million, or 9 cents a share, the prior year. The
company slashed selling and administrative expense to narrow the loss. It also
paid down debt, which cut its interest expense by 62 percent. GenStar
Therapeutics reported a loss of $2.9 million, or 12 cents per share, in the
second quarter ended June 30, compared with a loss of $3 million, or 13 cents
per share, in the same period last year.

   Revenue was $172,000, compared with $40,000 a year ago. The San Diego gene
therapy company had $10.4 million in cash and short-term investments at the end
of June. Gen-Probe reported profits of $550,000, or 2 cents per share, in the
second quarter ended June 30, compared with a loss of $346,000, or 1 cent per
share, in the same period a year ago.

   Revenue rose 12 percent to $34.9 million. The San Diego developer of
diagnostic tests is slated to become an independent, publicly-traded company
next month after it is spun off from its parent company, Japan's Chugai
Pharmaceutical.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1203 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 13, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 5; Health & Fitness; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 292 words

HEADLINE: BOOKS ON HEALTH;
New Promise For Treating A Crippler

BYLINE:  By John Langone

BODY:

   "Conquering Rheumatoid Arthritis," by Dr. Thomas F. Lee, Prometheus Books,
$20.

        In the prime of his creative life, Renoir "unwittingly entered a world
of inexorable progressive disability."

   The disability was rheumatoid arthritis, a painful and crippling disease that
has plagued millions of people for thousands of years.

    In Renoir's case, the disease had become so aggressive that he had to be
carried every morning to his easel, where he painted with the brush wedged into
his hands.

   "His physicians, true to the ignorance of their time," writes the author of
this comprehensive examination of rheumatoid arthritis and its treatment,
"prescribed enemas and fever medications that were of little help."

   Dr. Lee, a professor of microbiology and biotechnology at St. Anselm College
and a sufferer of rheumatoid arthritis, mentions some even more outlandish
treatments (bee stings, wolf fat and a South African molasses treatment, to name
a few).

   But his focus is on the promise of gene therapy and stem cell research, and
on drugs that may prevent the disease from progressing.

   Therapy "by means of genes," as Dr. Lee puts it, is an encouraging approach,
because researchers now know that some genes make people susceptible to
developing rheumatoid arthritis.

   Researchers also know, he adds, that the continuing painful inflammation and
joint damage so characteristic of the disease is brought about by chemical
messenger proteins "as well as other destructive proteins, the enzymes that
gradually erode cartilage and bone."

   At the moment, though, Dr. Lee points out, the goals of therapy are to reduce
pain and stiffness in the joints, control inflammation, prevent the destruction
of joints and support normal freedom of motion for as long as possible.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2002


                             1204 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 12, 2002, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1551 words

HEADLINE: LAWSUITS TARGET MEDICAL RESEARCH PATIENT SAFEGUARDS, OVERSIGHT KEY
ISSUES

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   For years, medical researchers were largely immune from lawsuits. While other
doctors faced a wave of malpractice suits, researchers seeking cures for
diseases such as cancer found patients eager to participate in experiments and
unlikely to hire a lawyer if something went wrong.

   But the death of Jesse Gelsinger in 1999 changed all that. The healthy
teenager died of massive organ failure in a gene therapy experiment gone awry.
His family won a multimillion-dollar settlement in 2000, opening the door to
other suits by focusing national attention on the flawed protections for study
participants.

      While the total number of suits remains small, involving only a few dozen
of the hundreds of thousands of people who participate in medical experiments in
the United States each year, their existence is sending shivers through the
research community.  Together with increased federal prosecution of research
fraud, the suits are spurring efforts to improve the safety of experiments - and
a scamble for more insurance.

   "Lawsuits were unheard of eight to 10 years ago," said Janet Richardson, a
Los Angeles lawyer who defends drug and medical device manufacturers. "Now, it's
the hot topic."

   Most of the suits target alleged medical malpractice where patients were
injured, but some are focusing on alleged ethical violations - such as
inadequate oversight or hidden financial conflicts - that are particular to
research. Cases filed in the last few months illustrate the range of claims:

   * A Philadelphia woman contends she lost complete control of her bowels as a
result of an experiment at Graduate Hospital of Philadelphia. She is suing not
only the hospital and a surgeon, but the ethics committee that approved the
experiment.

   * A Peabody woman is seeking damages for the death of her husband during a
gene therapy experiment at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Brighton. Roger
Darke suffered from severe heart disease, and federal officials uncovered no
evidence that the experiment killed him. But the lawsuit notes that he died only
hours after a gene was injected into his beating heart, and asserts he was
tricked into participating by doctors who had a financial interest in the
experiment's outcome.

   * A Bucks County, Pa., woman who participated in the University of
Pennsylvania study that subsequently killed Gelsinger charges researchers
breached her right to be treated with dignity and caused psychological harm by
misrepresenting the study's dangers.

   All the doctors and institutions deny the allegations.

   The suits have sparked debate about whether they represent legal opportunism
or a force for meaningful change. But there is widespread agreement that
protections for participants have not kept pace with the rapid growth of
experiments required to test new drugs and devices.

   Federal officials, too, are taking more action against research wrongdoing.
Regulators have shut down research at several major universities in the last few
years because of safety lapses and prosecuted individual researchers for fraud
in experiments. And in April, the government won a guilty plea and a $1.2
million fine from an Ohio company, Gliatech, accused of falsifying study results
to obtain Food and Drug Administration approval of a surgical gel.

   "We're walking on eggshells," said Susan Cronin, a researcher at Bone Care
International, a Wisconsin pharmaceutical company.

   Many attribute the increase in suits to one lawyer in a New Jersey firm, who
now specializes in medical experiments following his success in the Gelsinger
case. Alan Milstein has brought nearly a dozen cases, which he posts on the
Internet, where other lawyers have easy access to his arguments.

   But Milstein points to problems in the experiments themselves as the true
source of the suits. "You've got an explosion of clinical trials in this
country, and you've got more injuries, more bypassing of regulations, more
violations," said Milstein.

   "There is also an increased recognition that human subjects harmed in
research have rights and remedies. The clients I represent . . . have welcomed
the approach of trying to make real change through this process," he said.

   While the Gelsinger case involved a wrongful death claim, as malpractice
cases have for years, Milstein is seeking to create new case law with suits for
"dignitary harm" to patients who can prove no physical harm from experiments.
The claims, such as those of Dolores Aderman of Pennsylvania, draw on the 14th
Amendment to the Constitution, which guarantees life and liberty, as well as
international covenants on ethical treatment of research participants. They also
focus on requirements that patients in experiments knowingly consent to the
risks before agreeing to participate. In the past, in the absence of severe harm
to participants, lawyers often considered that consent an obstacle to a suit.

   Aderman contends she suffered emotional harm because the University of
Pennsylvania gene therapy researchers didn't fully disclose the experiment's
risks, including that a similar test made monkeys ill, or the university's
investment in marketing gene therapy.  School officials have denied the
allegations and asserted that Aderman suffered no harm.

   Milstein is not the first to bring a claim of dignitary harm. Stephen F.
Hanlon, a Florida lawyer, won a $3.8 million settlement from the University of
South Florida and Tampa General Hospital in 2000 in a federal class action suit
arising from a drug study of poor women with high-risk pregnancies.

   None of the women or their babies suffered any physical harm. In fact, the
study showed the drugs helped their babies' lungs develop. But the women
asserted they weren't told the drugs were experimental or that they could refuse
to participate, and they said the consent form was far above their reading
level.

   In settling, neither the university nor the hospital admitted wrongdoing, and
the case did not set legal precedent. But the institutions simplified their
consent forms and the case pointed the way for other suits.

   "The traditional defense of the biomedical research profession was no harm,
no foul," said Hanlon. "I thought that was wrong. When you touch someone without
their consent, that is independently compensable because it violates their basic
human dignity."

   "I don't think there are many lawyers out there who are going to have the
guts to take on a dignitary harm claim," he added. "But if you've got injury,
then this whole informed consent process is not going to be a barrier to
litigation the way it has been in the past."

   Some of the suits Milstein and other lawyers filed in the last two years
break other new ground by targeting the ethics committees that oversee
experiments. Federal officials have also cited these committees, called
institutional review boards, as a weak link in experiment safety.

   So far, no review board member has been held liable by the courts for
problems in an experiment, although Milstein and other lawyers have won
settlements from hospitals where the panels were included as defendants.

   The lack of verdicts and small number of cases leads Leonard Glantz, a
professor of health law at Boston University, to conclude that concern about the
suits is overblown. "Anyone can sue anyone," he said. "Lawyers sue as many
people as possible because it leads to quicker and richer settlements. So far,
we have a few cases settled out of court."

   But some hospitals say the suits are making it more difficult to recruit
researchers and citizens to take on the voluntary duties of a review board
member.

   "They are concerned about liability for themselves as well as the
institution," said Paula Knudson, executive coordinator of the institutional
review board at the University of Texas Health Science Center.

   And she said the suits and government actions have "focused the attention of
IRB members and offices on the problems and caused us to reassess what we're
doing."

   Indeed, academic medical centers nationally are spending millions of dollars
to improve protection of study participants, according to Jennifer Kulynych, an
administrator at the Association of American Medical Colleges.

   Many hospitals and companies that do medical experiments are also seeking
more insurance coverage.

   "We've been inundated," said Jill Wadlund, a casualty underwriter for the
Chubb Group of Insurance Companies.

   But insurers are offering coverage at a price, wary of the likelihood of more
lawsuits, said Robert Hartwig, chief economist for the Insurance Information
Institute. Insurers are requiring higher deductibles or co-insurance and
investigating researchers' safety and consent practices before writing policies,
he said.

   More researchers will probably need those insurance policies in the future,
prosecutors indicated, as more whistle-blowers come forward and the FDA
increases its referrals to the Department of Justice.

   "There are a significant number of cases coming," said James Sheehan, an
assistant US attorney in Philadelphia who specializes in medical cases. "We had
a training program for experienced health care prosecutors recently, and half
the session was on clinical trials. This is an area of significant interest and
growth."

   Alice Dembner can be reached at Dembner@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, shown in this family photo
outside the Spectrum in Philadelphia, died in 1999 while undergoing a gene
therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania. / AP FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2002


                             1205 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 09, 2002, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 94 words

HEADLINE: 2 get $ 1.2 million grant to finance DNA study

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

DATELINE: RICHARDSON

BODY:

   RICHARDSON - A biophysicist and a mathematician at the University of Texas at
Dallas have received a $ 1.2 million grant from the National Institutes of
Health.

   The grant is to finance the study of site-specific recombination of DNA, a
class of natural gene-splicing activities in which segments of a DNA sequence
are rearranged.

   The grant was awarded to associate molecular and cell biology professor
Stephen D. Levene and assistant mathematical sciences professor Isabel Darcy.

   Levene says the research could lead to advances in human gene therapy.


LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2002


                             1206 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      August 9, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 NAMES & GAMES

LENGTH: 753 words

BODY:

   The week's big national political controversy bubbled up out of Florida --
what are the odds? -- where Florida State Coach Bobby Bowden decided to adopt
"Let's roll" as the official slogan of his 2002 Seminole footballers.

    "Let's roll," were the words spoken by Flight 93 hero Todd Beamer just as he
and his fellow United passengers began to wrestle a hijacked jetliner from
agents of diabolical intent Sept. 11. Many Americans like to feel as if those
words triggered the first victory of the War on Terror.

    "Let's roll," previously famous for little more than as simply the words
before "another joint" in the noted Tom Petty song "You Don't Know How It
Feels," was consequently thrust way more than 100 yards deep into the national
consciousness, freshly placed in the same drawer with "One if by land, two if by
sea."

    Bowden said he adopted the term out of admiration for the courage of folks
who were "fixin' to die."

    OK, but ...

    "Let's roll," are more than words. They are stitched forever in the fabric
of U.S. history, and they were not exactly meant to inspire a bunch of
20-year-olds to the noble purpose of whipping up on Iowa State in the opener.
Not even to take it to Miami on the road for that matter.

    Reaction to the Bowden initiative was immediate, and it came mostly in a
spray of vitriol.

    ABC radio commentator Keith Olberman compared it to "spitting on the graves
of everyone who was lost in the September 11th attacks." And Jeff Miller of the
Miami Herald accused the Florida State program of "linking something as silly as
football to an event this country will spend only forever remembering."

    I generally agree.

    It's tasteless. It's stupid. It's egregious. It's outrageous. It's another
pitiful example of how seriously coaches take themselves. And, oh yeah, I don't
like it much. I hope Florida State loses every game, not that I ever much hoped
otherwise.

    Not to be critical.

    On the preferred Web site of the hopelessly Seminole smitten, called
Warchant.com in typically understated fashion, there's a very different
interpretation. On Warchant.com, Bowden is a patriot and a genius, which he
might well be, and people like me are "lazy columnists seeking attention by
jumping on the politically correct bandwagon," which, well, there's no denying
that.

    As someone whose business card in fact reads, "Lazy Columnist Seeking
Attention By Jumping On The Politically Correct Bandwagon," I don't care what
the fallout of all this is, but I am a little upset that I've been largely
ignorant to the notion that big-time sports entities need slogans, and that they
often rely on famous quotations and catch phrases to find them.

    "Let's roll," probably the most famous words of 2001, are now an unfortunate
part of the post-modern sports glossary. As it happens, lazy columnists don't
have to work very hard to see where and when some other famous American words
fit.

    Your Major League Baseball owners (1983-2002) -- "The only thing we have to
Fehr is Fehr himself."

    Your Texas Rangers (2001-02) -- "A-Rod helps those who help themselves."

    Your Pittsburgh Pirates (1993-02) -- "Well, here's another fine mess you've
gotten us into."

    Your Houston Rockets (2002-2003) with 7-foot-5 Shanghai center Yao Ming --
"Ancient Chinese secret, huh?"

    Your San Francisco Giants (1993-2002) -- "Bonds ... Barry Bonds."

    Your Pittsburgh Steelers (2001) -- "Ask not what your kicker can do for you,
ask what you can do to your kicker."

    Your 800,000 Pennsylvania Deer Hunters (always) -- "The bucks stop here."

    Your Three Stooges (too long ago) -- "Does the deer have any doe? Yeah, two
bucks."

    Washington Wizards of Michael Jordan (ad nauseum) -- "I'll be back."

    Your National Football League (prior to 2002) -- "Read my lips, no new
Texans."

    Your Tampa Bay Devil Rays (any year) -- "This was no boating accident."

    Your Pitt Panther footballers (1984-2002) -- "Life is like a box of
chocolates. You never know what you're gonna get."

    Your Duquesne Dukes basketballers (1984-2002) -- "Four score and seven ...
well, we might score that in two games.

    Your Pittsburgh Penguins (2001-02) -- "Pull my finger."

    Your UNLV Runnin' Rebels (circa 1980s) -- "I am not a crook."

    Your National Football League (1999) -- "Hello Cleveland!"

    Your Baltimore Ravens (2000) -- "Linebackers don't kill people. People kill
people."

    And the No. 1 universally adaptable slogan of major sports entities (since
time immemorial) -- "I did not have sex with that woman."

NOTES:
GENE THERAPY

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2002


                             1207 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2002 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     August 8, 2002 Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg.C3

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: BILLITTIER ISSUES RABIES WARNING

BODY:

   A rabid cat in Lancaster prompted Dr. Anthony J. Billittier IV, Erie County
health commissioner, to issue a rabies warning Wednesday.

    The cat, an outdoor pet that may have come in contact with up to half a
dozen other cats, tested positive for the disease. The other cats were taken
away by the Erie County SPCA.

    "Rabies can be a fatal disease if left untreated," Billittier said, "so I am
urging area residents to contact their town animal control officer if they
witness an animal acting erratically. Also, if you are a pet owner, check your
pet's medical record to determine if its rabies (vaccination) is current."

    The commissioner advised anyone bitten by an animal to contact the Health
Department at 858-6089.

    Billittier also announced a series of free rabies clinics throughout the
county, organized in cooperation with the SPCA and the Niagara Frontier
Veterinary Society. The clinics:

    Aug. 27 -- 2 to 4 p.m., SPCA headquarters, 205 Ensminger Road, Town of
Tonawanda.

    Sept. 10 -- 2 to 4 p.m., Broadway Market, 999 Broadway.

    Sept. 17 -- 2 to 4 p.m., Cheektowaga Highway Department Garage, 3145 Union
Road, Cheektowaga.


    Expansion begins at training academy



    Plans to expand the county Emergency Services Training Academy were under
way prior to Sept. 11, but the events of that day caused officials to take
another look at the project.

    Dozens of government officials and emergency services providers were on hand
Wednesday for the official ground-breaking for the $1.7 million project in
Cheektowaga.

    An upgraded computer system and other features were added after the
terrorist attack that hammered home the need to be ready for events that were
unimaginable previously, said Michael Walters, county emergency services
commissioner.

    The addition includes a 105-seat, four-tier auditorium flanked by two
30-seat classrooms and an expanded office area.

    More than 4,000 firefighters and other emergency services providers train at
the academy each year. The facility is in use 16 hours a day, six days a week.


    JFK Youth Day set for Saturday



    The 14th annual JFK Youth Day kicks off at 9:45 a.m. Saturday in JFK
Community Park on Hickory Street. With the theme "Cultivating a Creative Class,"
the JFK Save Our Youth Foundation will provide a day of fun and learning for
young people ages 8 to 18 and their families. The schedule of events:

    At 9:45 a.m., parade; 10:15 a.m., workshops; 11:30 a.m., awards
presentation; noon, lunch; 12:30 p.m., bounce house opens, pony rides begin and
dunk water tank; 1:30 p.m., track and field competition; 2:30 p.m., baseball
game; 4 p.m., basketball tournament; and 6 p.m., closing ceremonies.


    Amnesty International meeting Saturday



    How governments are exploiting the threat of terrorism to restrict personal
freedoms will be discussed during a meeting of Amnesty International at noon
Saturday in Crane Library, 633 Elmwood Ave.

    The guest speaker will be David F. Stamps, chairman of the North African
Coordinating Group, which oversees American efforts in Algeria and North Africa.
He joined Amnesty International in 1981.


    Polish Union plans convention



    The Polish Union of America will hold its 35th annual convention Aug. 23 to
25 in Sheraton Four Points Hotel, Cheektowaga.

    An inaugural Mass will be offered at 4 p.m. that Friday in St. John Gualbert
Catholic Church, 83 Gualbert, Cheektowaga, by the national chaplain, the Rev.
David W. Bialkowski. A banquet will follow at 6in the Four Points. The Quo Vadis
Choir will perform ancient and contemporary Polish music, followed by the
16-member student orchestra, Sugar & Jazz. For reservations, call 677-0220.


    Researcher to receive $30,000 grant



    A $30,000 pediatric ophthalmology research grant will be presented to Dr.
Sarah G. Finnegan at 11 a.m. Monday in Buffalo General Hospital.

    The Knights Templar Eye Foundation, a Masonic charity, is making the grant
to the University at Buffalo researcher for a study titled "Human Photo
Receptors in Culture: Growth Factor Requirements and Potential Gene Therapies."


    Teddy Drummer is latest ToyFest treat



    The East Aurora Toy Town Museum will release its 16th Toy Fest commemorative
toy -- the Teddy Drummer -- in conjunction with the 100th anniversary of the
teddy bear.

    This year's ToyFest, scheduled for Aug. 23 to 25, will highlight Toy Town
USA's celebration of the bear with a weekend of bear events. Special features
include visits from Tweed Roosevelt, great-grandson of Theodore Roosevelt, and
Steiff toy archivist Dick Frantz; a teddy bear children's costume contest;
photos with the teddy bear; and teddy bear's birthday bash.

    The commemorative toy replicates Fisher-Price's #775 Teddy Drummer, a
classic wooden pull toy originally made in 1936. The commemorative toy is an
all-wood reproduction with a drum marked with the 100th anniversary of the teddy
bear.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2002


                             1208 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                     AUGUST 6, 2002, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2287 words

HEADLINE: SPECIAL REPORT;

Experiments on humans;

A split verdict on clinical trials;

Studies offer hope -- and raise a series of ethical questions

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Bernadette Tansey

BODY:
LAST OF THREE PARTS.

    Sarah Bevier had no idea what a clinical trial was.

    Yet the Concord lingerie shop owner -- diagnosed with advanced lung cancer
-- was suddenly facing a decision: whether or not to participate in a study of
an experimental medicine that could prolong her life.

    Bevier is not alone. As the number of potential new therapies for all types
of ailments rises, more people than ever will be asked to join a medical study.

    However, that can be a tough choice to make amid conflicting perceptions.

    On one hand, there's a growing controversy about such tests as reports
emerge of violations nationwide involving human research subjects.

    On the other hand, researchers maintain that serious infractions are rare,
and they are telling potential volunteers stories of hope -- how science is
poised to deliver medical miracles in an age of genome sequencing and other
technological breakthroughs.

    For potential research subjects, perhaps the most important question is one
they can only ask themselves: What is their motivation for participating?

    If the reason is altruism -- the hope that the study will advance medical
knowledge and possibly yield a cure for others in the future -- such volunteers
are unlikely to be disappointed.

    The only way to prove that a remedy will work in human beings -- no matter
how promising the lab studies -- is to test it in people. And the need for
volunteers has never been greater.

    PERSONAL VS. SOCIETAL BENEFIT

    "This is the most exciting time in cancer research in decades," said Dr.
Richard Schilsky, a University of Chicago professor of medicine and a clinical
trials administrator. "The number of therapies that need to be evaluated is much
greater than the number of patients available to participate in clinical
trials."

    Most people, however, sign up for clinical trials in the hope of a cure for
themselves, studies show. That raises a host of hard questions for them, as well
as serious ethical concerns.

    Dr. Ellen Feigal, acting director of the National Cancer Institute's
Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, says a consumer approach to clinical
trials -- the search for personal benefit -- is somewhat appropriate.
Participants may get better quality care at a research institution and access to
a cutting-edge therapy before it is widely available.

    However, success is always uncertain, Feigal said: "There's no guarantee
they'll be the one who gets the benefit."

    Phyl Smith of San Francisco was one of the lucky ones. Suffering from leg
pain that made it difficult to walk, the workplace designer signed up for
experimental surgery to repair a spinal compression that was pinching her
nerves. The surgery worked.

    "I consider myself very fortunate," Smith said.

    But the odds may be stacked against subjects hoping for a personal cure,
especially if they participate in early-stage trials. For example, of all drugs
tested in the hope of approval by the Food and Drug Administration, about 80
percent fail, according to the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development.

    Even if a drug works, test subjects early in the process may not receive the
right dose, or they may not receive it in the right stage of their disease. And
some participants in noncancer trials receive a placebo.

    However, the odds improve for people in late-stage FDA trials. In 1999, the
FDA approved 44 percent of the drugs that completed the last phases of clinical
testing, which involve larger numbers of subjects.

    FOR SOME, A LAST HOPE

    Feigal also acknowledges a problem that troubles many involved in research.
Desperately ill people may join trials in the hope of getting better, even when
they've been explicitly told their chances of benefiting are slim.

    "Maybe that's a rug that shouldn't be pulled out from under them," Feigal
said.

    But others say researchers should not take advantage of extremely ill people
by involving them in clinical trials that may mar their final days with
unnecessary pain or other side effects.

    "Do you want to be tortured for the last six months or go home and take a
sail?" said Dr. Marcia Angell, a former editor of the New England Journal of
Medicine and a frequent critic of financial conflicts in research. "Nobody has
the moral courage to say that, because it's easier to keep hope alive."

    In addition to examining their own motives, participants should inquire
about the motivations of researchers and their institutions to guard against
conflicts of interest that could compromise their care, watchdog groups say.

    These days, your health maintenance organization may be under contract to
test drugs for a biotechnology firm, and your specialist -- or even your general
practitioner -- may be a paid investigator for the firm.

    All this comes as more drug companies move clinical trials into mainstream
medicine in response to the increasing challenge of enrolling test subjects.
Only about 5 percent of patients with a given disease now participate in a
trial.

    Even supporters of clinical trials say it's a good idea to know the
financial stake of anyone asking you to participate.

    It is increasingly possible that the doctor you assume is working only to
make you better could also have been offered a substantial fee -- as much as
thousands of dollars -- to recruit clinical trial subjects. Academic researchers
may be on a university payroll, but they may also own stock in the company that
produces the experimental drug they're testing.

    To further complicate things, researchers or pharmaceutical firms may tout
an experimental drug as promising, but they are not required to make public the
early data to back up the claim. Such information can be guarded as a
proprietary secret. In addition, past injuries of people or animals on the drug
often may be kept confidential, even if they must be reported to government
agencies.

    Subjects being recruited for a clinical trial are in a better position to
demand the information than the general public. Federal law imposes strong
disclosure obligations on researchers to share all information that could affect
a test subject's decision to participate -- including data on a drug's safety
and effectiveness as well as the financial interests of the investigators.

    Vera Hassner Sharav of the New York watchdog group Alliance for Human
Research Protection says trial volunteers have to take the initiative and ask
tough questions.

    "Ask, 'Are you getting a referral fee? How much?' " Sharav says.

    The advice you get from past participants varies greatly, depending on
whether their experiences were good or, for some, devastating.

    TRUST IS CRUCIAL

    Bevier, 55, says the most important thing is to find a doctor you trust.
After a stable year on the experimental drug, her lung cancer progressed, and
doctors switched her to conventional chemotherapy. But she wouldn't hesitate to
sign on for another study in the hope of surviving longer, in spite of the
whole-body rashes and other side effects she endured.

    The mother of another clinical trial participant says she also acted out of
trust and feels she paid dearly for it. Dr. Judy Vukov, a Glendale psychiatrist,
allowed her mentally ill daughter to enter a research unit at the former
Camarillo State Hospital in July 1993.

    "Forty-five days later, she was dead," Vukov said.

    She settled a lawsuit against the now-defunct hospital alleging inadequate
monitoring of her daughter, who took an overdose of aspirin after repeatedly
complaining to staff of severe headaches.

    What Bevier and Vukov share, in spite of their very different outlooks on
clinical trials, is a belief that participants need to educate themselves
thoroughly to make the choice that's right for them.

    Bevier, once the novice who admitted that she "had no clue" about clinical
trials, now zips around the Internet looking for suitable studies. A wealth of
information is available on the Web, although critics say it is still difficult
to find information that could help volunteers avoid doctors or research centers
that have run into trouble before.

    For those who want to get a quick education on clinical trials, it's easy to
get started. As part of an industry and government drive to boost participation,
a thicket of Web sites has sprung up offering trial listings by disease type.
Some sites match individuals with appropriate trials, but keep in mind they may
receive fees to promote one drug firm's trial over others that are not their
customers.

    Most patient advocates advise starting with a primer on the subject like the
detailed outline offered by the National Institutes of Health at
clinicaltrials.gov.

   ---------------------

    The clinical trials series

    With clinical trials a booming business, The Chronicle in a three-part
series explores the concerns about human safety in the pursuit of medical
breakthroughs.

    -- -- Sunday -- The risks: The growth in clinical trials puts pressure on
researchers, participants.

    -- -- Monday -- The rules: Fragmented regulations may leave some volunteers
unprotected.

    -- -- Today -- The reality: What every participant in a medical research
study should know.

   -----------------------

    Web resources

    Web sites for government health agencies and many patient advocacy groups
encourage participation in clinical trials, offering basic orientation, links
and trial listings.

    -- clinicaltrials.gov -- A service of the National Institutes of Health.
Includes a primer on trials, glossary, government links.

    -- www.fda.gov/oc/gcp/default.htm -- Food and Drug Administration pages on
clinical trials under its jurisdiction, human subject protection, where to
report problems.

    -- www.nci.nih.gov/clinical_trials/ -- National Cancer Institute site. A
guide to cancer clinical trials.

    -- ohrp.osophs.dhhs.gov -- Office for Human Research Protections, a federal
agency that safeguards test subjects, but only at institutions receiving federal
funding.

    -- www.canceradvocacy.org -- National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship.
Patient advocacy groups for specific diseases, like this one, offer information
on clinical trials. Here, it's under Resources.

    Commercial for-profit online sites like these may have listings not included
on government Web sites.

    -- www.centerwatch.com -- Centerwatch, which offers clinical trial listings,
is also a research and publishing company focusing on the clinical trials
industry.

    -- www.hopelink.com -- Hopelink compiles information and links from patient
groups, industry sponsors, and research sites. Some pay service fees for
"enhanced" trial listings.

    These watchdog groups urge patients to research possible pitfalls in
clinical trials that have cropped up in past studies.

    -- www.sskrplaw.com/gene/ -- Web site of the law firm of Alan Milstein, who
represented the father of an 18-year-old who died in a gene therapy experiment.
Links to past litigation and law of clinical trials.

    -- www.researchprotection.org -- Alliance for Human Research Protection --
tracks ethical and safety issues related to trials.

    -- www.cspinet.org/integrity/ -- Center for Science in the Public Interest's
Integrity in Science project. Focuses on financial links between scientists and
drug companies.

   -------------------

    Clinical trials: A Q&A

    -- Q: What is the purpose of the study?

    A: The goals of each study can vary widely -- and this can affect your
treatment. For example, an early Phase I study for FDA approval tests only
whether a drug is safe to take. Testing of the drug's effectiveness, if any,
comes only in later-stage trials.

    Q: Who are the individuals and institutions who will benefit financially
from the work?

    A: Look for information that details which manufacturer is sponsoring the
study, which doctors or other health care professionals are being paid to help
conduct it, and how much they and their research institutions are receiving from
salary, referral fees, grants, contracts, etc.

    Q: Who is ensuring the ethics, safety and scientific value of the study?

    A: Most studies are overseen by an Institutional Review Board at the
hospital, company or other site where the study is centered. You should be given
contact information for this board, in case you want to raise concerns or obtain
more information.

    If the IRB does not address your concerns, you can contact the federal
Office for Human Research Protections or the FDA.

    Q: What are the possible benefits and risks of the experimental treatment?
Will some patients receive a placebo?

    A: As a potential research participant, you can request detailed information
that may not be available to the general public, such as early studies assessing
the safety and effectiveness of the experimental treatment.

    Q: Who will cover the costs of the treatment, including any extra medical
care if it causes injuries?

    A: In general, drug companies cannot charge for experimental medicines. But
who covers other costs -- such as screening tests and routine care -- can vary
widely. Contact your medical insurance company for its policies on clinical
trial coverage.

    Q: Once subjects agree to participate in a clinical trial, can they change
their minds?

    A: Participants can leave a trial at any time, and they can request
additional information that could affect their decision whether to continue.

   ---------------------------

    Why people participate in clinical trials

    Percent of respondents stating their top reason. Based on a survey of 1,050
study volunteers in 1999-2000.


    Find relief: 60%

    Advance science: 23%

    Earn extra money: 11%

    Receive better medical care: 6%.

    Source: CenterWatch

    Chronicle Graphic

    E-mail Bernadette Tansey at btansey@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), CHART: SEE END OF TEXT, (1) Natalie Bradford (left), Ali
Desiderio and Elizabeth Phillips laugh nervously after listening to a doctor
from the UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center explain clinical trials and current
treatments at the Wellness Community in Walnut Creek., (2) Steve Whitman of
Martinez, who has lung cancer, listens to a doctor explain clinical trials at
The Wellness Community in Walnut Creek. / Photos by Kat Wade/The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2002


                             1209 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2002 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       August 4, 2002 Sunday 1ST EDITION

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. D-01

LENGTH: 6526 words

HEADLINE: SPECIAL REPORT Another year for Angelica Beset by the pain of a cruel
disease, a child finds strength in a family's dedicated embrace

BYLINE: Story by Erin Emery,

BODY:

   COLORADO SPRINGS - The girl in the pink linen dress hurries  through the
living room.

   Angelica Tafoya wears a ribbon in her hair and tights that  cover her
bandaged legs.

   She bangs open the front door and sees a gleaming black  limousine crawling
down Limelight Court.

   Angelica squeals.

   She walks gingerly, an unsteady ballerina, down the driveway.  Her arms flail
for balance, then she ducks into a seat at the rear  of the limo.

   'Jelly, look up,' her mother, Angie Tafoya, says.

   She photographs the girl who two months earlier had been in  surgery at
Children's Hospital in Denver.

   Angelica bats at a bouquet of balloons with a hand that is  taking the shape
of a mitten.

   Sitting across from her aunt, Yvonne Tafoya, Angelica removes  her pink
jacket, revealing sores on her neck.

   'Were you surprised?' Yvonne says. 'Or were you Miss Big Ears?'

   Miss Big Ears.

   On this big day, Angelica knows what she wants:

   'Princess Diaries,' she says. 'And I want summer clothes -  but none with
elastic.'

   Plans have been in the works for weeks. Angie and Yvonne want  Angelica's
ninth birthday to be special.

   Heaven knows she deserves it, this frail child who has been  to the hospital
82 times since birth. Who writhes and cries out in  pain each Monday, Wednesday
and Friday as her bandages are  changed. Who cannot eat, walk or play like most
children.

   She has a disease most people have never heard of -  epidermolysis bullosa.

   EB forces Angelica to be careful every day. Elastic in  clothing, or even the
wind on her face, can tear her skin off. The  disease gnaws at her every waking
moment.

   There is no cure. Researchers have been hunting for one since  1985, making
small, key discoveries, zeroing in. One advance  occurred when Angelica was in
the womb. An international team of  doctors pinpointed the spot on the gene that
causes EB when it  goes haywire.

   The research continues. But Angelica is getting sicker. She  may have lived a
third of her life.

   So this birthday is much more than a date on a calendar. It  is a reminder
that time is both her friend and her enemy, a  milestone in a mother and child's
nine-year embrace. Even if the  disease wins, it will take life but not love.

   When Angelica bats a beach ball high, when her grandpa  bestows a kiss at her
birthday, when her aunt teases about her  first bra, when she does no more than
smile, it seems that no harm  can touch her.

   'It's nine years of waking up - that's what this celebration  is about,' Aunt
Yvonne says. 'It's got to be something special  because we don't know how many
birthdays we're going to get.'

   Angelica giggles as the limousine pulls away from Limelight  Court.

   Angelica screams.

   She screams so hard, her arms and legs quiver.

   It is just after 11 p.m. on April 25, 1993.

   The newborn weighs 7 pounds, 6 ounces. Two toes are fused  together.

   'What's this?' says Dr. Frank Walker, noticing purple goo on  his thumb.
Flesh from Angelica's leg has rubbed off in his hand.

   Nurses begin to clean her. One nurse wipes under Angelica's  neck; another
wipes her tummy.

   Angelica's skin rolls off.

   'Stop. Stop,' one nurse says.

   Angelica keeps screaming and screaming.

   'Show her to her mom,' a nurse says.

   Angie, her sister Yvonne by her side, is groggy from  sedatives from the
Cesarean section. She looks at her baby. She  sees the sore under Angelica's eye
and her bloody lips.

   She does not know what to think.

   Outside the delivery room, a throng of Tafoyas waits.

   'Something's wrong,' Yvonne tells her family.

   Doctors and nurses are stumped. Does mom do drugs? Has she  been on
medication? Any recent fevers?

   'No, no, no,' Yvonne says.

   Angelica lies naked in the incubator. A cloth diaper, all  her skin can
tolerate, rests under her bottom. Her thick, dark  hair is matted with fluid.

   'Do you think we could wash her hair?' Yvonne says.

   Absolutely not. Until doctors find out what's wrong,  Angelica cannot have a
bath or clothes.

   She shrieks through the night, kicking so hard that the  heels of her feet
turn raw.

   In the morning, Angie shuffles to the nursery, still in pain  from the
C-section. Her sleeping baby wears headphones that pump  lullabies to keep her
calm.

   Angie tells the nurse she wants to hold her girl. The mother  cradles her
baby in a soft, nonirritating blue blanket that won't  tear Angelica's skin.

   Tears of love and worry stream down Angie's ashen face.

   What is wrong with my baby?

   Angie calls for a priest. He baptizes Angelica, then follows  with last
rites.

   On the third day, a dermatologist delivers grim news:  Angelica has
epidermolysis bullosa, an inherited skin disease.

   EB is caused by a defective gene. Angelica lacks the  'glue' that holds
dermis and epidermis together. Without fibrils  to anchor the two layers of
skin, any friction - a pillow on her  cheek, an enthusiastic embrace - can cause
her skin to blister and  fall off.

   Infection will fester in her open wounds. Disfigurement,  malnutrition and
other unforeseen problems are likely. Angelica  will need constant care.

   Angie is terrified.

   Silently, she says:

   What will I do?

   A month after Angelica's birth, allied doctors from Baltimore;  Philadelphia;
New York; Madison, Wis.; and Paris announce a  promising discovery.

   In two siblings with recessive dystrophic EB, the kind  Angelica has, doctors
have pinpointed the genetic mutation that  caused the problem. With recessive
dystrophic EB, the gene fails  to give a proper instruction for making a protein
called Type VII  collagen, the glue.

   If doctors know what goes wrong, they can work to make it  right. But for
now, life expectancy for those with recessive  dystrophic EB is short; skin
cancers often kill people with the  disease when they reach their late 20s or
early 30s.

   Scientists now will try to find ways to fix the key gene.

   No one knows whether a cure will come in time for Angelica.

   Angie becomes caregiver and torturer for her daughter.

   A single mother who limps because of missing joints in her  ankles, Angie has
help from Yvonne, 34, who lives nearby, but not  Angelica's father. He came to
the hospital to offer child support,  but she turned her fear and frustration on
him, refused his money,  sent him away. He has not seen his daughter since.

   Angie accepts her role - as she does most aspects of her life  -
purposefully, without philosophical musing.

   'She's mine. I'm her mother,' says Angie, now 41. 'I've got  to take care of
her. I love her.'

   Angie will need to draw on all her strength to meet the  challenges of EB.

   The struggle begins immediately, when they leave the hospital  in May 1993
and move in with Angelica's maternal grandparents.

   Angelica does not eat like a normal baby. She can't suck. She  has blisters
in her mouth. Angie feeds her with a special squeeze  bottle.

   Gently, gently, she presses the bottle, giving Angelica a bit  of formula at
a time.

   Angelica chokes when she gets too much milk. It takes an hour  to feed her 4
ounces.

   At 10 months, more worry.

   Angelica won't crawl. She only lies on her back. Angie takes  Angelica to
Memorial Hospital for physical therapy. Angelica rolls  back and forth on a big
ball to learn balance and movement.  Therapists say it will help her learn to
crawl.

   It doesn't. It only gives Angelica blisters on her hands.

   Instead of crawling, Angelica slides on her buttocks. Her  Pampers diaper
protects her.

   She scoots across the kitchen floor to baby nirvana: pots and  pans.

   Clang. Clang. Clang.

   Angie begins to learn more about the cruelty of EB.  Angelica's recessive
dystrophic EB is one of three types of the  disease. Just 3,400 people are
listed on a national registry for  the type Angelica has. This variety harms
mucous membranes as well  as skin. Not only do blisters form inside her mouth,
they can  invade her pharynx, esophagus and anus.

   Angie had not known that she and her boyfriend were carriers  of the
defective gene, giving Angelica a 25 percent chance of  contracting EB.

   After Angelica's first birthday, she teeters to her feet. First,  short steps
around the couch. Then,  an all-out waddle across the living room, her Barney
bib flapping  in step.

   'Good girl, Jelly,' Angie says. 'Good girl.'

   Angelica's mobility is a triumph and a worry. If she bangs  into a wall or
trips over her footie pajamas, she will get more  blisters, more sores.

   Angie tries to keep her safe. She buys her girl elbow and  knee pads. She
never picks Angelica up under her arms.

   'Look, you've got to be careful. You have ya-yas,' Angie  repeats often,
using the Spanish word for owies. 'You were born  this way.'

   'Ya-yas,' Angelica mimics. 'Ya-yas.'

   The child understands. Rarely does she put herself in a  dangerous position.
Rarely does she fall.

   She cries when Angie and Yvonne begin to gather supplies to  change the white
bandages on her arms and legs. Two-inch cling.  Scissors. Curlex wrap. Band
nets. Q-Tips. Antibiotic ointment.

   Angelica lies on the bed, her legs straight out so Angie and  Yvonne can
maneuver more easily.

   By the time her daughter is 2, Angie pops blisters with  precision, draining
fluid but leaving the canopy to fall as a  protective layer. Angie bathes
Angelica in bleach, vinegar and an  oatmeal solution to dry her sores. She
cleans wounds like a doctor.

   Because of her ankle problems, Angie receives disability  payments that allow
her to be home for her child.

   Her skill and her love achieve much. But without a medical  breakthrough, it
may not be enough.

   By the time Angelica is 4, she chokes when she eats. Angie  calls the doctor.

   At Memorial Hospital, Angelica drinks a white, chalky 'barium  swallow.' She
says it tastes yucky, so nurses add sweetener to  make it go down easier.

   Mother and daughter watch on a black-and-white television  monitor as the
heavy liquid travels through Angelica's digestive  system.

   The doctor points at a silky cloud on the screen. That's bad.  Angelica has
webbing in her esophagus.

   Angie calls Yvonne, a Head Start teacher, at school.

   Angie cries so hard that Yvonne has to ask her several times:  'What?'

   'It's in her throat,' Angie sobs. 'It's in her throat.'

   At 5, Angelica weighs only 28 pounds.

   She wears a size 4T. Because of blisters in her mouth and the  webbing in her
throat, she barely eats.

   Without a feeding tube, doctors fear, she'll die of  malnutrition. It takes
two hours to cut the hole in her belly.  Afterward, Angie holds up a can of
fortified milk. It flows down a  clear, plastic tube into Angelica. That's how
she'll get most of  her nourishment from now on.

   Angelica hates the feedings. She complains that she feels  bloated. She says
her tummy hurts.

   'I don't want a can,' she says before feedings.

   'Jelly,' Angie says sternly. 'You have to have it.'

   Angelica has to receive nourishment even at night when she  sleeps in the
apartment she and Angie have moved into. Her body  uses the few nutrients she
gets from eating regular food to help  heal her skin.

   So, each night before bed, Angie hooks Angelica up to a  feeding machine.
Five 8-ounce cans of milk flow through the tube  every night as long as there is
no kink in the line. When that  happens, the alarm blares and Angie dashes from
bed to fix the  problem.

   Angelica goes to kindergarten and learns to count to 20, say  her ABCs and
write her name: Angelica Marie Tafoya.

   She holds pencils and crayons well even though her hands are  partly
bandaged. The constant blistering and healing create scar  tissue that is
beginning to join the fingers as one. She's lucky;  she can still use her thumb.

   Angelica's toes are no longer visible. They melded, a pudgy  ball.

   Her feet are extended like a ballerina's, but her walk is  graceless, a
herky-jerky struggle for balance and motion by a  fragile girl who cannot afford
to fall.

   Angie calls Dr. Gary Bellus, with the department of  dermatology at the
University of Colorado School of Medicine, and  explains that Angelica no longer
walks flat-footed.

   'Progressive fusion,' Bellus says. 'It's real typical for EB.'

   The toe problem, much to Angie's surprise, is probably not  what's causing
Angelica's ungainly gait.

   'It could be due to the fact that Angelica has scarring on  her foot that
causes her to hold her feet in an extended position,  causing secondary
tightening up of the heel cords.'

   Angelica is 7 when Bellus proposes back-to-back surgeries.

   He wants to release her heel cord, hoping it will enable her  to walk
flat-footed. And he suggests covering the incision to the  heel cord with
something called Apligraf.

   'It's a skin made from circumcised-infant foreskin,' Bellus says.  'It has
been successfully  transplanted on other kids with EB.'

   He warns that the procedure is not permanent and may fail.  But if it works
on her heel, it probably will work on the rest of  her body, helping her mend.

   Angie and her sister fill with hope, something they have  lacked for a long
time.

   'This is the answer,' Yvonne tells Angie. 'Maybe it won't  stay intact
forever, but maybe she can have a a pain-free bath and  quality of life for a
little while. Oh, dude! Wouldn't it be so  cool if we had days when she wouldn't
have any blistering? She'd  have all of her skin and she wouldn't have
bandages.'

   The heel-cord surgery takes 90 minutes.

   Then, Dr. Bellus lifts the Apligraf, a translucent sheet of  skin, from a
4-inch round container. He nicks it with a sterile  instrument so drainage from
Angelica's wounds will escape and not  pool under it.

   Bellus dabs medical super glue around the edges of Angelica's  surgical
wound. He avoids stitches because it will only cause more  trauma to her fragile
skin.

   He bandages Angelica's wounds.

   Two weeks later, Bellus carefully removes Angelica's bandages.

   The Apligraf is gone. The surgery failed. Bellus believes a  systemic
infection in Angelica may be to blame. The heel-cord  surgery didn't work
either.

   'It didn't do nothing,' Angie says bitterly.

   Building on prior breakthroughs, researchers at Stanford  University are
trying to develop healthy skin that could grow on  patients such as Angelica.

   They take specimens of skin from children with junctional EB,  a variety that
kills victims by the age of 9 months. They repair  the defective gene and, with
that correction, can grow good skin.

   Then they transplant the skin to mice. In another advance  toward a cure for
EB, it takes hold.

   But will it work on humans?

   During her second- and third-grade years at Stratton Meadows  Elementary
School, Angelica visits the hospital more than 50  times.

   She's getting worse. The EB is going after her.

   Repeatedly, her temperature spikes to 106. She is lethargic.  Her wounds
stink. Angie rushes Angelica to Memorial Hospital.  Doctors and nurses flood her
with potent intravenous antibiotics.

   From September to February during third grade, she attends 17  days of
school.

   In February this year, Angie notices

   Angelica's foot has doubled in size. Her right foot is cherry  red, as if
it's been in a fire. She can't put on her Barbie  slipper.

   The day before Valentine's Day, Bellus offers a strand of  good news to
Angelica, her mom and aunt. He tells them about the  gene therapy research by
doctors at Stanford.

   'It's still in its early stages, but I think it is very  encouraging,' Bellus
says.

   Yvonne hangs on every word. Angelica and her mom keep their  emotions to
themselves. Angie says later she doesn't want to raise  false hopes.

   Bellus needs to do another surgery, a biopsy to explore the  foot and find
the cause of the infection.

   The next day, on the second floor of the hospital, Angie is  at Angelica's
bedside. Angie's face is drawn.

   'I don't think I can handle what they're going to be doing in  there,' Angie
says.

   Angelica is nervous, too.

   'I'm dizzy,' she says.

   As surgeries go, this one is simple. Bellus needs to cut a  slice of infected
skin from Angelica's foot, then send the sample  to a laboratory.

   'Did you sneak any food since midnight?' Bellus says.

   Angelica smiles.

   'No,' she says defiantly. 'I couldn't.'

   Angie kisses Angelica. They embrace in a long, Velcro hug.

   'I'm going to be there when you get up,' Angie says. 'I  love you. Don't
cry.'

   Through the hospital, its lobbies and waiting rooms  festooned with red
carnations and balloons for Valentine's Day, a  nurse wheels the steel gurney
into the operating room. Dr.  Jennifer Krupp, the anesthesiologist and Bellus'
wife, is waiting.

   'Are you ready for this?' Bellus says.

   Angelica lies still.

   'I'm going to hook you up right there,' Dr. Krupp says,  pointing to a port
in Angelica's chest that was inserted the  previous summer so doctors wouldn't
have to prick her skin when  she needs intravenous drugs or fluids.

   The operating room is quiet except for the rhythmic beep of  the heart
monitor. Krupp places an oxygen mask over Angelica's  face and injects the
anesthesia into her port.

   The drug works like a switch. Angelica is out.

   Bellus shines a bright light on Angelica's 46-pound body.  Using surgical
scissors, he snips at the outer webbing that covers  Angelica's legs. The
bandages underneath are blotched with blood.  Gently, he peels off two soiled,
silicone-based bandages.

   His nose crinkles.

   'That's kind of a strong smell. Smells like pseudomonas a  little bit,' he
says of the bacterial infection.

   There are sores on the backs of her thighs and her knees. The  top of her
left foot is open and raw, the color of a valentine.  Wet with secretions, it
glistens under the operating room lights.

   'This is very raised and red,' Bellus says, his words thick  with concern.
'It's almost fissuring.'

   He videotapes her. From the top of her foot, he cuts a piece  of flesh the
size of a pencil eraser and drops the specimen into a  jar.

   Blood seeps from Angelica's newest wound.

   'Can we send this for quantitative culture?' he says.

   Bellus starts to rewrap Angelica's legs. He butters a  silicone-based pad
with antibiotic ointment and presses it to  Angelica's ravaged skin. He puts
another, thinner bandage on top,  wraps it and covers it with webbed material
that fits like a sock.

   Moving to her arms, Bellus carefully excises soiled dressings  that cling to
Angelica's open sores.

   'She's really stuck in a lot of places,' he says.

   Angelica's arm jerks - even under anesthesia.

   Bellus emerges from the operating room with glum news.

   'Jelly's got a lot of involved areas now,' Bellus says. 'This  is a different
time for Jelly because she's starting to evolve.  Her foot, you know, looked
pretty bad. I'm suspecting it must be a  yeast infection, because that's the
only thing we're not covering  for.'

   Bellus says her wound care has to be exceptional. He suggests  using a
different dressing, one that looks like Saran Wrap and  collects more of the
drainage from the wounds.

   'We'll take it a day at a time,' Bellus says.

   Angelica wakes up yowling with fear.

   After the girl settles into her recovery room, Angie leaves  for the gift
shop, where she buys Angelica a furry pen covered  with red hearts.

   She walks to the cafeteria and orders a burger and a soda.  She squeezes
ketchup from a small packet, then breaks down.

   'She's getting worse,' Angie cries, tears running down her  cheeks. 'You
heard him, she's getting worse.'

   A week later, after doctors drench Angelica's system with  antibiotics, she
goes home. Bellus says he still can't determine  what's causing her infection.

   Three weeks later, she is admitted to Memorial Hospital with  a fever of 106.

   As the EB advances, the infection has moved to Angelica's  blood.

   Yvonne starts to talk the way she does when she's scared.

   'You know, dude,' Yvonne says to her sister, 'there's going  to come a day
when you're going to have to let her go. You're  going to have to tell her to
go. If we make her stay, it'll be for  ourselves. She'll just suffer more. If
the day comes, you need to  let her go.'

   Angie hates when Yvonne talks like this. She has learned to  dam her fears,
knowing that if she released them she might get  overwhelmed.

   'Why are you saying that?' Angie barks at her sister. 'Shut  up.'

   Tension rises every Monday, Wednesday and Friday,  dressing-changing days.
With the possibility of a skin-transplant  cure in the future, care of
Angelica's wounds becomes all the more  crucial.

   The routine starts when Angie fills a syringe with a  morphine-like drug to
calm Angelica. The girl presses the drug in  through her feeding tube.

   The house reeks of bleach. Angie has scoured the bathtub for  germs. The
bandages will come off easier when wet.

   With some prodding, Angelica gets in the tub. She fiddles  with a Barbie that
has long black hair like hers.

   'I like to wash her hair,' Angelica says. Her words plod. The  drug is
kicking in.

   Yvonne yells from the hallway: 'Remember to get your arms  wet, honey.'

   'I know.'

   Angelica splashes water over the doll.

   'Come on, missy, get your arms wet,' Angie says sternly.

   'Could you just wait?' Angelica barks back.

   'OK, OK, OK,' Angie says, irritated.

   'Do your arms now, hon,' Yvonne says.

   She fiddles with the Barbie.

   'I need to do her hair,' Angelica says.

   'Before you do her hair, you need to be soaking,' Yvonne says.

   'I am soaking,' Angelica retorts.

   'Well, your legs are now, but your arms aren't. And the  wetter they are then
the easier the dressing goes.'

   Yvonne suggests that Angelica let Barbie do the backstroke.

   'No!' Angelica screams. 'Her hair's going to get soaking wet  and if she does
the backstroke then she'll have to get  conditioner.'

   Angelica complains that her stomach hurts.

   'I don't think anything's wrong with your stomach,' Yvonne  says.

   'Come on, missy,' a stressed-out Angie says.

   'Could you wait?'

   'Do you want it to be a stuck mess?' Yvonne says. 'It's up  to you.'

   Angelica puts her arms under water.

   'There,' the girl says.

   That was the easy part.

   Now, the bandages must come off.

   Angie wraps a towel around Angelica, cradling the 8-year-old  like a newborn,
and carries her to her bedroom. Angie sets her  daughter on a blue cloth so
Angelica won't soil or stick to her  bedspread.

   Winnie-the-Pooh, Mickey Mouse and dozens more stuffed animals  look down from
one shelf. Another is crammed with gauze,  ointments, sterilized scissors.
Knowing what is coming, Angelica  tries to stall.

   'Would you wash your hands?' Angelica shouts at her mother.

   'I already washed my hands,' Angie yells back.

   'Go wash your hands.'

   'Stop it right now.'

   'I'm cold,' Angelica says.

   'Go get a blanket or something,' Yvonne says to Emma Tafoya,  Angelica's
grandmother.

   "Nooo,' says Angelica, out of control.

   'Do you want a dry towel then?'

   'Nooo.'

   'You need to calm down,' Yvonne says.

   With Yvonne on one side and Angie on the other, they begin  to take the
blood-soaked bandages off of Angelica's arms, which  she holds out stiff. As the
bandages come off, Angelica's screams  reach the pitch of a boiling tea kettle.

   'Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Wait a minute,' Angelica  shrieks, tears
streaming. 'I'm thirsty. I'm thirsty. I'm thirsty.'

   'All right,' Angie says abruptly. 'Do you want pop or water?'

   Angie and Yvonne cut the bandages with surgical scissors.  They gently peel
them from Angelica's raw flesh. In places,

   Angelica's skin rips off with the bandages.

   Angelica wails so hard she loses her breath.

   'One at a time. One at a time. One at a time,' she gasps.  'Don't do that to
me. Don't do that to me.'

   'No,' Angie says. 'We are doing both. We've got to get these  yuckies off.'

   Angelica howls again.

   'Enough. Enough,' Angie yells. 'Stop it, now.'

   Angie and Yvonne dab Silvadene cream onto Angelica's wounds.  Then they apply
a silicone-based sheet called Mepitel around the  wounds, cover it with gel and
a sheet of Mepilex, another type of  no-stick bandage. Each dressing change
costs $ 1,200 for materials.  Medicaid covers all Angelica's medical bills.

   The sisters put a stretchy net over the silicone bandages to  keep them in
place.

   With her arms covered, Angelica calms. Her face is blotchy  from crying.

   Next, the legs. Angie takes the left one, Yvonne the right.

   Each cuts the netting and begins to remove the silicone  bandages.

   'It's stuck,' Angelica sobs as the bandages come off,  bringing pieces of
skin with them. 'Why'd you do that? It burns.  It burns.'

   'Jelly, we can't do it one at a time,' says Yvonne.

   Her legs and arms are outstretched and stiff, frozen in pain.

   'Watch it,' Angelica screams. 'Oweeee.'

   'Enough, Jelly,' Angie says.

   'Hold my hand. Hold my hand. Hold my hand,' Angelica cries,  losing her
breath again.

   'Jelly, would you calm down?' Yvonne says.

   'I can't, I can't.'

   'Honey, what could we do so you won't cry so much?' Yvonne  says.

   'I want my grandpa.'

   As they call her grandfather, who is home resting, there is  calm for the
first time in 90 minutes.

   'Hello,' the girl says in a sweet voice. 'It's Angelica.'

   They talk briefly.

   'OK,' Angelica says in farewell. 'I love you, too.'

   Angelica stands on the bed. Her mother dresses her in footie  pajamas.

   Angie envelops Angelica in a long embrace.

   It is a Friday. In three days, they will endure all this again.

   'You want to take a nap, Jelly?'

   Six yellow cards, each with a letter on it, land on Angelica's  desk at
school.

   'You have three minutes to make as many words as you can out  of those
letters,' says third-grade teacher Connie McMillan.

   The room quiets. Angelica spends most of the time trying to  scoot forward in
her chair. She yawns, glances around, picks at a  sore on her hand. Like so much
in her life, school is a challenge,  a place that highlights her differences.

   'One more minute,' McMillan says.

   Angelica has no words on her paper. When time's up, she has  written only
two: 'best' and 'bet.' Everyone else has more than  10.

   Forty minutes after school starts, Angelica tiptoes to her  wheelchair.

   'Do you need to use the restroom?' the teacher asks.

   Angelica zooms down the hall, which is chaotic with coats  and backpacks. She
uses the bathroom next to the nurse's office.

   'I'm done,' Angelica yells a few seconds later.

   The school nurse, Cathi Minerich, checks to make sure  Angelica has no new
blisters.

   'You look pretty good, Angelica,' Minerich says. 'It looks  like your sores
are healing.'

   'No they're not,' Angelica says.

   Back in class, Angelica picks at her hand again, then rubs  antiseptic cream
onto her skin. The sore bleeds.

   At 10:10 a.m., the bell rings. Boys and girls line up at the  door. Angelica
wants to skip recess on this beautiful April day.

   She goes to Yvonne's Head Start classroom and asks her aunt  if she can stay
in. Yvonne kisses Angelica on the cheek, cleans  her teeth, which are spotted
with blood, then sends her outside.

   'She's always got something up her sleeve,' Yvonne says.

   In school, as at home, Angelica faces reminders of the  disease that chews at
her childhood. But in Connie McMillan's  third-grade class, Angelica also gets
to be something else.

   She gets to be a kid.

   Angelica finds her friend Brianna Aguilar on the playground.  They hook arms
and play wheelchair crack-the-whip. Angelica throws  her head back laughing.

   'You walk slow,' Angelica says, yanking Brianna around the  blacktop.

   Angelica whips her around until she loses her balance and  falls.

   'Whoa,' Angelica says. 'Are you all right?'

   Yes, but Brianna doesn't want to play crack-the-whip anymore.

   'Let's go on the swings,' Brianna says.

   'I can't,' Angelica says. 'I can't get on the swings 'cause  I'll fall.'

   Brianna goes anyway. Angelica sits in her wheelchair.

   When recess ends at 10:35 a.m., Angelica goes to the nurse  to drink
Carafate, a medicine that coats her stomach so she will  be able to eat lunch.
Later, in the cafeteria, she nibbles on a  cookie and sips from a milk carton.

   When the bell rings for another recess. Angelica heads  outside where dozens
of children are playing, but the wind,  dangerous only to her, has picked up.

   She goes back in. Three friends follow, even though only two  children are
allowed to go inside with Angelica.

   In the hallway, Brianna, Sara Jewitt Garcia and Jasmine  Salgado negotiate
who gets to stay. They stick their feet in a  circle.

   'Bubble gum, bubble gum, in a dish. How many pieces do you  wish?' Brianna
says, tapping on the tennis shoes in the childhood  game of chance.

   'We always fight over Angelica,' Sara says.

   'Yeah,' Jasmine says, 'I know about her and I really like  her. Everybody
loves her. So do I.'

   Before they can choose, the bell rings. Her friends all  should head back to
class, but instead they go with Angelica to  Yvonne's room. Angelica needs a
feeding.

   Yvonne pours a can of Pediasure into Angelica's feeding tube.  Her friends,
elbows planted on a pint-sized table, watch in  amazement.

   'What kind of food is that?' Brianna asks.

   'How much does Jelly eat?' Sara chimes in.

   Yvonne explains that many nutrients Angelica needs to stay  out of the
hospital come out of a can.

   Brianna asks how the milk gets in Angelica's stomach.

   'They made a little cut right here,' Yvonne says, pointing to  Angelica's
tummy, 'and they opened it up.'

   A boy appears in the doorway: 'Mrs. McMillan said you guys  didn't have
permission to be down here.'

   The other girls go back to class.

   Angelica remains, finishing her feeding.

   'You want some chicken?' jokes Venice Morrison, Yvonne's  colleague.

   Angelica laughs so hard the Pediasure flows back up the tube.

   'You want some pork chops?' Morrison says.

   Angelica giggles.

   'She likes steak,' Morrison says.

   More laughs.

   The feeding is done.

   'Kiss me,' Yvonne says.

   Angelica catches up to her classmates at the school store. As  a reading
incentive, kids earn points for the number of books  read. Angelica has just
four points.

   She tiptoes over to a cabinet and picks out a small plastic  tub of body
glitter.

   'Well,' says the teacher, McMillan, 'aren't you going to  sparkle?'

   The faculty tries to include Angelica in activities, even  jumping jacks in
gym class.

   'Come on, baby doll,' pleads Holly Shiffler, Angelica's gym  teacher. 'Just
try with your arms.'

   Angelica says no. Her mind drifts to another day, two weeks  ahead.

   'I've got to make a list,' she says with a twinkle in her  eye. 'I've got to
write invitations for my birthday party.'

   Boisterous kids run laps around the gym, which is decorated  with
motivational posters. One says: 'Success is getting up just  one more time than
you fall down.'

   'All right, boys and girls,' Shiffler says, 'For the next  three weeks, we're
going to be learning and playing volleyball.'

   Angelica has never seen this game before.

   'Come here, sweet pea,' Shiffler coaxes.

   Angelica's webbed fingers press the 'go' button on her  wheelchair. She zooms
across the gym to Shiffler.

   Shiffler holds a big beach ball in her arms, tosses it into  the air and
tells the third-graders to form an imaginary window  above their heads and 'tap,
tap, tap.'

   She turns to Angelica.

   'OK. I'm going to tap this to you, and I want you to tap it  back,' she says.

   Angelica eases forward in her seat, but not to the edge,  where she might
fall.

   A beach ball sails toward her. Angelica's bandaged arms shoot  for it. Smack.
The ball flies back to Shiffler.

   'Excellent,' Shiffler says.

   Angelica wiggles and giggles.

   'Again,' Shiffler says.

   She tosses balls to Angelica. One. Two. Three. The fourth  flies over
Angelica's head. She arches her back, throws her arms  behind her head and lets
out a man-sized grunt and smacks the ball.

   'Atta girl,' the teacher says.

   Angelica laughs as if she's being tickled.

   The bell rings. Angelica is still giggling as she hoists a  beach ball onto
her left shoulder and zooms past another poster:  'Powered by the human spirit.'

   She dumps the ball in the equipment room.

   'I want to play that again,' she says, grinning. 'I want to  play that some
more.'

   A few days later, Angelica, the 8-year-old girl who is so  careful, asks her
mother if she can do something for the first  time in her life.

   'Mom,' she says, 'I want to swing.'

   Angie carries Angelica to a swing set outside their  apartment. A cousin,
Selina Flores, settles into another swing.

   Angelica squeezes the chains. Angie gives her a push.

   'Higher!' Angelica says, her brown hair flying. 'Higher. I  could do this all
day. Pull my hair out of my mouth. I don't want  to let go.'

   Angie gets the stray hair.

   'Push me with two hands, then you don't miss me,' Angelica  says. 'If you
miss me, you gotta kiss me.'

   Angelica and Selina begin to bicker over which one Grandpa  Tafoya likes
best.

   The argument is a standoff until Selina, 5, changes the  subject in a way
that kids do.

   'You have a mirror,' Selina says. 'When you look at it,  you'll break it.'

   'Yeah, whatever,' Angelica says quietly, looking away.

   That is how she copes with stares, the rare insensitive  comment. She tries
to ignore, to shrug off the hurt.

   When she is in pain, however, she sometimes howls out her  despair.

   'Why me?' she says. 'Why did this happen to me?'

   At the swing set, Angie sees one of Angelica's hands drift  off of the swing.

   'You're getting brave there, missy,' Angie says. 'Jelly, you  better not
fall. Hold on, missy.'

   Angelica smiles, then announces: 'I'm getting braver every  day.'

   'That's enough,' Angie says. 'That's enough swinging.'

   The girls go inside. Their spat quickly forgotten, Angelica  paints Selina's
fingernails dark purple.

   Angelica talks about the birthday party. She wants summer  clothes and a
Disney movie: 'The Princess Diaries,' about a nerdy  girl who becomes a
princess.

   Angie asks Angelica whether she remembers the conversation  she had in
February with Dr. Bellus, when he told her about the  gene research that might
lead to a cure.

   Angelica seems uncomfortable with the memory. She takes a  swig off of a
soda.

   'What would happen if it works?' Angie says. 'You would be  like Selina. You
would be normal.'

   Angelica shrugs her shoulders.

   'I don't know.'

   The Stanford doctors await a decision from the Food and Drug  Administration
on their application to try on humans the skin  transfer that worked with mice.
But that is for junctional EB.

   For Angelica's form of the disease, recessive dystrophic EB,  the researchers
have grown healthy skin from repaired genes but  haven't tried transferring it
to mice yet. Until that happens,  they won't be able to experiment with people.

   Research into EB continues.

   The girl in the pink linen dress sits ladylike in the back of  the black
limo.

   'Everybody is staring at us,' says Angelica's friend Sara  Jewitt Garcia.

   Angelica's dress falls off her right shoulder, revealing a  white strap

   'She has her first bra on,' Yvonne says.

   Angelica glares daggers.

   'Do you mind?' Angelica says.

   'Am I telling your most intimate secrets?' Yvonne says,  laughing.

   The girls bat at the balloons.

   'This is fun,' Sara says.

   The limo stops in front of Brianna Aguilar's blue house. She  races to the
car, where she and Sara whisper about their presents  for Angelica.

   Yvonne hands each girl a champagne glass and pours sparkling  cider.

   The girls clink glasses, wish Angelica happy birthday, sip.

   The girls listen to hip-hop singer Lil' Bow Wow.

   The limo stops in front of the home on Limelight Court.  Angelica doesn't get
out when the chauffeur opens the door.

   'I'm feeling crazy now,' she says, as if the cider were  champagne.

   Inside the house, white plastic lawn chairs are scattered  through the living
room. Huge foil pans with 100 pieces of fried  chicken are ready on the
countertop. A hand-colored banner, 'Happy  Birthday Angelica,' is strung across
the living room.

   Four generations cram into the house of Angelica's aunt, Ida  Herrero. It's
noisy.

   Angie serves Angelica chicken, rice and bread.

   'I want this food gone,' Angie says. 'You haven't eaten  anything all day.'

   But she knows that Angelica will only peck at the plate.

   Angelica opens a pile of gifts. The first: the board game Life.

   Then summer clothes. Shorts and shirts galore, none with  elastic. The
Princess Diaries.'

   'OK, more gifts, more gifts,' Angelica says.

   Grandpa Tafoya videotapes the celebration.

   Dollar bills fall from birthday cards that Angelica  barely reads. She
unwraps two big beach balls and taps one across  the living room.

   Everyone cheers.

   They gather around a long kitchen table. A birthday cake with  two baby
pictures of Angelica shows how far the little girl in  pink has come. It reminds
that time is both enemy and friend.

   Angie lights a '9' candle.

   Four generations sing, grateful that they have one more  birthday to
celebrate.

   'Happy birthday to you. Happy birthday to you. Happy birthday  dear Angelica,
happy birthday to you.'

   About the disease

   The Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of  America Inc. is
a nonprofit organization created to find a cure  and help families that have a
member with EB. DEBRA's address is  5West 36th St., Room 404, New York, NY
10018. For more information  about EB, visit the website at www.debra.org or
call the group at  212-868-1573. Researchers at Stanford University can be
reached  through the Epidermolysis Medical Research Foundation, 130  Sandringham
Road, Piedmont, CA 94611. The website: www.ebkids.org

   Angie and Angelica Tafoya can be reached via e-mail at  yta7500349@aol.com.

   About this report

   The Denver Post chronicled the Tafoya family's medical and  emotional
struggle with epidermolysis bullosa, a rare skin  disease, based on hours of
interviews since December with family  members, doctors and researchers.

   The Post also reviewed videotapes and photographs of  Angelica's early years.
The family agreed to share their story to  bring greater understanding and
attention to EB, which has no  cure.

   About the section

   Reporter Erin Emery

   Photographers Helen H. Richardson

   Craig F. Walker

   Graphic artist Jonathan Moreno

   Section editor Dan Meyers

   Photo editor Alison Dale

   Section designer Linda Shapley


GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Denver Post/Helen H. Richardson Angelica When her bandages
are being changed, Angelica sometimes wails so hard she loses her breath. The
bandages must be changed three times a week.  Angelica's aunt, Yvonne Tafoya,
gives her a good luck kiss before Angelica had skin removed from her foot for a
biopsy.  In her third-grade classroom at Stratton Meadows Elementary, Angelica
steers her way through clutter and classmates.  Above left, the surgical team
reassures Angelica before she is anesthetized. At right, Dr. Gary Bellus removes
a small piece of skin from Angelica's foot for a biopsy.  Angelica takes a
bandage-soaking bath, top left, to make the changing process less painful. She
often will stay in the water as long as she can, putting off the inevitable.
Above and top right, Angelica's mother and aunt move quickly to wrap her arms
and legs, but it doesn't ease the pain during the excruciating process.  During
one dressing change, Angelica demanded to talk to her grandfather to try to help
take her mind off the pain. The call produced a brief lull of calm.  Angelica's
mother, Angie, hugs her exhausted daughter. Both are drained by the
bandage-changing ordeal. A comfortable blanket and her mother's embrace help
Angelica fall asleep.  Angelica jokes with one of her best friends. Brianna
Aguilar, as they work on a math exercise. Angelica feels at home in the
classroom.  PHOTOS: The Denver Post/Craig F. Walker Angelica discovered during
gym class at school that she loves to toss around a beach ball. She plays with
one she received for her ninth birthday, which she celebrated with a big party
at the home of her aunt and uncle, Ida and Robert Herrero.  At top left, Cousin
Florencia Herrero, Angelica and friend Sara Jewitt Garcia enjoy sparkling cider
en route to Angelica's birthday party. Angelica received many gifts, including
the board game 'Life,' at top right. Above, she smiles. Each birthday is
precious.  PHOTOS: One day old, with mother Angie Tafoya Two months Three months
The Denver Post/Jonathan Moreno Epidermolysis bullosa

LOAD-DATE: August 06, 2002


                             1210 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             August 4, 2002 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1801 words

HEADLINE: Once Golden, Drug Firms Under Assault;
Price pressure, generic competition and leaner profits could spur more mergers
and prompt some to cut research

BYLINE: DON LEE and RONALD D. WHITE, TIMES STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   After years of basking in the glow of huge profits and a sterling public
image, the big brand-name drug companies are reeling from attacks by senior
citizen groups, AIDS activists and state and federal regulators. The industry is
under tremendous pressures that experts say are likely to transform it in the
coming decade and perhaps even alter the flow of new drugs to the marketplace.

   For companies already vilified as price gougers by politicians, consumer
groups and executives at other firms, the recent stream of bad news has been
relentless: questionable accounting practices at Merck & Co. and Bristol-Myers
Squibb Co.; dire warnings about Wyeth's hormone replacement therapy; prolonged
manufacturing deficiencies at Eli Lilly & Co.; a criminal probe at a Johnson &
Johnson plant in Puerto Rico.

   All of this comes against a backdrop of eroding sales and earnings as generic
drugs steal market share from one blockbuster brand-name drug after another,
while Third World countries challenge the worldwide drug patent system in order
to get cheaper AIDS medicines.

   "Clearly there is a lot of upheaval and uncertainty in the industry right
now," said Merck's chairman and chief executive, Raymond V. Gilmartin. He
suggested that the industry was taking a breather after a period of rapid
product roll-outs in the 1990s. The criticisms, he said, should subside if
Congress passes a subscription drug plan for the elderly.

   But the Senate last week killed legislation to provide Medicare drug
benefits, although it passed a bill that would give consumers easier access to
cheaper generic drugs, which was immediately denounced by Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America, the industry's main trade group.

   The association points out that drug makers have faced adversity before and
says it will overcome their current challenges. But their two core problems--a
dearth of new products in the pipeline and mounting pressure on drug
pricing--are widely seen as deep-seated and long-term. And that suggests the
$400-billion industry will be in for a lengthy period of turmoil and change.

   "On the revenue side, they're likely to get kicked in the shin. And on the
product side, the well has run dry," said Uwe Reinhardt, a Princeton University
professor and expert on health-care economics and policy. "It is not an easy
future."

   In a recent conference call with analysts and reporters, Pfizer's chief
executive, Hank McKinnell, expressed amazement at the sudden change affecting
the industry, and referred wistfully to "the days when the pharmaceutical
companies were considered safe harbors for investors."

   McKinnell blamed "irrational gloom" for the overall stock market losses and
general uncertainty about the industry. What the critics have failed to notice,
he said, is that "we're at a turning point for our industry."

   "There has been a well-documented slowdown in the pipeline for new drugs and
there have been rapid rises in research and development costs," McKinnell said.

   One key way that drug makers are expected to respond to these challenges is
through mergers, such as the $50-billion deal announced last month by Pfizer and
Pharmacia.

   Concentration of market power always raises the specter of higher prices, but
analysts say drug makers will be hard-pressed to put through big increases,
given the intense criticisms and scrutiny of the industry's pricing and
marketing practices. Unlike auto and computer manufacturing, the drug industry
is still quite fragmented. Even with the Pharmacia acquisition, the market share
for Pfizer, already the industry's largest, will grow to just 11%.

   Consolidation, though, could have a substantial influence on the development
of new drugs. Pfizer and Pharmacia promoted their merger largely as a way to
enhance resources for research and create new medicines. Their combined research
and development budget, they said, would amount to $7 billion, about 15% of
their annual revenue.

   Bigger May Not Be Better

   But experts say the Pfizer-Pharmacia merger was more of a short-term bet to
bolster earnings. In fact, big drug mergers in the past haven't led to more
success in drug development, and the largest research departments have been
criticized for being inefficient and lumbering.

   "That's the unfortunate thing, there's no evidence that bigger is better when
it comes to R&D," said Patricia Danzon, a professor in health-care systems at
the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Some analysts say they expect big drug companies eventually will stop doing
research, leaving it to biotech firms from which they could get product
licenses.

   The industry's R&D budget, as a share of its overall revenue, has declined
slightly since the late 1990s, when it peaked at 20%, the pharmaceutical
association said.

   "These big pharmaceuticals are really morphing from research companies into
marketing companies," Reinhardt said. He expects major companies to scale back
on research and development.

   Regardless of whether that comes to pass, it is apparent that the industry is
entering an era of leaner profits.

   Analysts point out that leading pharmaceutical companies still are
outperforming businesses in many other industries; demand for drugs will grow as
the nation's population ages. But for most brand-name drug makers, the years of
double-digit returns and profit growth appear to be over.

   Outlook Grim for Year

   Drug industry analyst C. Anthony Butler of Lehman Bros. said in a research
note to clients last month that the industry is mired in "what may be the worst
year-over-year performance in earnings in the past decade" and that "numerous
company-specific mishaps have poisoned investor confidence."

   He also noted that only seven new products have been approved for sale this
year--with maybe five more to come--compared with 27 drug approvals last year
and 26 the year before.

   The dimmed outlook has emerged in one company earnings report after another.
Merck, the world's third-biggest drug maker, said it wasn't likely to show any
earnings growth this year. The main reason: Five of its leading drugs will lose
their patent protection.

   Adding to its problems, Merck has been under fire for accounting for $12
billion in revenue from its pharmacy-benefits subsidiary that it never
collected, even though that didn't affect the bottom line.

   Indianapolis-based Lilly said its latest quarterly earnings plunged 20%, then
executives surprised analysts by saying they could not provide any financial
guidance for next year because of uncertainties of the Food and Drug
Administration's ongoing review of its manufacturing operations, which could
delay the launch of several promising drugs.

   Sales of one of Lilly's most famous products, the antidepressant Prozac, have
fallen precipitously since its patent expired last August, opening the market to
cheaper generic versions.

   Today, generic drugs comprise half of U.S. prescription sales, up from less
than 20% two decades ago. That share is expected to keep rising as patents on
top-selling drugs, such as the cholesterol reducer Zocor and antidepressant
Zoloft, expire in the next few years.

   Backlash on Patents

   In some ways, the drug industry is a victim of its own success. Over the last
decade, the industry launched a host of new products, plus a bunch of me-too
versions, and drove demand with aggressive marketing. Consumers clamored for the
drugs, doctors obliged, and the drug companies reaped hefty margins because in
most cases insurers were paying the bills.

   But as insurers and others started pushing back against soaring drug prices,
the big drug makers hurt themselves more by aggressively trying to extend
patents, which caused a huge backlash in the courts and the political arena.

   Many states, including California, have filed lawsuits against pharmaceutical
companies in the last year, claiming antitrust violations and illegal
manipulations of prescription drug prices. One of the biggest is a lawsuit by 29
state attorneys general against Bristol-Myers Squibb that accuses the company of
illegally blocking cheaper generic alternatives to its top-selling cancer drug,
Taxol.

   "Now, more and more pharmaceutical firms are admitting that maybe this was
the wrong strategy and that they are going to readjust and put more energy into
new drug development," said Ken Kaitin, director of the Tufts Center for the
Study of Drug Development.

   The drug industry always has dealt with patents expiring, but much more now
than in the past. That has put enormous pressure on manufacturers to refill
their pipelines. Last year, 31 new drugs hit the U.S. market, compared with 52 a
decade ago, the Center for Medicines Research said.

   Development Slowdown

   A big part of the slowdown is the science. Researchers have harvested
chemical compounds to treat a number of ailments, but now they are taking on
more serious diseases such as cancer. And although there are great hopes for the
next generation of drugs based on the mapping of the human genome, those
undertakings will be more tricky, expensive and time consuming. Analysts say it
could be five to 10 years before companies see the fruits of human gene therapy.

   The Tufts Center estimates it costs $805 million and takes 10 to 15 years to
bring a new drug to market. Yet only three in 10 drugs have recouped that
average cost.

   Citing such statistics, the pharmaceutical industry has defended the high
price of its drugs in the United States. But recent controversies over the
pricing of AIDS drugs in Africa, for example, and the huge amounts spent in
marketing to doctors and directly to consumers have undermined that argument.
That has made the public highly suspicious.

   In a recent poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation, excessive profiteering by
drug companies was cited most often by consumers when asked about why they
thought health-care costs were escalating.Meanwhile, managed-care companies are
successfully pushing more generic drugs in the marketplace, prodded by large
employers that are trying to keep costs under control. And as consumers are
required to pay larger amounts out of pocket for drugs--through more
sophisticated multi-tiered prescription plans--they will be making their voices
heard, especially the aging baby boomers.

   "The pressure to make important drugs economically available is going to
become unbearable because the most politically active group will be cruising
into territory where they will need them," said Dr. Peter Kongstvedt, a leader
in the health-care consulting practice at Cap Gemini Ernst & Young.

   All that should help consumers, at least in the short run. But for the drug
companies, it probably means their long, wonderful ride is over.

   "They made hay while the sun was shining," said Reinhardt of Princeton
University. "Sooner or later, they were going to run into this."

GRAPHIC:  Generic drugs comprise half of U.S. prescription sales, up from less
than 20% two decades ago. That share is expected to rise. PHOTOGRAPHER: KAREN
TAPIA-ANDERSEN / Los Angeles Times
 Denis Piendeau is senior investigator at the Merck Frosst Centre for
Therapeutic Research in Canada. Merck said it probably won't show earnings
growth this year because five of its drugs will be losing their patent
protections.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2002


                             1211 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      August 4, 2002 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1540 words

HEADLINE: Ageless athlete may not be far off;
Penn's research into a synthetic gene has wide implications for sports.

BYLINE: Frank Fitzpatrick Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   You know all those steroid-laced sluggers, blood-doped swimmers, and
hormonally enhanced weightlifters who people worry are ruining sports?

   They're just minor-league fears.

   The real nightmare is lurking inside tiny cages in a University of
Pennsylvania basement.

   There, genetically engineered mice and rats, some of them the equivalent of
80-year-old humans, display rippling, well-toned muscles that neither aging nor
a lack of exercise can diminish.

   Injected only once with a synthetic gene created by researchers in Penn's
physiology department, these ripped rodents are as much as 60 percent stronger
than untreated ones. When injured, they recover with remarkable speed. And their
muscles don't weaken with age.

   "The muscle properties of the mice really never changed from when they were
young to as old as we could get them," said Dr. H. Lee Sweeney, who heads the
Penn study, funded by the National Institutes of Health. "The potential for its
use in athletics is very high. Combined with a normal training protocol,
athletes will get more out of their work, will recover from injury more quickly,
and... the number of years they will be competitive will increase immensely."

   Imagine Barry Bonds winning another home-run title at 50. Or Michael Johnson
ascending an Olympic medals stand at 60.

   So far, only mice and rats have been treated in the three-year-old Penn
program. Sweeney hopes to turn to dogs this year. And perhaps then, because the
aim of his work all along has been to reduce muscle-weakening in the elderly,
humans.

   If the gene's effect is the same in men as it is in mice, the implications
could be enormous for sports, many of them already tainted by speculation about
drug-cheating.

   Sweeney's research, and similar studies in England, Australia and elsewhere,
is speeding up the timetables for those concerned about genetic engineering.
Once considered a distant possibility, experts now say these designer-athletes
could turn up at the next Olympic Games, just two summers from now in Athens.

   "I've already gotten lots of calls from weightlifters and other athletes who
had heard about this," Sweeney said. "I even heard from one high school football
coach who wanted me to inject his entire team."

   These altered bodies would bear no telltale signs and could contain synthetic
genes that improve not only an athlete's muscle strength, but also his stamina,
vision and reflexes.

   And, according to Sweeney, this kind of manipulation need not be limited to
teenagers and adults. It's possible to implant these genes in embryos.

   Perhaps the most vexing element of this Frankenstein scenario for world
sports officials is that traditional drug-testing won't be able to detect a
thing. Scientists insist the only way to find an injected gene is with a muscle
biopsy, a potentially damaging procedure to which few athletes are likely to
submit.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA, the drug-testing arm of the International
Olympic Committee), still beset with 20th-century problems such as blood-doping
and the use of growth hormones, last year convened a seminar to discuss this
looming laboratory threat, one of at least five such conferences on the topic in
the last 12 months.

   "WADA wasn't asking the question 'if' this will happen, they were asking,
'When? How soon?' " said Sweeney, who addressed the conference. "It's doable
now."

   The Human Genome Project provided a genetic road map to the body. Researchers
and athletes now know which athletic-enhancing functions are triggered by which
of our 30,000 genes. So every time an unknown bursts onto the world stage with a
remarkable performance - as happened recently with several teenage Chinese
runners - the specter of genetic engineering is raised.

   "It's not the kind of thing you can do in your garage at this point," Sweeney
said, "but if there were a government willing to do what East Germany once did
for its athletes, it could be happening now."

   Penn State professor Charles Yesalis, the coeditor of the book Performance
Enhancing Substances in Sport and Exercise, said geneticists around the world
now believe there could be genetically altered athletes as soon as the 2004
Summer Games.

   "I was at a conference in Europe, and these same people who several years ago
predicted that we wouldn't see it any earlier than 2010, then revised that to
2008, are now saying look out for Athens," Yesalis said.

   With genetic engineering for health purposes likely to win social approval,
the challenge for sports will be to draw a line between legal and illegal
tampering. Is it OK, for example, if an athlete undergoes gene therapy to repair
a muscle injury? But is it not OK if he or she does so to prevent injury by
strengthening a muscle?

   "This gene manipulation is not all bad," Harri Syvasalmi, the WADA's
secretary general, said last year. "We have to accept that some of these
enhancements will be wonderful, especially for athletes who are injured."

   There are scientific regulations in the United States and most Western
nations that carefully control genetic research and limit it to the laboratory.
But decades ago, how many anticipated that steroids and human-growth hormones
would find their way to the baseball fields and swimming pools?

   At this point, the IOC seems determined to prevent the phenomenon from
further eroding the public's faith in sports.

   "Gene manipulation is there to treat people with ailments," IOC president
Jacques Rogge said. "I'm very clear on that."

   Still, many fear that developing nations like China, where chemically
enhanced swimmers were uncovered in the late 1990s, or desperately ambitious
individuals in the West might take the risk, even though little is known of
possible side effects.

   That's because if you build a better mouse, the world will beat a path to
your door.

   "It changes the playing field dramatically," Sweeney said. "If we get to that
point, what do we do? Say 'OK, there are no rules'?"

   *

   The Penn study's initial aim was to explore muscle deterioration in the
elderly. A virus was created that produced a synthetic version of the gene that
alerts muscles to the need for repair and growth.

   It does so with a substance called IGF-1 (Insulin Growth Factor-1). By
injecting mice, and later rats, with the gene, Sweeney and his team ensured that
the rodents' IGF-1-triggering devices would be constantly switched on.

   "We thought if we kept that signal on all the time, anytime the muscle got
damaged, it would repair itself faster and maybe even bigger," Sweeney said. "It
turned out that with that signal turned on all the time, the animals did not get
weaker as they got older. And they kept their speed as well as their strength
throughout their lives."

   Along the way, possible applications for treating muscular dystrophy and
diseases such as diabetes were examined with encouraging results.

   "In muscular dystrophy, the problem is that the muscle is damaged very
easily," Sweeney said. "If we can increase the repair mechanism, we can slow the
progression of it."

   Still, it was the IGF-1 gene's inherent benefits to athletes that became
apparent most quickly.

   "They [the injected mice and rats] were more muscular," Sweeney said. "If
they were on a treadmill running, the difference became very noticeable. You can
see they have broad definition - broad shoulders and big hind and forelimbs.
They look like weightlifters."

   Athletes injected with the gene would look well-muscled and extremely fit,
but wouldn't be the bloated freaks that steroids have created.

   "There won't be any of that characteristic steroid look around the neck and
face," Sweeney said.

   And, in the rodents at least, there have been no damaging side effects.

   "We haven't seen any," Sweeney said. "Of course, we know that if humans have
high levels of IGF-1, it can cause cardiac problems and a number of other
problems. But by having the muscle produce it within the muscle, none was
getting into the blood. It was all being trapped in the muscle."

   The younger the animal was injected, the more it increased its strength.
Young adult mice quickly became 15 percent to 25 percent stronger and maintained
that level throughout their lives, typically 21/2 years. Even those treated in
middle age grew stronger, too.

   The strength of one mouse, dubbed "He-Man," improved by 60 percent, and he
was able to carry three times his weight.

   However, it's easier to get rats to exercise than mice. With moderate
treadmill and more severe weight-bearing exercises, rats showed even greater
improvement than the mice, and those that had been injured recovered with almost
no scar tissue.

   "The exercise causes some damage, and that causes you to rebuild bigger than
you'd see with exercise alone," Sweeney said.

   As altruistic as the aims of these medical researchers might be, it's
inevitable that athletes whose dreams can be fulfilled or broken by a few
hundredths of a second will try to adapt the research to their own purposes.

   "Then, I'm afraid, even the optimists who believe this war [on drug-cheating]
can be won would have to admit the war has been lost," Yesalis said.

   Contact Frank Fitzpatrick at 215-854-5068 or ffitzpatrick@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2002


                             1212 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                     AUGUST 4, 2002, SUNDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1571 words

HEADLINE: SPECIAL REPORT;

Experiments on Humans;

Business of clinical trials soars, but risks unknown;

Medical studies give new hope to patients, yet

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
At Children's Hospital in Oakland, nurses poked Kendra Gottsleben's arm, looking
for a vein to deliver an experimental enzyme that's designed to tame the toxins
ravaging her body.

    Gottsleben, 17, suffers from a rare disease that has left her just 39 inches
tall, and unless medical researchers can devise a treatment, chances are she
could be dead in a few years.

    No one would fault this experiment. But clinical trials are not always so
ethically straightforward.

    Three years ago at San Francisco General Hospital, doctors gave patients
with acute respiratory distress different levels of oxygen as part of a test of
whether this would improve survival rates.

    The change proved beneficial. But researchers ran into trouble when federal
regulators determined that they failed to obtain the proper consent before
putting patients through the experiment.

    This year, an estimated 20 million Americans will take part in more than
41,000 clinical trials and uncounted more federally funded experiments. And even
though few would argue the necessity of these life-and-death tests, the process
of human experimentation is coming under a microscope.

    With billions of dollars swelling the coffers of medical research, a spate
of tragic deaths has revealed cracks in regulatory safeguards and raised
concerns that scientists in a rush to discover new treatments may not be doing
enough to ensure safety.

    The problem is that these experiments, which range from tightly supervised
drug studies like Gottsleben's to triage situations like the UCSF case, defy
simple safety prescriptions.

    "I do support research with human beings and I think we can do it without
slowing down (progress), but I am also an advocate for greater human research
protections," said Adil Shamoo, a professor at the University of Maryland at
Baltimore and a longtime critic of the current systems of oversight for human
clinical trials.

    But clinical trial insiders say concern about safety risks have been
overblown by prominent coverage of a few incidents, like the deaths of Jesse
Gelsinger at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999 and Ellen Roche at Johns
Hopkins in 2001.

    "It is not a patient-beware situation," said Ken Getz, president of
CenterWatch, the Boston publishing firm that tracks the clinical trials
industry. "The vast, vast majority of clinical trial participants have very
positive experiences."

    But even those who run the regulatory systems designed to police the booming
medical trials industry don't have a firm grasp on how many volunteers are
taking part in experiments -- much less whether they face greater or lesser
risks.

    "The numbers quite frankly have been hard to pin down because various
agencies have parts of the puzzle," said Greg Koski, director of the Office of
Human Research Protections, the federal agency that polices federally funded
academic research and that recently scolded UCSF for its emergency room trial.

    But Koski's counterpart at the U.S. Food & Drug Administration, the agency
that regulates clinical trials by drug and biotech firms, said that clinical
trials are so different that their risks cannot be analyzed or regulated in some
blanket fashion.

    "How do you compare deaths in an AIDS trial to deaths in a sinusitis trial?"
asked David Lepay, the FDA's director of clinical trial safety.

    And that brings the debate full circle to the difference between the UCSF
experiments and Gottsleben's -- there is no one-size-fits-all description of the
nature or the risks of clinical trials.

    For life and death conditions like heart disease or cancer, for example,
volunteers have almost nothing to lose.

    Arthur Kaye, a 70-year-old San Franciscan, took part in a clinical trial in
1999, taking infusions of a biotech medicine designed to grow new blood vessels
to his ailing heart. It didn't work, but Kaye says he's no worse off for having
volunteered and would take part in research again.

    "When you're sick and in a life-threatening situation, if you can do
anything that could solve the problem, why not?" Kaye asked. "It'll either help
you or help the general public."

    Although Kaye suffered no side effects, he did take a novel medicine and was
therefore at some possible risk. At the opposite end of the safety spectrum,
some studies require no more than answering questions and giving blood.

    For instance, Kaiser and UCSF are collaborating to determine whether there
are genetic differences that make some people respond to antidepressant drugs,
while others suffer side effects.

    There are several antidepressants on the market, but 30 to 40 percent of
patients don't respond to the first type of pill they're prescribed, said
Kaiser's principal investigator Catherine Schaefer.

    Kaiser researcher Nancy Rieser is helping recruit 1,500 volunteers from
Kaiser clinics. She enlists patients who have just started taking drugs for
depression and conducts a 90-minute interview to establish their mood when
treatment begins. Shorter follow-up interviews are conducted at four and eight
weeks to gauge any responses to the medication. Kaiser technicians also draw a
blood sample.

    The blood work is sent to UCSF, where scientists Kathleen Giacomini and Ira
Herskowitz are looking for genetic variations among the volunteers. By
correlating the interviews with the DNA profiles, researchers hope to spot any
differences that could be diagnosed in advance so each patient gets the right
pill.

    "Once you explain the purpose of the study, most people are willing to take
part," Rieser said. "They want us to find these answers."

    And then there's the Kendra Gottsleben experiment, which involves a disease,
MPS VI, that is so rare that BioMarin Pharmaceuticals of Novato had to scour the
world for volunteers on whom to test its enzyme treatment.

    Gottsleben and her mother only recently went home to South Dakota after
spending four months living in an Emeryville hotel. BioMarin paid for their
room, and extended the same courtesy to three other youths with MPS VI, and
their moms, from Portugal, Brazil and France.

    Sitting around the hotel pool with the other moms last month, watching all
four young volunteers splash off the heat of an East Bay afternoon, Betsy
Gottsleben nodded in Kendra's direction.

    "The enzyme has to be doing something -- she hasn't walked this well in
three years," she said.

    Of course, that could be just a mother's wishful thinking, and the whole
reason for doing clinical trials is to get the proof that drug companies,
biotech firms and academic researchers all need to determine whether their
experimental treatments are safe and effective.

    In fact, the surge in medical experimentation, powered by advances in
genetics and other fields, continues to fuel demand for volunteers and poses new
challenges for scientists trying to recruit them -- and for regulators who want
to make sure subjects aren't being pressured into taking unnecessary risks.

    Safety questions aside, there are already signs that a steady increase in
the number of human experiments is butting up against the finite supply of
potential volunteers. For instance, CenterWatch has reported that 52 percent of
drug trials were delayed up to six months by recruitment difficulties in 2001.

    With the safety debate compounding the troubles with recruitment, it's clear
that researchers will have to settle questions about risks and regulations.

    "One of the reasons for taking a look at the rules is that more and more
individuals are losing faith in their safety if they participate in a trial,"
said Heidi Wagner, a Washington, D.C., lobbyist for Genentech, the biotech giant
in South San Francisco.

    "It hasn't affected Genentech yet, but it's a general concern."

   ------------------------------

    The series

    With clinical trials a booming business, The Chronicle explores the concerns
about human safety.

    -- Today: The risks The growth in clinical trials puts pressure on
researchers, participants.

    -- Monday: The rules Fragmented regulations may leave some volunteers
unprotected.

    -- Tuesday: The reality What every participant in a medical research study
should know.

   ----------------------------
CHART:

   Clinical trial deaths

Year Research center/Patient     Type     Funding source
of trial
1991UCLA /
        Tony LaMadrid           Schizophrenia    Government
1993Hutchinson Cancer
        Institute /
        Kathryn Hamilton        Breast cancer      Industry
1996University of Rochester/
        Nicole Wan                Airborne        Government
                                  chemicals
1998St. Jude's Children's
        Hospital, Memphis /
        Three children              Leukemia      Government
1999Children's Hospital,
        Pittsburgh
        Gage Stevens                Acid reflux   Government
1999University of Pennsylvania
        Jesse Gelsinger             Gene therapy  Government
2001Johns Hopkins
        Ellen Roche                 Asthma       Independent

   Source: Centerwatch.com
   Chronicle Graphic

    E-mail Tom Abate at tabate@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (5): CHART: SEE END OF TEXT, (1) Kendra Gottsleben (right) and
Severine Paulin (left, with mother Evelyne Paulin) play cards while receiving
enzymes for their rare growth-stunting condition in a clinical trial at
Children's Hospital in Oakland., (2) After a four-hour infusion of enzymes,
Severine Paulin is helped into bed., (3) Children's Hospital enzyme study
participants (clockwise from left, Cristiane Barbosa Resende of Brazil, 16,
Severine Paulin of France, 14, and Claudio Costa of Portugal, 8) play with
Celine Paulin, 5, in the pool at their hotel in Emeryville., (4) To pass the
time during their four-hour experimental enzyme treatment, Severine Paulin and
other participants play a game with her mother. / Photos by Kat Wade / The
Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2002


                             1213 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      August 2, 2002 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 416 words

HEADLINE: GenVec losses grew in 2nd quarter;
 Revenue declined, costs of development rose, says gene-therapies company

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   GenVec Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter loss widened about 82
percent to $6.9 million as revenue fell and the company's drugs advanced in
development, increasing costs.

   The Gaithersburg-based developer of gene therapies said the loss amounted to
32 cents a share. That compares with a loss of $3.8 million, or 21 cents a
share, in the second quarter of last year. Revenue in the quarter was $1.6
million, down from $2 million as payments decreased after Pfizer Inc.'s
previously announced decision to discontinue financial backing for one of
GenVec's drugs.

   Analysts had predicted a loss of 30 cents a share, according to the average
estimate of two analysts surveyed by Thompson Financial/First Call.

   "Over the first half of 2002, GenVec has made significant progress in moving
each of its product candidates forward while keeping costs in line with
corporate and analyst projections," Jeffrey W. Church, GenVec's chief financial
officer, said in a statement.

   GenVec announced in January that Pfizer Inc. would discontinue financial
backing for BioBypass, which is designed to treat vascular problems by promoting
the growth of new blood vessels. The company has enough money to take its drugs
through clinical trials designed to give initial indications of their
effectiveness, said Craig D. West, an analyst with A.G. Edwards. If the drugs
continue to show promise, he said, the company will be able to raise more money.

   "My bottom line on GenVec is that it's a perfectly capitalized biotech
company in that the amount of capital they have in hand will allow them to
answer the most important clinical questions they have in the next 18 months,"
West said.

   By the end of this year, GenVec expects to present results showing how well
BioBypass worked in a Phase II clinical trial involving patients with peripheral
vascular disease and, separately, in a Phase II clinical trial involving
patients with coronary artery disease. It also expects to present results of
two, Phase Ib trials of its TNFerade therapy, designed to enhance the effects of
radiation in cancer patients, and to start a Phase II trial of the drug.

   A third gene therapy, GenVec's AdPEDF treatment for macular degeneration - a
disease of the eye - is likely to begin a Phase Ib trial this year.

   GenVec reported cash, investments and working capital totaling $48.8 million
at the end of June. Shares gained 12 cents yesterday to close at $3.40 on the
Nasdaq stock market.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2002


                             1214 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 1, 2002 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 040

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BODY:


   Justice Dept. is probing AOL

   NEW YORK - AOL Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that the Justice Department is
looking into its accounting practices, raising the possibility of a criminal
case against the world's largest media company.

   AOL Time Warner did not detail the Justice Department probe, and agency
officials declined comment. Securities regulators are already investigating the
company's bookkeeping. - AP

   Fleet shares soar

   NEW YORK - FleetBoston Financial Corp. shares, which fell to a seven-year low
last week, have jumped 24 percent this week on speculation New England's biggest
bank is a takeover candidate. The stock gained $ 2.22, or 10.6 percent, to $
23.30 in New York Stock Exchange trading after a 12 percent gain two days ago. -
BLOOMBERG

   Local bank merges

   LOS ANGELES - Boston Bank of Commerce and Family Savings Bank have agreed to
merge, a deal that will create the nation's largest black-owned bank, the banks
confirmed yesterday.  The combined entity will have about $ 460 million in
assets. - AP

   GE to count options

   FAIRFIELD, Conn. - General Electric Co. announced Wednesday that it will
start counting employee stock options as expenses in its earnings reports,
joining other major companies adopting the practice after a wave of accounting
scandals. - AP

   Merck unit stops IPO

   WHITEHOUSE STATION, N.J. - Drug giant Merck & Co., citing market conditions,
has withdrawn the initial public offering for the Medco pharmacy benefit
management business it has been trying to spin off. - AP

   Genzyme pricing eyed

   LONDON - Genzyme Corp.'s pricing policy for its Cerezyme treatment for
Gaucher's disease may violate U.K. competition law, the country's Office of Fair
Trading said. The company charges the country's National Health Service for
nursing services as well as the drug, and bills outside home-care service
providers a price for the medicine that allows them no margin, the agency said
in a statement. - BLOOMBERG

   UK court backs TKT

   CAMBRIDGE - An appeals court in the United Kingdom reversed a lower court and
sided with Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. in a closely watched patent dispute with
Amgen Inc., TKT said yesterday.

   In April, an English judge ruled that TKT's attempts to make a drug similar
to Amgen's lucrative Epogen infringed on its patent.

   The latest ruling holds the Amgen patent to be valid but significantly
narrows it, TKT said in a press release, and states Cambridge-based TKT did not
infringe on the patent. - AP


LOAD-DATE: August 01, 2002


                             1215 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 1, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 614 words

HEADLINE: TKT WINS BRITISH APPEAL RULING OPENS DOOR FOR SALE OF DRUG THAT WOULD
RIVAL AMGEN'S

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A British appeals court yesterday overturned an earlier ruling in favor of
Amgen Inc., opening the door for Cambridge-based rival Transkaryotic Therapies
Inc. to market a competing version of Amgen's top-selling drug in the United
Kingdom.

   Amgen, the world's largest biotech company, won the first round in its fight
to defend patent exclusivity on its $2 billion-a-year anemia drug Epogen. But
yesterday the United Kingdom's Court of Appeal reversed the decision of a lower
court, issuing a unanimous opinion that TKT and its marketing partner Aventis
Pharma do not infringe patents held by Amgen.

      The dispute has blocked TKT and Aventis from marketing Dynepo, its version
of the human protein erythropoietin, despite regulatory approval to sell the
product in Europe. Although the court ruling is only binding in the United
Kingdom, it is likely to clear the path to market in the other countries of the
European Union.

   "We're thrilled," said Dr. Richard Selden, TKT's president and chief
executive. "This has been a long time coming, and it's a wonderful feeling to
have validation from this court that we're different and we don't infringe."

   Shares in TKT fell 33 cents yesterday to $38.55 while shares in Amgen fell 15
cents to $45.64.

   The appeals court upheld Amgen's patent but significantly narrowed its scope.
The two companies make versions of erythro poie tin, which helps spur red blood
cell production in anemic patients, using different processes. Amgen claimed,
however, that TKT's method of making the drug was covered by its patents. A US
court found in Amgen's favor in a similar case last year. The case is under
appeal, and a decision is expected late this year or early next year. Before
Dynepo could be sold in the United States, however, it must gain regulatory
approval.

   Amgen spokesman Jeff Richardson said the California company may appeal to the
House of Lords, the final arbiter of legal disputes in the United Kingdom.
Either way, Richardson said, the ruling isn't a significant threat. The decision
is limited to the United Kingdom and does not affect the appeal pending in the
United States, he said.

   Moreover, the patent on Epogen is set to expire next year in the United
Kingdom and Amgen is already marketing its next-generation anemia drug, Aranesp.
The newer drug lasts three times longer than erythropoietin products, including
Epogen and Dynepo, which Richardson said would make it difficult for TKT to
capture much of the market.

   The ruling may not hurt Amgen, said Dennis Harp, a Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown
analyst, but it certainly helps TKT. Estimates for the European market range
from $1 billion to $2 billion. Even capturing a small piece of that would be a
boon to TKT. The company has one product, Replagal, to treat a rare genetic
disorder called Fabry disease. Marketed outside the United States, it generated
nearly $15 million in sales in the first six months of the year. In that time,
TKT lost nearly $70 million.

   When Dynepo will be launched in Europe, however, remains uncertain. Selden
said the company will discuss launch plans with Aventis, but the French
drugmaker is awaiting the outcome of the US appeal. The drug cannot be made in
the United States - even if it is intended for sale elsewhere - unless TKT wins
the US case.

   TKT, which also reported second-quarter earnings yesterday after markets
closed, said it hopes to gain US regulatory approval for its Fabry drug Replagal
by year-end.  The company lost $1.24 a share in the second quarter, compared to
a loss of 92 cents a share for the same period last year.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2002


                             1216 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 1, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C6

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: GENZYME MOVING BIOSURGERY UNIT INTO THE FORMER LOTUS BUILDING

BYLINE: By Thomas C. Palmer Jr., Globe Staff

BODY:

   Biotech pioneer Genzyme Corp. is moving one of its three divisions into the
former Lotus Development building, 55 Cambridge Parkway, only a few blocks from
where the company's world headquarters is under construction.

   Top officials at Genzyme, currently located at One Kendall Square, and Cabot,
Cabot & Forbes of New England Inc., developer and owner of 55 Cambridge Parkway,
said yesterday the company has signed a seven-year lease for 61,101 square feet
of space.

      Genzyme spokesman Bo Piela said the 21-year-old company will make the
former Lotus building headquarters for the 200 employees in its biosurgery
division.

   "It is close to where we are now and also very close to where our new
corporate headquarters will be," said Piela. Genzyme's headquarters is expected
to shift to a new 285,000-square-foot Lyme Properties building at Binney and
Third streets in a little over a year.

   The biosurgery unit, which will occupy floors three through six on one wing
of the T-shaped ex-Lotus building beginning in November, focuses on developing
products for diseases that are treated by surgeons.

   For example, Genzyme is working on gene therapy to improve the outcome of
heart surgery by growing blood vessels or replacing damaged tissue.

   Lotus, now owned by IBM, once had 95 percent of the space in 55 Cambridge
Parkway, located on the Charles River adjoining the Sonesta Hotel, across from
Boston.

   "It's got some of the nicest views of the city" across the river, said CC&F
president Jay Doherty.

   In April, the Lotus lease expired on the building its employees had occupied
and dominated since the structure opened in 1984. IBM's e-commerce group still
occupies 30,000 square feet on the top floor of the building, which has a total
of 275,000 square feet on nine floors.

   In a difficult leasing climate, with considerable office vacancy in Eastern
Massachusetts, CC&F has now filled more than half of the building but has
130,000 square feet left to lease.

   Smaller tenants include Finnegan, Henderson, Farabow, Garrett & Dunner LLP,
the Massachusetts office of a Washington, D.C., law firm specializing in
biotechnology and patents. Also in the building is Sahin Technologies, run by
software entrepreneur Kenan Sahin and his son, Kent.

   Peter Sullivan of CC&F said office use by a biotech firm like Genzyme is a
good fit.

   "They complement a prestigious mix," Sullivan said. "This is a good-sized
lease in this environment."

   Meredith & Grew Inc./ONCOR International represented CC&F. Genzyme's broker
was Trammell Crow.

   Genzyme has 5,500 employees worldwide, of which 3,300 are in Massachusetts.
It has locations on Sidney Street in Cambridge, at Allston Landing, and in
Waltham, Lexington, and Framingham. Piela said those would be unaffected even
when Genzyme moves into its new headquarters. Some employees will remain at One
Kendall Square.

   CC&F built 55 Cambridge Parkway in 1983 as a "spec" building, before a tenant
was secured, and gradually absorbed the growing Lotus company. Similarly, the
company is now outfitting the even larger building formerly known as the Boston
Tech Center, in Brighton along the Massachusetts Turnpike, for biotechnology
laboratory use.

   Lab space is one sector of the real estate market that is not in a slump,
though most companies looking for space prefer to be in Cambridge, a center of
biotech education, entrepreneurial activity, and established biotech firms.

   Thomas C. Palmer Jr. can be reached at tpalmer@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2002


                             1217 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            August 1, 2002 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: British Court Rules Against Amgen;
Drugs: Earlier victory in patent infringement suit against Transkaryotic over a
product to treat anemia is reversed.

BYLINE: DENISE GELLENE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   An appeals court in Britain on Wednesday reversed Amgen Inc.'s victory in a
patent infringement suit over its anti-anemia drug.

   The decision by an appeals court in London means Amgen could face competition
from Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. before the European patent on the drug expires
in 2004.

   At stake is a European market worth more than $800 million, with Britain
representing 8% to 10%. Although the court decision affects only Britain,
analysts said it could influence the outcome in other countries.

   Amgen said it is considering an appeal to the House of Lords. However, Thomas
J. Dietz, an analyst with Pacific Growth Equities in San Francisco, said the
House of Lords rarely hears patent appeals.

   The case involves Amgen's patents on genetically engineered erythropoietin, a
protein that spurs red blood cell production. Amgen sells the protein under the
name Epogen in the U.S., where it accounts for $2 billion in annual sales.

   Thousand Oaks-based Amgen doesn't market the drug in Europe. Johnson &
Johnson sells it there under the name Eprex through a licensing deal with Amgen.
The drug is marketed to dialysis patients because their damaged kidneys do not
produce enough erythropoietin.

   The case is significant to Amgen in two ways: The company receives a
licensing fee on sales by Johnson & Johnson; and last summer, Amgen launched a
second-generation anti-anemia drug in Europe to reclaim revenue it had lost to
Johnson & Johnson, the company's estranged business partner. Called Aranesp, the
drug had worldwide revenue of $56 million in the second quarter.

   Analysts said Transkaryotic's drug, called Dynepo, closely resembles Eprex
and is a greater threat to the Johnson & Johnson drug than it is to Aranesp.

   Moreover, Johnson & Johnson has had a rash of serious illnesses and one death
linked to its drug in Europe, making it vulnerable to competition.

   Dietz said profit on Dynepo is high so that Transkaryotic and its marketing
partner, Aventis, could use price as a weapon against Eprex and, to a lesser
extent, Aranesp. "This are 95% gross-margin products," he said. "You don't
necessarily want to use price, but you can."

   Cambridge, Mass.-based Transkaryotic and Aventis this year received approval
from the European Union to market Dynepo. But Transkaryotic Chief Executive
Richard F. Seldon said that French drug maker Aventis does not want to launch
the drug in Europe until there is a ruling in a similar patent infringement case
in the U.S.

   A federal district court in Boston last year ruled that Transkaryotic
infringed three Amgen patents.

   The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit heard arguments in the case
in May, and Transkaryotic said a decision is not expected until early next year.

   Elise Wang, an analyst with Salomon Smith Barney in New York, said the
hurdles are higher for Transkaryotic in the U.S. patent case.

   Amgen, as part of its lower-court victory, obtained an injunction that
prevents Transkaryotic and Aventis from manufacturing Dynepo in the United
States for export markets. That ruling could make it difficult for the companies
to supply the European market, because its Dynepo manufacturing facilities are
in the United States.

   Transkaryotic spokeswoman Justine Koenigsberg said Aventis "is developing
manufacturing options," but she would not be more specific.

   Amgen shares Wednesday closed up 15 cents at $45.64, while Transkaryotic
shares fell 35 cents to $38.55, both on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2002


                             1218 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 1, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 114 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
TRANSKARYOTIC WINS ANAPPEAL ON DRUG PATENT RULING

BYLINE:  Bloomberg News

BODY:

        Transkaryotic Therapies won a British appeals-court reversal of a ruling
that the biotechnology company's anemia drug infringed on a patent for Amgen's
$2 billion Epogen treatment. The patent dispute has blocked Transkaryotic and
its partner, Aventis, from marketing Dynepo, which won European approval last
year. Courts in the United States and Britain ruled last year that
Transkaryotic, which makes drugs based on human proteins, and Aventis infringed
on Amgen's patents, preventing Dynepo from cutting into Epogen's sales. In the
United States, the Court of Appeals for the federal circuit in Washington heard
arguments on the case in May, with a decision expected next year.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2002


                             1219 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             July 30, 2002 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 2470 words

HEADLINE: Paying Attention to Adult ADHD;
For the Author, an Overdue Diagnosis Was the First Step to Order

BYLINE: Matt McMillen, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:

   My coffee table nearly buckled beneath mounds of mail and magazines. All
around my efficiency apartment, piles of books, papers and clothes grew around
the perimeter of the bed, beside the bookshelves, in the closet. I'd been
meaning to clean up, I swear, but . . . I hadn't gotten around to it.

   Instead I lay on my couch, picking at a copy of The American Scholar, a
highbrow journal I had bought on a whim. After flipping through the short
subjects, I settled on the lead article.

   James Trilling, an art historian, was writing about his father, the literary
critic Lionel Trilling. I counted the pages -- 25. A bit long, I thought; I
usually can barely make it through a newspaper article without drifting off.

   I have had this problem all my life. I often find myself 20 or 30 pages into
a book before realizing that my mind has been elsewhere since Page 10. With
force I can overcome this briefly, but the effort exhausts me. I usually give up
and move on to something else.

   This story, though, held me.

   James Trilling has attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). In his
article, he argued that his father suffered from ADHD as well. The lack of a
diagnosis and treatment, wrote the younger Trilling, created deep, irreparable
fissures in his father's personal and professional life.

   "I sensed that large areas of his personality were a facade," Trilling said,
"but only with the diagnosis of my own [ADHD] could I start to understand what
might have led him to build it the way he did."

   Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder is a neurological condition, the
most salient features of which are inattentiveness, impulsivity and, above all,
hyperactivity. Those with ADHD suffer impairment of the executive functions of
the brain, such as organization, working memory and information assessment.
First medically documented in children in 1902, the disorder has been the
subject of intense research, and myriad theories on its origins have been
debated. But it has been only in the past few decades that researchers have
accepted the idea that ADHD can persist into adulthood.

   Why has this taken so long? Because the hyperactivity so often associated
with the disorder diminishes over time. That fact was taken as evidence that the
brain somehow corrected itself, that it became "normal," with age.

   Scientists "used to believe that the brain caught up in adolescence,"
explains Stephen Faraone, associate professor of psychology at Harvard Medical
School. "That's wrong. With the passage of time, symptoms tend to change. [There
is] a diminution of hyperactivity and impulsivity, [but] not a diminution of
inattentiveness." Hyperactivity, in fact, is no longer an essential symptom for
a diagnosis of ADHD, in children or adults.

   As Trilling graphically catalogued the symptoms of the disorder, I had a
building sense of recognition. The intense impulses, the restless movements from
task to task, the thoughts that switched from one to the other like stations on
a radio whose dial I could not control. I experienced all of these all of the
time and had done so for as long as I could remember.

   It had been clear to me for some time that I had a problem. In school and
elsewhere, even my best efforts often came up short, leading me to expect
failure and to discount success as an aberration. Feeling low constantly, I was
certain I was depressed.

   "We think about what we know about," says Faraone. "[People] tend to
attribute symptoms to depression or anxiety because they don't know enough about
ADHD."

   Sadly, both are often present in addition to ADHD. The disorder, according to
Timothy Wilens, an associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard, "doubles your
risk for . . . disorders like anxiety, conduct disorders, depression and
substance abuse."

   Until I came across the Trilling article, all I had read about ADHD was that
it affected children and caused them to misbehave in the extreme.

   That didn't describe me. I merely couldn't concentrate, couldn't keep my mind
on my work, so I didn't bother with it. All I needed to do, as my teachers told
me time and time again, was "apply myself."

    But I couldn't. In eighth grade, I failed every class except Latin. I idled
for a year at a Jesuit high school before transferring to a public high school.
There I watched my friends breeze through with A's while I barely graduated. It
took me 6 1/2 years and four colleges (one of them twice) to get my BA. I
dropped out of graduate school.

   My lack of hyperactivity, perhaps, was a detriment. Teachers wrote on my
report card that I wasn't living up to my potential. I stared out the window,
the slightest movement caught by my peripheral vision, pulling my attention away
from the teacher and the chalkboard. But my behavior was rarely an issue. If I
had been hyperactive, that might have sounded a few alarms. In a structured
setting like school, after all, abnormal behavior stands out.

   "When you have a set environment," says Alan Zametkin, senior staff physician
at the National Institute of Mental Health, "it is easier to identify
difference." If the disorder goes undiagnosed, it is often simply because it
goes unnoticed.

   And it goes unnoticed more frequently in girls than in boys. While both sexes
are equally prone to the disorder, "what you tend to find," says Wilens, "is
that girls are less . . . disruptive or oppositional."

   That girls tend not to act out helps explain the 5-1 ratio of boys to girls
who are referred for ADHD, Wilens says. But hyperactivity diminishes over time
-- by adulthood, the symptoms men and women experience will be very much the
same.

   When I read James Trilling's piece, I was 28. Two years and three jobs after
dropping out of graduate school, I had taken a temp job in a busy downtown
office. Hardly what I wanted to do -- that changed from week to week. It was a
job I merely settled for, feeling I had few marketable skills beyond an ability
to type.

   As a newly minted administrative assistant, this was the first time that I
had to face daily my utter inability to organize. From 9 to 5:30 I answered
phones, sorted mail, filed documents, prepared expense reports, handled travel
arrangements, typed correspondence, all of it with epic inefficiency. Around me,
piles of papers grew, scribbled phone messages disappeared and reappeared,
seemingly at their whim, handwritten dictation I had taken left me baffled when
I troubled myself to transcribe it. Once, a $ 10,000 check disappeared on my
watch.

   Before taking this job, I had coped, however poorly, with my problems with
organizing, with concentration, with motivation. Here, it became clear how bad
those problems were.

   The frustration I felt when even the simplest of tasks required heroic
efforts was crippling. The disorder on my desk mirrored the mess that awaited me
at home each night. Both reflected my chronically derailed train of thought,
while my constant procrastination prevented me from seeking help.

   There is little argument among researchers that ADHD is a disorder of the
brain. That it has multiple causes is equally accepted. But despite advances in
research aimed at pinpointing those causes, much remains unknown.

   "[ADHD] is the accumulation of many small things," says Faraone of Harvard.

   Genetic irregularities, below-normal rates of glucose metabolism in the
brain, structural abnormalities in the frontal cortex, aberrations in the
noradrenergic and dopaminergic neurotransmitter systems, prenatal exposure to
alcohol and nicotine -- all have been implicated in the development of ADHD.

   There is strong evidence as well -- 20 to 30 studies, says Zametkin -- that
ADHD is, in many cases, an inherited disorder. Of particular interest to
researchers studying the heritability of the disorder are the D-4 dopamine
receptor and dopamine transporter genes. Both play a role in the functioning of
the frontal lobe, or what Wilens calls "the secretary of the brain." Genetic and
neuroimaging studies recently have shown that both function abnormally in some
ADHD cases.

   Identifying the disorder's causes clearly is complicated. Compounding that,
though, is increasing evidence that those causes combine differently in
different individuals. So while some cases may be linked primarily to genetic
abnormalities, others may be a result of complications during pregnancy. ADHD,
simply put, is no cookie-cutter disorder.

   I saw a psychiatrist for the first time a few weeks before I turned 29.

   During my initial appointment, I told the doctor I had recently learned about
ADHD and that I thought I should be evaluated. He didn't agree.

   Instead, he prescribed Wellbutrin, an antidepressant. Poor concentration, he
told me, is a hallmark of depression. The medication didn't work. After a while
I lost interest in our monthly appointments and didn't go back.

   Like many people with ADHD, novelty-seeking has been a significant part of my
profile. No matter how initially focused I can be on a job, a hobby, a book, a
relationship, when it becomes routine, I move on. Even the possibility that I
had ADHD and that I could (and should) get help lost its appeal. It would be
almost two years before I saw a therapist again.

   In the meantime, I quit my office job. I went to cooking school and then
worked as a pastry cook in a busy hotel kitchen. The ceaseless rush of activity
rarely allowed my mind to wander. All my tasks were assigned at the beginning of
each day. I had problems keeping things in order, as always, and frequently fell
behind. But the kitchen staff worked as a team, and I could count on help when I
needed it. The job was ideal.

   But after seven months, I quit. It had gotten old.

   Freelance writing was next. What was I thinking? After all, I knew from my
office-job debacle that basic tasks, like scheduling my time and organizing my
notes, were immovable roadblocks. How could I expect to accomplish anything when
all my energy was spent getting started?

   Still, my first article was accepted by a major newspaper. Then another.
Success.

   Nevertheless, I put off interviews, I avoided research, every passerby
outside my window pulled my attention from the computer screen. Writing a
1,200-word article took me three months. The disorder was busily working and
wouldn't let me ignore it. Picking up a part-time job at a book store, I got on
their health plan and saw a psychiatrist.

   When I swallowed my first five milligrams of Ritalin, the effect was
immediate. An hour or so into the dose, the frustration and irritation that I
constantly felt was gone. Without hesitation, I started writing a proposal for
my next article. The procrastination that had always plagued me had vanished,
too.

   But when I stood in the shower, where there are no distractions, and tried to
control the rush of thoughts that always dart in and out of my head, I couldn't
do it. A mental outline of my next article lost its place when a stray thought
jumped the line, followed by another, and another. In an instant, all was
disarray -- in other words, normal. After a few weeks and a few different dosing
schedules, my concentration had yet to improve.

   This experience is not uncommon. While Ritalin, the brand name for the
stimulant methylphenidate, is still the most frequently prescribed drug for
reducing the symptoms of ADHD ("It's been 50 years now," says Zametkin, "and we
know that stimulants are safe and effective."), it doesn't work for everyone.

   "Why do we have a variable response? Because the brain is a highly complex
organ," Zametkin says. "It is safe to say that the disorder affects different
people in different parts of the brain."

   Fortunately, there are other drugs, and I began trying them. The stimulant
Adderall, a long-acting mixture of dextroamphetamine and amphetamine, was first.
My concentration improved momentarily.

   Then, in an about-face, my mind became muddied, confused. When the drug wore
off, the comedown left me tired and depressed. I went back on Ritalin, pairing
it with desipramine, an antidepressant that has proven effective for some with
ADHD. Instead of helping, the new drug made me want to sleep all the time, so my
doctor switched me to Dexedrine, a stimulant. With a different chemical makeup
than either Adderall or Ritalin, it was worth a try. Taking it three times a
day, my mood shifted constantly as the drug's effectiveness seemed to turn on
and off like a toggle switch. It was intolerable. With some hesitation, I agreed
to try Dexedrine Spansules, a time-release version of the previous drug.

   And it worked. Concentration, to a greater degree than I have ever
experienced it, is there. My mind wanders still, though now I feel like I have a
leash on my thoughts and can pull them in when I need to. On the downside, I
have been sleeping less than usual, so the drug occasionally has to compete with
sleep deficits. Still, it works better, much better, than any other medication I
have tried.

   Why? My particular brain chemistry must just like it.

   As effective as drugs can be, those diagnosed with ADHD in adulthood have
more problems than medication alone can solve. Popping a Ritalin won't get you
organized -- a lifetime of disarray needs to be unlearned and replaced with more
effective and efficient habits. As Zametkin says, "one area that we need
research in is non-pharmacological approaches."

   A two-year study underway at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston seeks
to measure the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy on adults with ADHD
who have been stabilized by medication. Researchers hope to find methods to curb
some of the disorder's most disruptive symptoms. Novelty-seeking and
distractibility, for example, are "modules" of the study. Both prevent those
with ADHD from sticking with basic routines such as balancing a checkbook,
keeping a calendar and paying bills.

   "What we've found," says Stephen Safren, a researcher with the project as
well as an assistant professor of psychology at Harvard Medical School, "is
people who have adult [ADHD] often have started these [routines,] but because of
the [ADHD] they have moved on to something else."

   The challenge of the study is to develop and teach long-term strategies that
will counteract a lifetime of impulsivity and disorganization.

   Even therapy and taking the medication becomes routine, though. I have yet to
forget a dose or an appointment, but I often feel that my excitement over
finally getting diagnosed and over my success so far with treatment is wearing
thin. I want to try different drugs, I want a different kind of therapy,
anything that's new. My current routine is often dull and difficult. But as
Safren points out, "You have to realize there is no perfect system, that you
have to practice -- if you can get past the hard part, you will realize that you
can do it."

   I hope he's right.*

   Matt McMillen is a Washington freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2002


                             1220 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       July 28, 2002 Sunday EARLY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 1255 words

HEADLINE: Recovery wearies mechanical heart recipient;
Device saved man's life but has required long stay in hospital

BYLINE: STACEY BURLING Knight Ridder News Service

BODY:

   Philadelphia -- It has been eight months since James "Butch" Quinn's ailing
heart was replaced with a machine, and he has spent all but three weeks of it in
Hahnemann University Hospital.

   Doctors said that, without the artificial heart, he almost certainly would
have died months ago. Yet because of all that time away from his home in West
Philadelphia and disappointing quality of life, Quinn now questions his decision
last year to become one of the first humans to test a new type of fully
implantable mechanical heart.

   "I don't believe I would do it again simply because it's too much afterwards,
you know," Quinn said recently in a soft, raspy voice from his ICU bed.

   Quinn healed remarkably quickly in the days after his Nov. 5 surgery. He was
able to leave the hospital in January for the nearby Hawthorn Suites, despite a
small stroke. But severe pneumonia brought him back, and he's had bleeding
problems caused by blood thinners meant to prevent more strokes. He was on a
ventilator until the end of June and still receives extra oxygen through a tube
in his throat. Because of the bleeding, his doctor, heart surgeon Louis Samuels,
has taken the unusual step of stopping the blood thinners.

   "I've gone through quite a bit since the surgery. I've gone through more than
any man can stand or bear, really," said Quinn, a retired baker and Vietnam
veteran. "It's hard and very difficult day to day not knowing what to think.
They tell me one thing and my body is feeling another."

   Still, he said, he's never thought of quitting. "I have a lot of fight in
me," he said. "I don't know how to give up."

   But would he do it again, the way he's feeling right now?

   No.

   Quinn said he has prayed for Tom Christerson, the Kentucky man who went home
in April, seven months after receiving the device, and still hopes that he, too,
will be able to go home. Of the six men given the heart since last July, only
Quinn and Christerson are still alive.

   Abiomed, the Danvers, Mass., company that manufactures the machine, has since
modified it. No one has gotten an AbioCor heart since April. The company is now
working to make monitoring equipment more suitable for homes -- more
maneuverable, for example, and with fewer but louder warning beeps.

   The number of heart transplant operations nationwide, about 2,000 a year, now
is limited largely by the availability of donated cadaver hearts. Far more
people need them, and many die waiting. Quinn was too sick to qualify even if a
cadaver heart had been available.

   Edward Berger, Abiomed's vice president for strategic policy and planning,
said the mechanical heart's clinical trial is continuing. Indeed, he said, the
company hopes to do "a significant number" of the eight more authorized implants
this year.

   Berger said the company did its best to prepare people who enrolled in the
trial, all of whom were deemed likely to die within a month, for all of the
possible complications. It appointed an independent group of patient advocates
to help potential study subjects understand the trial. Nonetheless, it's to be
expected that some would be dissatisfied, Berger said.

   "When things go well, patients and their families are going to be
extraordinarily happy," he said. "When things don't go well, it is absolutely
understandable that patients or their family are going to be distressed. . . .
James has had a very difficult last few months."

   Healthiest of the recipients

   Both surgeon and patient have described what happened when Quinn got the
artificial heart as a deeply religious experience. After a rough first week,
Quinn bounced back and quickly became the healthiest and most vigorous of the
recipients -- a "poster boy" for the heart, as Samuels put it.

   In December, Quinn said his life felt "altogether new." He said: "Life is
beautiful."

   Soon after celebrating his 52nd birthday at the hospital June 30, he told CNN
that getting the mechanical heart has been "very meaningful and I would do it
again."

   But recently, in his first interview done without medical staff present,
Quinn said he had changed his mind. He has received good treatment, he said, but
has been away from home too long.

   "I think that's the best quality of life, is to be at home in my own
surroundings, be with my family." He said he wants to have "rigorous
confrontations" with his grandbabies. "They're the best therapists in the world.

   "The more I lie here, I get sick," he said. "It's like the bed's draining
me."

   Samuels said he understands, and he thinks Quinn's unhappiness stems largely
from being "cooped up" in the hospital so long. In fact, he said there is no
medical reason for Quinn to be in the hospital. He wants to get him home by
early August, but said it has been complicated to arrange for qualified 24-hour
nursing and modifications to the home Quinn shares with his wife, Irene.

   Strong support at home

   Samuels said Quinn's medical condition has improved more than he realizes.
He's still very weak, but it was an achievement to wean him off the ventilator.
"The situation we have now is 1,000 percent better than we had even a month
ago."

   Quinn and his wife still speak fondly of Samuels. "He's been here for me, and
he's talked to me," Quinn said. "He's tried to uplift me when my spirits were
down."

   Patients in the trial are required to have a strong support system, but their
very closeness is one thing that has made Quinn's long stay in the hospital
difficult for him and Irene, a rail-thin nurse's aide who is 55.

   They have been married nearly 23 years. She calls them "two peas in a pod."
He calls her "more than my better half."

   Watching helplessly while her husband suffers through one medical problem
after another has been "like a nightmare," she said.

   "If I would have known," she said, "he would have never got it done. I don't
think anybody should ever get it done."

   Every day, she said, "every time I go to the hospital, I cry. I cry before I
get in there, and I cry when I get out."

   Harder on his wife

   James Quinn said he thinks the experience has been harder on Irene than on
him, and that's one reason he now questions his decision. "She's a tough old
bird and I love her to death," he said, "but I can see the breakdown in her
eyes. I know she's unhappy. . . . I feel it all the way through me."

   Irene Quinn said she did not realize just how experimental the AbioCor heart
was. And, while she was aware that many serious complications were possible, she
said she thought her husband either would die quickly or return home in better
shape than before the surgery. She never imagined months of isolation in the
hospital.

   Alan Milstein, a Pennsauken lawyer the Quinns have hired as an adviser, has
concerns about what potential patients are told about clinical trials. He
represented the family of Jesse Gelsinger, who died in a gene-therapy
experiment, in a suit against the University of Pennsylvania.

   Milstein believes patients should be told clearly that they will be subjects
in a "human experiment" and that the goal of the experiment is not to make them
well, but to test technology for future patients.

   George Annas, a professor of health law and bioethics at Boston University,
calls clinical trials like this one "experiments on families." He said any
potential subjects from now on should be required to talk with people who've
already gotten the heart and their spouses.

   What would James Quinn tell them?

   "Think," he said. "Think and then do some more thinking."


LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2002


                             1221 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       July 26, 2002 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 025

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: Patients gather to honor Hub gene therapy pioneer

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Former heart patients of the late Dr. Jeffrey Isner are gathering in Boston
tonight to honor the gene therapy pioneer and to offer encouragement to his
successor as the groundbreaking experiment is about to be expanded.

   "We're here to encourage one another and to encourage the staff and other
patients as they are coming in," said the Rev. Charles Wilson, who flew in from
Charlotte, N.C., for the event at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center. The dinner
will also include a tribute to Isner, who died of a heart attack in November.

   "He had been a good friend," Wilson said. "He was a very personable doctor. I
knew he had a good team in place to take over, but I still feel the loss."

   Isner's work involved giving genetically engineered DNA, known as VEGF or
vascular endothelial growth factor, to cardiac patients to help them grow new
blood vessels to the heart, a process called angiogenesis. Wilson said he could
barely walk before getting the treatment in April 1999. Today, he exercises
daily on a stationary bike, lifts weights and has virtually no angina pain.

   One of Isner's gene therapy programs was shut down by the FDA in March 2000
for violating protocols. But the agency agreed to allow the experiments to
resume shortly before Isner's death.

   His work has been taken over by Dr. Douglas Losordo, who published a paper in
April showing the therapy improved the lives of the 25 subjects enrolled. Right
now, Losordo is negotiating with the FDA to start an expanded double-blinded,
placebo-controlled version of the study involving 400 patients.

   He said he hopes to begin enrolling patients in the fall.

   Losordo said he will speak at tonight's "alumni" meeting.

   "It's a tribute to the patients themselves and their willingness to help the
program," he said. "They have strong feelings for Jeff and the role he played in
making them feel better. They haven't forgotten the guy who changed their
lives."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2002


                             1222 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                    July 26, 2002 Friday City final Edition

SECTION: CITY STATE; WILL HIGGINS; Pg. 01B

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: Family wages month-by-month battle against disease

BYLINE: WILL HIGGINS

BODY:

   Not many people get Batten disease, which is good because it's a horrible
thing. It strikes kids' brains, and makes them regress. They lose what they've
learned; eventually they go blind and must take food through a tube. The disease
is fatal.

   The downside of Batten's scarcity is this: Since there is such a small market
for a cure for the disease -- since there's no money in it -- not much effort
has gone into finding a cure. No cure exists.

   For now, anyway.

   Phil Milto is trying to find a cure. He's not a doctor; he's in the
dry-cleaning business. Yet, he's making progress.

   Milto had never heard of Batten disease until 1999, when his oldest son,
Nathan, was diagnosed with it.

   The doctors advised Milto and his wife, Tricia, to enjoy the time they had
left with Nathan, who at the time was 5 years old.

   Phil Milto began researching Batten and soon found that little attention was
being paid to it. "I realized that if something was going to get done, I'd have
to pay for it," he says.

   He formed a tax-deductible foundation, Nathan's Battle Foundation, and
enlisted the help of everyone he knew to raise money. Milto is from a large
family that has lived on the Southside a long time. Their many friends held
garage sales, golf outings, 5K runs, etc. -- about 30 fund-raisers so far.

   On Sunday, about 1,000 motorcyclists are expected to participate in the
second annual Nathan and PJ's Ride. PJ is the Miltos' youngest son. He now has
Batten disease, too.

   The ride came about like this: A friend of a friend knew a guy named Papaw,
who rides bikes and knows a lot of bikers. Papaw's real name is Steve Pyatte.
He's tough-looking but has a big heart. Last year's ride netted $25,000.

   Milto also has had some success with major donors. A friend of a friend knew
a man who was so moved (and so rich) that he gave the foundation $600,000.
Nearly $2 million has been raised.

   A year ago last August, Milto got researchers at Cornell University
interested in Batten. They concluded they might be able to come up with a gene
therapy to beat the disease.

   They're working on it, funded by Nathan's foundation. Each month, Milto
writes them a check for $100,000.

   Their goal is to be doing clinical trials on humans in August 2003.

   Milto's hope is for his boys to participate in the clinical trials. But
Nathan's health has slipped markedly. He's in a wheelchair now; his vocabulary
is down to a dozen or so words.

   The trials are at least 13 months away, and Milto allows that the doctors
aren't positive Nathan will make it. "But I know more about it than most
doctors," Milto says, "and I'm still hopeful."

   Nathan's foundation has $450,000 left. At $100,000 a month, it will need
another $700,000 or so to get to the clinical trial stage.

   To learn more about Nathan's battle, or to help, log on to
www.nathansbattle.com.

   Will Higgins' column appears Monday, Wednesday and Friday. You can contact
him at 1-317-444-6043 or via e-mail at will.higgins@indystar.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2002


                             1223 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                              July 26, 2002 Friday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: CITY STATE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: Family wages month-by-month battle against disease

BYLINE: By, WILL HIGGINS

BODY:

   Not many people get Batten disease, which is good because it's a horrible
thing. It strikes kids' brains, and makes them regress. They lose what they've
learned; eventually they go blind and must take food through a tube. The disease
is fatal.

   The downside of Batten's scarcity is this: Since there is such a small market
for a cure for the disease -- since there's no money in it -- not much effort
has gone into finding a cure. No cure exists.

   For now, anyway.

   Phil Milto is trying to find a cure. He's not a doctor; he's in the
dry-cleaning business. Yet, he's making progress.

   Milto had never heard of Batten disease until 1999, when his oldest son,
Nathan, was diagnosed with it.

   The doctors advised Milto and his wife, Tricia, to enjoy the time they had
left with Nathan, who at the time was 5 years old.

   Phil Milto began researching Batten and soon found that little attention was
being paid to it. "I realized that if something was going to get done, I'd have
to pay for it," he says.

   He formed a tax-deductible foundation, Nathan's Battle Foundation, and
enlisted the help of everyone he knew to raise money. Milto is from a large
family that has lived on the Southside a long time. Their many friends held
garage sales, golf outings, 5K runs, etc. -- about 30 fund-raisers so far.

   On Sunday, about 1,000 motorcyclists are expected to participate in the
second annual Nathan and PJ's Ride. PJ is the Miltos' youngest son. He now has
Batten disease, too.

   The ride came about like this: A friend of a friend knew a guy named Papaw,
who rides bikes and knows a lot of bikers. Papaw's real name is Steve Pyatte.
He's tough-looking but has a big heart. Last year's ride netted $25,000.

   Milto also has had some success with major donors. A friend of a friend knew
a man who was so moved (and so rich) that he gave the foundation $600,000.
Nearly $2 million has been raised.

   A year ago last August, Milto got researchers at Cornell University
interested in Batten. They concluded they might be able to come up with a gene
therapy to beat the disease.

   They're working on it, funded by Nathan's foundation. Each month, Milto
writes them a check for $100,000.

   Their goal is to be doing clinical trials on humans in August 2003.

   Milto's hope is for his boys to participate in the clinical trials. But
Nathan's health has slipped markedly. He's in a wheelchair now; his vocabulary
is down to a dozen or so words.

   The trials are at least 13 months away, and Milto allows that the doctors
aren't positive Nathan will make it. "But I know more about it than most
doctors," Milto says, "and I'm still hopeful."

   Nathan's foundation has $450,000 left. At $100,000 a month, it will need
another $700,000 or so to get to the clinical trial stage.

   To learn more about Nathan's battle, or to help, log on to
www.nathansbattle.com.

   Will Higgins' column appears Monday, Wednesday and Friday. You can contact
him at 1-317-444-6043 or via e-mail at will.higgins@indystar.com

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2009


                             1224 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      July 26, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 777 words

BODY:

   The Steelers open the regular season Sept. 9 at CMGI Field, site of the first
conflagration on a highly difficult road schedule that includes stops at
Collapsed Internet Company Stadium, Bankrupt Communications Corporation Field
and Not Yet Bankrupt Wireless Telecommunications Conglomerate Park.

    And it's probably just as well that Bill Cowher's club does not have an
appointment at the Edward Jones Dome.

    In the meantime, the question persists: Does anyone around here know where
any of these places are?

    There was a time in this man's National Football League when the names of
stadiums provided the instantaneous identification of a positive destination.
RFK meant Washington, the Astrodome meant Houston, Memorial meant Baltimore, and
Municipal meant Steelers 34, Browns 6.

    But no more. This tradition too has flowed away like the contents of the
tipped over Port-a-John of time. Or something.

    Many of you no doubt suspected that CMGI Field is the new home of the World
Champion New England Patriots, with whom the Steelers smack heads in the
season's first installment of "Monday Night Football," which, coincidentally,
will mark the first time John Madden has worked past 11 p.m. since he was
coaching the Oakland Raiders.

    The Patriots' new stadium is near the site of their old stadium, but you
likely can't get there, as a radio caller suggested in January, by driving
"right down the main street of New England."

    As for Collapsed Internet Company Stadium, that would be in Baltimore, where
the Ravens are still looking for a new name for what started out as PsiNet
Stadium. Bankrupt Communications Corporation Field would be the home of the
Tennessee Titans, once called Adelphia Stadium after the Rigas family's
corporate Xanadu. Three Rigases were arrested this week for what federal agents
called "looting" the company, but I don't think Three Rigases In Handcuffs Field
will work for the Titans.

    Not Yet Bankrupt Wireless Communications Conglomerate Park is in
Jacksonville, where Alltell Stadium has hung around going on eight years along
with, presumably, its Little Rock-based corporate namesake. As for Edward Jones,
he got his name on the dome the St. Louis Rams play in after Trans World
Airlines went bankrupt. Edward Jones has been dead approximately a century, but
the brokerage house he founded has been in St. Louis lo these many years. Let's
not speculate on the staying power of the Edward Jones Dome.

    The point is, happily enough, that the sale by team owners of stadium naming
rights to large corporations continues to be one of the great foibles of modern
sport. Owners fail to realize that bedrock stability in the world financial
markets of the new millennium lies not in mega-conglomos, but in small business,
the enduring backbone of any economy. Even on the ' 90s Internet bubble that
recently popped, most of the net gain in jobs was from small businesses.

    In the current climate, you can save yourself a world of embarrassment by
just naming the place Paul Brown Stadium or Turner Field. But if you must sell
out, there are hundreds of thousands of superior small-business choices right
there in any phone book in America.

    To illustrate, I spent part of yesterday just randomly opening the business
phone books (not even flipping pages, mind you) of cities that had stadiums with
terrible names, just to prove, as ever, that I have absolutely positively
nothing to do.

    St. Louis: Current name -- Edward Jones Dome. Better names -- Gus Meat
Field; Guys & Dolls Ultimate Image Day Spa Stadium.

    Boston: Current name -- CMGI Field. Better names -- Ambrosia Escorts
Stadium; American Blower Fans (is there another kind?) Field.

    Houston: Current name -- Reliant Stadium. Better names -- Prime Gasket
Field; Pride of Persia Rug Company Stadium.

    San Diego: Current name -- Qualcomm Stadium. Better names -- Farmers Outlet
Stadium; What's Your Beef Frozen Foods Field.

    Washington: Current name -- FedEx Field. Better name -- Maids to Clean
Field; Maids to Sit Around Smoking and Watching All My Children Stadium.

    Detroit: Current name -- Ford Field. Better names -- Dinette Masters
Stadium; Rob Hickey's Furniture Stripping and Refinishing Field.

    San Francisco: Current name -- 3Com Park. Better names -- Splicing,
Terminating, and Testing Field; Buzzell Electric Works Stadium.

    Tampa: Current name -- Raymond James Stadium. Not Necessarily A Better Name
But I Just Had To Include It -- Chris M. Limberopoulos Medical Malpractice and
Nursing Home Abuse Representation Field.

    Pittsburgh: Current name -- Heinz Field. Better name -- Pants 'n'at Park.

    As ever, no need to thank me.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2002


                             1225 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              July 26, 2002 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:

   * Vastera, a Dulles firm that sells trade-management software and services,
narrowed its losses during the second quarter. It reported a loss of $ 4.5
million (11 cents per share), compared with a loss of $ 10.9 million (29 cents)
during the year-earlier period. Excluding one-time charges, the company would
have lost $ 954,000 (2 cents). Revenue rose to $ 18.3 million from $ 14.9
million. The software company said it expects to break even, excluding one-time
charges, during the fourth quarter. It forecast annual revenue of $ 73.5 million
to $ 74.5 million. Vastera announced its results after the close of markets. Its
shares, which trades on the Nasdaq Stock Market, closed at $ 3.97, down 30
cents.

   * Human Genome Sciences, a Rockville biotechnology firm, said its
second-quarter loss grew while revenue declined. The company posted a loss of $
46.5 million (36 cents per share), compared with a loss of $ 24 million (19
cents) in the year-earlier period. Quarterly revenue fell to $ 642,000 from $
5.3 million. The company did not record any revenue from third-party contracts
during the quarter, while third-party contracts constituted $ 4.6 million of its
revenue in the year-earlier period. Shares of the company closed at $ 14.91, up
44 cents. Separately, the firm reached an agreement with Schering-Plough that
gives it exclusive rights to develop and sell a pair of human antibodies from
HGS technology. Human Genome Sciences said it will receive milestone payments
and royalties from the sales of products derived from research on the
antibodies. It said the agreement satisfies its obligations to Schering-Plough
as covered by the Human Gene Therapeutic Consortium agreement, which expired
June 30, 2001. With those obligations met, Human Genome Sciences said it is free
to form partnerships and other agreements to market drugs it has in human trials
or advanced preclinical tests.

   * Igen International, a Gaithersburg biotechnology company, said it lost $
7.6 million (33 cents per share) during its fiscal first quarter, which ended
June 30. In the year-earlier period, the company lost $ 12.3 million (69 cents).
Quarterly revenue rose to $ 12 million from $ 8.3 million. The company's shares
closed at $ 28.95, up 45 cents.

   * Halifax, an Alexandria information technology company, said it earned $
143,000 (7 cents per share) during its fiscal first quarter. In the same period
of 2001, it earned $ 18,000 (1 cent). Revenue for the three months ended June 30
rose to $ 14 million from $ 10.8 million. Shares of Halifax closed at $ 3.60,
down 20 cents.

   * GTSI, a Chantilly government contracting company, said it received a $ 2.5
million order from the Air Force Academy. Under the agreement, GTSI will provide
specialized IBM laptop computers and accompanying equipment to incoming cadets.

   Compiled from reports by Washington Post staff writers, washingtonpost.com
and Dow Jones News Service

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2002


                             1226 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 22, 2002, Monday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy halted heart failure in hamsters; UCSD team plans trials
on humans

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Scientists at UCSD have developed a gene therapy that halts heart failure in
hamsters, and human trials for the treatment could begin in 12 to 18 months,
researchers said.

   The scientists targeted a gene in heart-muscle cells that malfunctions in
heart failure.  They devised a way to inject animals with a modified version of
that gene.  It blocked the faulty gene and stopped heart failure, according to
researchers.

   Their study, published online today by the journal Nature Medicine, suggests
that people suffering from heart failure someday might have alternatives to
heart transplants and mechanical pumps.

   Heart disease afflicts more than 4.5 million Americans and can cause chronic
heart failure -- a condition in which the heart loses its ability to pump enough
blood through the body.

   Dr. Kenneth Chien, director of the UCSD Institute of Molecular Medicine and
the study's senior author, called heart failure the disease of the 21st century.

   "It's like cancer, except people know less about it," Chien said.  "They
think about it as something that can be solved by mechanical pumps and
transplantation, and these are halfway technologies.

   "We can now devise much more biologically targeted therapy, and that's what's
exciting."

   Chien and his colleagues modified a gene called phospholamban, or PLN, which
regulates the movement of calcium within heart-muscle cells.  The movement of
calcium within heart cells plays a critical role in the way they alternate
between contraction and relaxation.  In heart failure, the PLN gene does not
release enough calcium, thereby restricting its movement within the cell and
weakening the heart.

   The modified gene, carried into the heart muscle by a virus injected into the
hamsters, inhibits the function of the malfunctioning PLN genes already in the
heart muscle.  For seven months, heart failure stopped progressing, the
researchers said.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2002


                             1227 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 22, 2002 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy halted heart failure in hamsters;
UCSD team plans trials on humans

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists at UCSD have developed a gene therapy that halts heart failure in
hamsters, and human trials for the treatment could begin in 12 to 18 months,
researchers said. The scientists targeted a gene in heart-muscle cells that
malfunctions in heart failure.

   They devised a way to inject animals with a modified version of that gene.

   It blocked the faulty gene and stopped heart failure, according to
researchers. Their study, published online today by the journal Nature Medicine,
suggests that people suffering from heart failure someday might have
alternatives to heart transplants and mechanical pumps. Heart disease afflicts
more than 4.5 million Americans and can cause chronic heart failure -- a
condition in which the heart loses its ability to pump enough blood through the
body. Dr. Kenneth Chien, director of the UCSD Institute of Molecular Medicine
and the study's senior author, called heart failure the disease of the 21st
century. "It's like cancer, except people know less about it," Chien said.

   "They think about it as something that can be solved by mechanical pumps and
transplantation, and these are halfway technologies. "We can now devise much
more biologically targeted therapy, and that's what's exciting." Chien and his
colleagues modified a gene called phospholamban, or PLN, which regulates the
movement of calcium within heart-muscle cells.

   The movement of calcium within heart cells plays a critical role in the way
they alternate between contraction and relaxation.

   In heart failure, the PLN gene does not release enough calcium, thereby
restricting its movement within the cell and weakening the heart. The modified
gene, carried into the heart muscle by a virus injected into the hamsters,
inhibits the function of the malfunctioning PLN genes already in the heart
muscle.

   For seven months, heart failure stopped progressing, the researchers said.
Bruce Lieberman: (619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1228 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 20, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: Viruses may damage key cell functions; Study could aid cancer research

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Viruses, nature's aggressive invaders and tenacious survivors, may disable a
cell's ability to recognize damaged DNA, thereby triggering gene mutations and
cancer, a team of scientists at The Salk Institute has found.

   The La Jolla researchers have not identified a direct link between viruses
and cancer, but their findings suggest viruses may destabilize a cell's genetic
makeup.

   Working with human cells in culture, the team showed that a common
respiratory virus called adenovirus can disrupt a molecular sensor in the cells
that detects damage to DNA. Without the sensor, cells can lose their ability to
repair mutations and control replication.

   "This is the first demonstration of a virus interacting with this critical
machinery," said Matthew Weitzman, assistant professor of genetics at Salk and
senior author of the study, which appeared in Thursday's edition of the journal
Nature.

   "It does so to further its own ends -- to make copies of itself and continue
infection -- but the unfortunate side effect is to compromise a cell's genetic
material," Weitzman said.

   Further studies are needed to determine how adenovirus disables the cellular
sensor, a complex of proteins in the cell called Mre11.

   The work at Salk advances the understanding of how viruses interact with
cells and how cells protect themselves from outside invaders, said John Petrini,
a researcher at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York whose lab
isolated and characterized the Mre11 complex in human cells.

   The Salk finding "expands the scope of what viruses mess with when they enter
a cell," Petrini said.

   Studying viruses has long aided scientists' understanding of how cells work.
A protein in cells responsible for suppressing tumors was discovered by studying
a virus that disables it, Petrini said.

   Also, viruses are used in gene therapy trials to deliver normal genes to
cells to replace flawed or missing ones in the treatment of disease, so knowing
what the viruses do once they are inside a cell is important, Weitzman said.

   "If we're putting viruses into cells, we want to know how it interacts with
the cell," he said.

   The Salk study was financed by the National Institutes of Health, the Joe W.
and Dorothy Dorsett Brown Foundation, the James B. Pendleton Foundation and the
Lebensfeld Foundation.

   University of California San Diego graduate students Travis Stracker and
Christian Carson also contributed to the study.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2002


                             1229 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 20, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: Viruses may damage key cell functions;
Study could aid cancer research

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Viruses, nature's aggressive invaders and tenacious survivors, may disable a
cell's ability to recognize damaged DNA, thereby triggering gene mutations and
cancer, a team of scientists at The Salk Institute has found. The La Jolla
researchers have not identified a direct link between viruses and cancer, but
their findings suggest viruses may destabilize a cell's genetic makeup. Working
with human cells in culture, the team showed that a common respiratory virus
called adenovirus can disrupt a molecular sensor in the cells that detects
damage to DNA.

   Without the sensor, cells can lose their ability to repair mutations and
control replication. "This is the first demonstration of a virus interacting
with this critical machinery," said Matthew Weitzman, assistant professor of
genetics at Salk and senior author of the study, which appeared in Thursday's
edition of the journal Nature. "It does so to further its own ends -- to make
copies of itself and continue infection -- but the unfortunate side effect is to
compromise a cell's genetic material," Weitzman said. Further studies are needed
to determine how adenovirus disables the cellular sensor, a complex of proteins
in the cell called Mre11. The work at Salk advances the understanding of how
viruses interact with cells and how cells protect themselves from outside
invaders, said John Petrini, a researcher at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center in New York whose lab isolated and characterized the Mre11 complex in
human cells. The Salk finding "expands the scope of what viruses mess with when
they enter a cell," Petrini said. Studying viruses has long aided scientists'
understanding of how cells work.

   A protein in cells responsible for suppressing tumors was discovered by
studying a virus that disables it, Petrini said. Also, viruses are used in gene
therapy trials to deliver normal genes to cells to replace flawed or missing
ones in the treatment of disease, so knowing what the viruses do once they are
inside a cell is important, Weitzman said. "If we're putting viruses into cells,
we want to know how it interacts with the cell," he said. The Salk study was
financed by the National Institutes of Health, the Joe W. and Dorothy Dorsett
Brown Foundation, the James B. Pendleton Foundation and the Lebensfeld
Foundation. University of California San Diego graduate students Travis Stracker
and Christian Carson also contributed to the study. Bruce Lieberman:
(619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1230 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2002 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                             July 19, 2002, Friday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 126

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: GEORGE IS WAITING, BILL

BYLINE: DAVID K. LI

BODY:

   PASADENA, Calif. - ABC news executives yesterday vowed to give Sunday-morning
stalwart "This Week" a "freshening up" by airing stories that reach beyond
Washington.

   The Beltway talk institution will take a new twist this September - when solo
anchor George Stephanopoulos takes control of the show that producers promised
will connect general news stories to politics.

   And Stephanopoulos said he has a standing invitation for his former boss,
President Clinton, to appear on "This Week."

   If the show's new format aired this week, producers said, stories like the
Atkins diet or hormone gene therapy might take be popular topics of "This Week."

   "Freshening up, to us, means to take a different approach," executive
producer Jon Banner told a gathering of TV critics.

   "This Week" is still set to have a roundtable discussion that will include
Stephanopoulos and conservative columnist George Will. Producers are still
looking for a third permanent member of the table.

   A fourth talking head, perhaps from outside the Washington establishment,
will be rotated in depending on the breaking news of the week.

   That fourth seat will play a key role, producers said, in the network's
efforts to vary stories and bring more racial and geographic diversity to "This
Week."

   "You'll see us trying to reach out geographically and topic-wise to be
different," Banner said. "There is a desire on our part to broaden the mix of
stories, while at the same time not getting away from what we view as the
crucial role of the show which is a public policy show."

   The former Clinton staffer said he's not sure where he stands with his
one-time boss - as his beloved ex-campaign aide and advisor; or as the turncoat
commentator who has voiced harsh words about the 42nd president.

   "It cuts both ways," said a laughing Stephanopoulos. "If he wants to come on,
I want to interview him."


GRAPHIC: Getting fresh: George Stephanopoulos (l) and "This Week" exec producer
Jon Banner.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2002


                             1231 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      July 19, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 754 words

HEADLINE: ARE YOU READY FOR SOME FOOTBALL? ME NEITHER.

BODY:

   Yet here is another NFL season staring us right in the facemask, with the
Steelers barely 100 hours from the start of maxicamp.

    Issue One: Mike Mularkey, the celebrated innovator who last year redesigned
the Steelers' offense so that it took advantage of Kordell Stewart's athletic
ability (the previous design being an unsuccessful attempt to take advantage of
Stewart's knowledge of Elizabethan poetry), will be coordinating a unit on which
only 81 percent of the starters were not arrested in the off-season.

    Though not by an alarming margin, this is decidedly below the league
average. Yet, as any number of offensive geniuses around the league can tell
you, it's not how many arrests you have from season to season, it's more a
question of who gets handcuffed and why.

    When it's two very important components such as tackle Marvel Smith and
wideout Plaxico Burress, the potential for negative impact is considerable. But
hey, let's get all frantic about that next week or even next month, or even not
at all. Let's finish the off-season by congratulating Smith and Burress. With
these two young stars, unlike with everyone else in the Steelers' organization,
you at least have two guys who know what the off-season is for. Allegedly.

    Obviously, it's for smoking dope and walking around beach communities drunk
after hours. It's not for minicamp, microcamp, passing camp, kicking camp or for
perfectly useful summer days squandered obsessing about the interminable
competitive politics associated with the old inflated pig bladder.

    For some reason, this lesson is lost on coaches. They've already coached the
life out of this game, but they won't stop until every single person on the
payroll is lifting, stretching, drilling, throwing, catching, running, blocking,
tackling, kicking, holding, taunting or breaking down film 24/7/365. Maybe it's
the money. Maybe coaches think, "God I'm making $5 million a year, I can't take
six months off."

    Take it, please.

    Coach, at least take May, June, and July off. It'll be good for the game.

    Don't you think new Oakland Raiders Coach Bill Callahan wishes he'd told
defensive tackle Regan Upshaw to go smoke dope in a Tempe, Ariz., hotel room or
go get hammered in Virginia Beach until August instead of drilling him in
technique in minicamp June 16?

    Oh youbetcha, although he'd never admit it.

    Instead, on June 16, a mere 12 weeks before the opener, Upshaw's anterior
cruciate ligament was ripped apart and he will miss the entire 2002 season.

    "Those things are weird," Callahan said at the time. "You get in a bad
position and you get caught with your cleat in the ground and the knee just
torques."

    Well no, that's not the weird part. The weird part is that you're playing
300-pound roulette with very valuable inventory two months before you really
need to.

    So with the precious off-season leaking away by the hour, let's give props
(whatever that means) to the pro footballers who know what to do when the
calendar insists it ain't football season.

    Props to the New Orleans Saints' Ricky Williams, arrested for allegedly
speeding by Louisiana State Police, and not for doing 46 in a 35 either. Police
clocked the enigmatic running back at 126 mph. The wire story said he was given
a citation. How nice. I'm sure he was very proud.

    Props to the Patriots Kevin Faulk, arrested for allegedly becoming abusive
when he was asked not to move a traffic barricade. This could happen around here
24/7/365. Kevin was apparently leaving a night club very late and didn't want to
wait in the parking lot. Police said he tried to move a barricade for a quick
exit.

    Props to Arizona Cardinals wideout David Boston, detained for allegedly
"performing very poorly" on a field sobriety test. Likely he hadn't studied. No
alcohol involved, police said, just cocaine and marijuana. David, how many
times? Don't toke, snort and drive.

    None of these fellas, it should be noted, had anywhere near the off-season
enjoyed by Allen Iverson of the NBA's Philadelphia 76ers, whose downtime this
month included charges of criminal trespass, criminal conspiracy, firearms
violations, simple assault, terroristic threats, unlawful restraint and
possession of an instrument of crime.

    In that particular case, the 76ers might have been better served to have
scheduled a mandatory crossover dribbling camp for July 3-6.

    Ah well, by Wednesday, most of the NFL will be entirely focused on business
again. It'll be time to tear ligaments because it matters.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2002


                             1232 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 18, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-4:1,2; B-2:6

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: Study: Viruses harm cell sensors; Salk researchers test interaction

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Viruses, nature's aggressive invaders and tenacious survivors, may disable a
cell's ability to recognize damaged DNA, thereby triggering gene mutations and
cancer, a team of scientists at The Salk Institute has found.

   The La Jolla researchers have not identified a direct link between viruses
and cancer, but their findings show that viruses may destabilize a cell's
genetic makeup.

   Working with human cells in culture, the team showed that a common
respiratory virus called adenovirus can disrupt a molecular sensor in the cells
that detects damage to DNA. Without the sensor, cells can lose their ability to
repair mutations and control replication.

   "This is the first demonstration of a virus interacting with this critical
machinery," said Matthew Weitzman, assistant professor of genetics at Salk and
senior author of the study, which appears in today's edition of the journal
Nature.

   "It does so to further its own ends -- to make copies of itself and continue
infection -- but the unfortunate side effect is to compromise a cell's genetic
material," Weitzman said.

   Further studies are needed to determine how adenovirus disables the cellular
sensor, a complex of proteins in the cell called Mre11.

   The work at Salk advances the understanding of how viruses interact with
cells and how cells protect themselves from outside invaders, said John Petrini,
a researcher at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York whose lab
isolated and characterized the Mre11 complex in human cells.

   The Salk finding "expands the scope of what viruses mess with when they enter
a cell," Petrini said.

   Studying viruses has long aided scientists' understanding of how cells work.
A protein in cells responsible for suppressing tumors was discovered by studying
a virus that disables it, Petrini said.

   Also, viruses are used in gene therapy trials to deliver normal genes to
cells to replace flawed or missing ones in the treatment of disease, so knowing
what the viruses do once they are inside a cell is important, Weitzman said.

   "If we're putting viruses into cells, we want to know how it interacts with
the cell," he said.

   The Salk study was financed by the National Institutes of Health, the Joe W.
and Dorothy Dorsett Brown Foundation, the James B. Pendleton Foundation and the
Lebensfeld Foundation.

   University of California San Diego graduate students Travis Stracker and
Christian Carson also contributed to the study.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2002


                             1233 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 18, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-4:1,2; B-2:6

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: Study: Viruses harm cell sensors;
Salk researchers test interaction

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Viruses, nature's aggressive invaders and tenacious survivors, may disable a
cell's ability to recognize damaged DNA, thereby triggering gene mutations and
cancer, a team of scientists at The Salk Institute has found. The La Jolla
researchers have not identified a direct link between viruses and cancer, but
their findings show that viruses may destabilize a cell's genetic makeup.
Working with human cells in culture, the team showed that a common respiratory
virus called adenovirus can disrupt a molecular sensor in the cells that detects
damage to DNA.

   Without the sensor, cells can lose their ability to repair mutations and
control replication. "This is the first demonstration of a virus interacting
with this critical machinery," said Matthew Weitzman, assistant professor of
genetics at Salk and senior author of the study, which appears in today's
edition of the journal Nature. "It does so to further its own ends -- to make
copies of itself and continue infection -- but the unfortunate side effect is to
compromise a cell's genetic material," Weitzman said. Further studies are needed
to determine how adenovirus disables the cellular sensor, a complex of proteins
in the cell called Mre11. The work at Salk advances the understanding of how
viruses interact with cells and how cells protect themselves from outside
invaders, said John Petrini, a researcher at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center in New York whose lab isolated and characterized the Mre11 complex in
human cells. The Salk finding "expands the scope of what viruses mess with when
they enter a cell," Petrini said. Studying viruses has long aided scientists'
understanding of how cells work.

   A protein in cells responsible for suppressing tumors was discovered by
studying a virus that disables it, Petrini said. Also, viruses are used in gene
therapy trials to deliver normal genes to cells to replace flawed or missing
ones in the treatment of disease, so knowing what the viruses do once they are
inside a cell is important, Weitzman said. "If we're putting viruses into cells,
we want to know how it interacts with the cell," he said. The Salk study was
financed by the National Institutes of Health, the Joe W. and Dorothy Dorsett
Brown Foundation, the James B. Pendleton Foundation and the Lebensfeld
Foundation. University of California San Diego graduate students Travis Stracker
and Christian Carson also contributed to the study. Bruce Lieberman:
(619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1234 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 July 17, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS ; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 201 words

HEADLINE: DRUG MERGER MIGHT FIND EASY PATH TO EU CONSENT

BYLINE: Dow Jones/AP

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM

BODY:

   The European Union probably will approve Pfizer Inc.'s proposed purchase of
Pharmacia Corp. with minimal concessions, Brussels-based lawyers said Tuesday.

   Pfizer and Pharmacia would be the world's No. 1 drug company, but they'd
control only 11 percent of the global market. As in the United States, few
product overlaps exist in Europe, though regulators could require some
divestitures before approving the $60 billion deal.

   One area of concern could be the market for drug development.

   EU Competition Commissioner Mario Monti is likely to look at the effect of
the deal on "innovation markets." Such analysis looks beyond what's in each
company's pipeline to examine the power the merged company will have through its
research and development resources.

   In the tie-up between Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz to form Novartis AG, the EU was
concerned about gene-therapy patents. The parties said they'd be ready to grant
flexible licenses on products not yet developed.

   Lawyers say it's possible that EU authorities will do the same with Pfizer
and Pharmacia, depending on what they find.

   The deal's size means that Pfizer-Pharmacia must be submitted to the
Competition Commission for scrutiny.

NOTES:
MORNING BRIEFING

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2002


                             1235 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            July 17, 2002 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1666 words

HEADLINE: Mail-Order Molecules Brew a Terrorism Debate;
Virus Created in Lab Raises Questions of Scrutiny for DNA Suppliers

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    The orders arrive by fax and e-mail 24 hours a day from pharmaceutical
companies, government agencies and academic scientists. And every day at
Integrated DNA Technologies, an army of machines responds by producing hundreds
of batches of microscopic merchandise: custom-designed snippets of genetic
material.

    Until recently the Coralville, Iowa, company prospered in quiet anonymity,
spewing out for scientists round the world various made-to-order pieces of DNA,
the molecular code upon which so much biotechnology research depends today.

    But last week's announcement that scientists in New York had used the
company's mail-order molecules to make polioviruses from scratch has prompted
questions about whether the DNA synthesis industry deserves closer scrutiny, and
whether strategies for preventing the proliferation of biological weapons need
to be rethought.

    For decades the United States and other nations have sought to limit the
risk of biological warfare and bioterrorism by placing controls on the
cultivation and shipment of dangerous microbes. The new work threatens to
undermine that approach by proving for the first time that potentially deadly
viruses can be built from the ground up.

    If infectious agents can be made from off-the-shelf smidgens of DNA that are
individually benign, then government regulators, law enforcement agencies and
even DNA synthesis companies may have no way of knowing when someone is building
a biological bullet.

    "The customer gets to design the sequence they want manufactured and there
is a limited ability for us to know what people are going to do with it," said
Roman Terrill, vice president of legal and regulatory affairs at Integrated DNA
Technologies.

    Indeed, Terrill said, with perhaps $ 10,000 and a few months time, motivated
scientists could manufacture the genetic components of a deadly virus. "You
could buy your own used DNA synthesizer," he said, "and make whatever you want
in the comfort and privacy of your own garage."

    Integrated DNA is one of about a half-dozen major U.S. manufacturers of
small DNA strands, which are known in the trade as oligonucleotides or "oligos."
The bigger companies, including Qiagen Operon of Alameda, Calif., Invitrogen of
Carlsbad, Calif., and Sigma-Genosys of Woodlands, Tex., make thousands of
customized oligos each day.

    Each oligo typically consists of about 25 or 30 units of DNA, representing a
tiny fraction of an organism's entire genome (a full viral genetic code can be
tens of thousands of units long or more). Scientists generally use the oligos as
molecular tools to help them find genes in various organisms or to trigger
biological chain reactions that allow them to mass produce DNA strands in test
tubes.

    Because they are so small, most individual oligos lack any "fingerprint"
that might identify them as part of something dangerous. But it was just such
oligos that Eckard Wimmer and two colleagues at the State University of New York
in Stony Brook painstakingly stitched together into a full length, 7,741-unit
poliovirus genome, which spontaneously began making infectious polioviruses.

    The feat arguably fell short of creating life from scratch because most
scientists maintain that viruses are not truly alive. But the implications were
clear.

    "If you can go from a viral DNA sequence on paper to an infectious agent
using things you can order out of catalogues, obviously that has big
implications for bioterrorism," said Mildred Cho of the Center for Biomedical
Ethics at Stanford. Two years ago Cho chaired an expert panel on the
implications of creating novel life forms.

    In fact, it was the Department of Defense that funded the three-year
research effort as part of a program to devise protections against
"unconventional pathogens." In a statement, the department said Friday it did
not believe that the techniques could be used to build viruses with greater
bioterror potential, such as smallpox. But others disagreed.

    "With a little more advancement in technology you could probably make
something more complex than polio," said Jim Cornette, a retired Air Force
colonel with a doctorate in biochemistry who served in the Defense Intelligence
Agency and was involved in biodefense planning during Operation Desert Storm.
"Smallpox is probably just two or three years down the road, maybe less," said
Cornette, who now lives in Florida. "Then what about the things that are 'none
of the above?' Something dangerous but totally new?"

    Several scientists said in interviews they would be reluctant to see new
layers of oversight slapped on oligo makers, which have become to the
biotechnology industry what silicon chip makers are to the computer industry.
But many suggested the time was ripe for a public discussion about how best to
prevent nefarious use of the science.

    Today most biodefense efforts focus on disease-causing organisms themselves,
rather than the genetic instructions for making them. Federal regulations
restrict shipments of dangerous microbes and toxins listed by the government as
"select agents," but those rules do not apply to shipments of their DNA
components, at least within the United States.

    DNA exports are more strictly regulated, with the Commerce Department
requiring licenses for overseas shipments of DNA deemed a threat to national
security. But those rules are open to interpretation and are easily flouted,
scientists inside and outside the government said.

    When Terrill of Integrated DNA wanted to learn more about the export rules
last year, he went to the Commerce Department's Bureau of Exchange
Administration (renamed in April the Bureau of Industry and Security), which
oversees and enforces export rules for "dual-use" technologies, including
microbial DNA strands. He learned that the bureau restricts exports of genetic
sequences "associated with pathogenicity," which means the ability to cause
disease.

    "The problem is the bureau has not released those sequences, so . . . we
would have to decide for ourselves whether a sequence is associated with
pathogenicity," Terrill said. "But how pathogenic? And what does 'associated'
mean? The phrase is difficult to get a grasp on. It's not really a scientific
term. It's a lawyer's term."

    Moreover, Terrill learned, the 370-person agency has only one microbiologist
on staff to deal with the hundreds of biological export applications the agency
receives annually.

    That employee was away and not available to be interviewed this week. But
another Commerce Department official, speaking on condition of anonymity,
confirmed that it is "the responsibility of the exporter" to determine if a
genetic sequence falls under the bureau's rules.

    The official said the bureau engages in "outreach activities" to educate
academic and commercial scientists about the export restrictions. But the
official also acknowledged that many scientists -- especially university-based
researchers -- have a tradition of sharing DNA freely through the mail, making
enforcement difficult.

    In any case, scientists said, rules that focus on "pathogenic" DNA sequences
are meaningless in an era when manufacturers can make pieces of DNA that are
individually benign yet can pose a serious threat if properly assembled.

    "I don't know how you could overcome that problem," the Commerce Department
official said. "You could get one part [of the sequence] from one company and
another part from another company and completely circumvent the law."

    Some experts have begun to consider whether manufacturers themselves should
be brought under some kind of oversight. "We propose that . . . those companies
that produce the oligos should be asked to routinely check the sequences against
those of known pathogens," said Wimmer, the scientist who led the polio project.

    Several computer programs, most notably one known as BLAST, can quickly scan
the genetic sequence of a large piece of DNA and report whether it is similar to
other known sequences, such as ones encoding parts of a virus or toxin. But
company officials said they were not enthusiastic about taking on the cost or
legal responsibility of fingering potential perpetrators.

    In any case, said Garry Merry, corporate vice president of genomic services
at Qiagen Operon, a scientist could evade BLAST's eyes simply by ordering DNA
components small enough to be completely generic, then assembling them later.
"You could do it," Merry said, "and we couldn't tell."

    As an alternative, some are calling for extra layers of institutional review
for researchers who, like Wimmer, propose combining genetic components to make
viruses or other dangerous entities.

    "I would argue there needs to be more oversight in terms of getting
approval," said Arthur Caplan, a University of Pennsylvania ethicist who sat on
Mildred Cho's expert panel. "Are we going to be seeing this kind of thing done
in a science fair soon? I'm in favor of tighter controls."

    Craig Venter, president of the Center for the Advancement of Genomics in
Rockville who last week called the polio work "irresponsible science," said the
nation might need a special advisory committee to publicly review all such
studies in advance, just as a National Institutes of Health panel reviews
proposed gene therapy experiments as a way of watching for trouble and
reassuring the public. Without such openness, Venter said, "this kind of work
can set science back in the public eye."

    But while institutional or government review may bring more oversight to
legitimate research, others said, it's unlikely to deter those who wish to keep
their work secret. And with the biotech revolution now 30 years old -- and trade
in aftermarket equipment burgeoning -- deterrence may be difficult.

    "You can buy an old synthesizer and some raw ingredients and no one would
have any idea what you're doing or what you're making," said Terrill of
Integrated DNA. With an old machine, he said, "it might take you a week longer.
They're big and clunky. But a week isn't that long."

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2002


                             1236 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              July 15, 2002 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E07

LENGTH: 457 words

HEADLINE: Earnings Forecast Boosts Nextel

BYLINE: Michael Barbaro, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Shares in Reston-based Nextel Communications Inc. were up sharply Friday,
putting the company atop the list of biggest winners last week after analysts
upgraded earnings forecasts for the wireless-phone carrier.

    Research analysts at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter & Co. and Legg Mason and
Co., while noting there was still risk related to Nextel's hefty debt, said they
expect the company to narrow its loss this year. Morgan Stanley expects Nextel
to lose 89 cents a share this year, compared with a loss of $ 1.01 a share
predicted earlier this year. Nextel plans to release its second-quarter earnings
report this week. The company's stock closed Friday at $ 4.40 a share, up 42
percent.

    The Washington Post-Bloomberg regional stock index closed Friday at 145.28,
down 6.7 points for the week. The NVTC Potomac Tech 60, which tracks 60
technology companies in the region, closed at 523.06, down 36.8 points.

    It was another buoyant week for Vastera Inc., the Dulles software service
provider, which closed at $ 5.83 a share, up 17 percent, after it announced the
scheduling of its second-quarter earnings report. Toshiba America Business
Solutions, which provides office electronic products, last month selected one of
Vastera's leading products, TradeSphere Exporter, to help speed product
shipments worldwide.

    Shares of Orbital Sciences, a Dulles satellite equipment company, fell 24
percent last week, despite an announcement that it was awarded two contracts
worth a total of $ 46.4 million. The contracts were $ 39 million from the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory and $ 7.4 million from the Missile Defense Agency. Orbital
Sciences stock closed at $ 5.61 a share.

    Shares of Arlington defense contractor United Defense Industries Inc., fell
more than 13 percent last week, despite its $ 316 million recent acquisition of
United States Marine Repair Inc. from the Carlyle Group. United States Marine
Repair, based in Norfolk, provides ship repair, modernization and conversion
services to the Navy. United Defense Industries' stock closed Friday at $ 19.09
a share.

    The decision by drugmaker GenVec Inc. of Gaithersburg to contract with
biological manufacturer BioReliance Corp. of Rockville to produce its leading
product, BioBypass, gave a big lift to GenVec's stock price. BioBypass, one of
the most advanced drug candidates in the experimental field of gene therapy, is
being studied in patients with coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular
disease.

    Shares of GenVec, which develops gene-based medicines, closed Friday at $
2.80 a share, up 43 percent for the week. BioReliance, which provides testing,
development and manufacturing services to biotech and pharmaceutical companies,
closed at $ 26.61 a share, up about 1 percent.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2002


                             1237 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      July 14, 2002 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1414 words

HEADLINE: Mechanical-heart patient comes to regret his life-saving choice

BYLINE: Stacey Burling Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   It has been eight months since James "Butch" Quinn's ailing heart was
replaced with a machine, and he has spent all but three weeks of it in Hahnemann
University Hospital. Doctors said that without the artificial heart he almost
certainly would have died months ago. Yet because of all that time away from his
home in West Philadelphia and disappointing quality of life, Quinn now questions
his decision last year to become one of the first humans to test a new type of
fully implantable mechanical heart. "I don't believe I would do it again simply
because it's too much afterwards, you know," Quinn said in a soft, raspy voice
from his ICU bed last week. Quinn healed remarkably quickly in the days
following his Nov. 5 surgery. He was able to leave the hospital in January for
the nearby Hawthorn Suites despite a small stroke. But severe pneumonia brought
him back and he's had bleeding problems caused by blood thinners meant to
prevent more strokes. He was on a ventilator until the end of June and still
receives extra oxygen through a tube in his throat. Because of the bleeding, his
doctor, heart surgeon Louis Samuels, has taken the unusual step of stopping the
blood thinners. "I've gone through quite a bit since the surgery. I've gone
through more than any man can stand or bear, really," said Quinn, a retired
baker and Vietnam veteran. "It's hard and very difficult day to day not knowing
what to think. They tell me one thing and my body is feeling another." Still, he
said, he's never thought of quitting. "I have a lot of fight in me," he said. "I
don't know how to give up." But would he do it again, the way he's feeling right
now? No. Quinn said he has prayed for Tom Christerson, the Kentucky man who went
home in April, seven months after receiving the device, and still hopes that he,
too, will be able to go home. Of the six men given the heart since last July,
only Quinn and Christerson are still alive. Abiomed, the Danvers, Mass., company
that manufactures the machine, has since modified it. No one has gotten an
AbioCor heart since April. The company is now working to make monitoring
equipment more suitable for homes - more maneuverable, for example, and with
fewer but louder warning beeps. The number of heart transplant operations
nationwide, about 2,000 a year, now is limited largely by the availability of
donated cadaver hearts. Far more people need them, and many die waiting. Quinn
was too sick to qualify even if a cadaver heart had been available. Edward
Berger, Abiomed's vice president for strategic policy and planning, said the
mechanical heart's clinical trial is continuing. Indeed, he said, the company
hopes to do "a significant number" of the eight more authorized implants this
year. Berger said the company did its best to prepare people who enrolled in the
trial, all of whom were deemed likely to die within a month, for all the
possible complications. It appointed an independent group of patient advocates
to help potential study subjects understand the trial. Nonetheless, it's to be
expected that some would be dissatisfied, Berger said. "When things go well,
patients and their families are going to be extraordinarily happy," he said.
"When things don't go well, it is absolutely understandable that patients or
their family are going to be distressed... . James has had a very difficult last
few months." Both surgeon and patient have described what happened when Quinn
got the artificial heart as a deeply religious experience. After a rough first
week, Quinn bounced back and quickly became the healthiest and most vigorous of
the recipients - a "poster boy" for the heart, as Samuels put it. In December,
Quinn said his life felt "altogether new." He said: "Life is beautiful." Soon
after celebrating his 52d birthday at the hospital June 30, he told CNN that
getting the mechanical heart has been "very meaningful and I would do it again."
But last week, in his first interview done without medical staff present, Quinn
said he had changed his mind. He has received good treatment, he said, but has
been away from home too long. "I think that's the best quality of life, is to be
at home in my own surroundings, be with my family." He said he wants to have
"rigorous confrontations" with his grandbabies. "They're the best therapists in
the world. "The more I lie here, I get sick," he said. "It's like the bed's
draining me." Samuels said he understands, and thinks Quinn's unhappiness stems
largely from being "cooped up" in the hospital so long. In fact, he said there
is no medical reason for Quinn to be in the hospital. He wants to get him home
by early August, but said it has been complicated to arrange for qualified
24-hour nursing and modifications to the home Quinn shares with his wife, Irene.
Samuels said Quinn's medical condition has improved more than he realizes. He's
still very weak, but it was an achievement to wean him off the ventilator. "The
situation we have now is a thousand percent better than we had even a month
ago." Quinn and his wife still speak fondly of Samuels. "He's been here for me
and he's talked to me," Quinn said. "He's tried to uplift me when my spirits
were down." Patients in the trial are required to have a strong support system,
but their very closeness is one thing that has made Quinn's long stay in the
hospital difficult for him and Irene, a rail-thin nurse's aide who is 55, but
looks far younger. The couple have been married nearly 23 years. She calls them
"two peas in a pod." He calls her "more than my better half." Watching
helplessly while her husband suffers through one medical problem after another
has been "like a nightmare," she said. "If I would have known," she said, "he
would have never got it done. I don't think anybody should ever get it done."
Every day, she said, "every time I go to the hospital, I cry. I cry before I get
in there and I cry when I get out." James Quinn said he thinks the experience
has been harder on Irene than on him, and that's one reason he now questions his
decision. "She's a tough old bird and I love her to death," he said, "but I can
see the breakdown in her eyes. I know she's unhappy... . I feel it all the way
through me." Irene Quinn said she did not realize just how experimental the
AbioCor heart was. And, while she was aware that many serious complications were
possible, she said she thought her husband either would die quickly or return
home in better shape than before the surgery. She never imagined months of
isolation in the hospital. Alan Milstein, a Pennsauken lawyer the Quinns have
hired as an adviser, has concerns about what potential patients are told about
clinical trials. He represented the family of Jesse Gelsinger, who died in a
gene-therapy experiment, in a suit against the University of Pennsylvania.
Milstein believes patients should be told clearly that they will be subjects in
a "human experiment" and that the goal of the experiment is not to make them
well, but to test technology for future patients. People who join such trials
often feel, as Quinn did, that their only choice is between the experimental
treatment and death. They grab at the chance to live, said Milstein. In reality,
"We all know that the purpose of the research experiment is to perfect this
product so that it can later be sold." E. Haavi Morreim, a professor in the
department of human values and ethics at the University of Tennessee who chairs
Abiomed's patient advocacy program, said the advocates discovered that most
patients have entered the process with their minds already made up. "They come
to get the heart," she said. The advocates have done their best to help patients
understand everything that could go wrong. (The Quinns dismissed their original
advocate and have since chosen a medical anthropologist and ethicist who is
independent of Morreim's group.) But because this is brand-new technology, it's
difficult to tell people what to expect. "What we have is the very cutting edge
here and there isn't anything typical yet," Morreim said. George Annas, a
professor of health law and bioethics at Boston University, calls clinical
trials like this one "experiments on families." He said any potential subjects
from now on should be required to talk with people who've already gotten the
heart and their spouses. What would James Quinn tell them? "Think," he said.
"Think and then do some more thinking."

   Contact Stacey Burling at 215-854-4944 or sburling@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2002


                             1238 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      July 12, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 NAMES & GAMES

LENGTH: 809 words

BODY:

   Bud Selig, the man who brought the two-minute warning to baseball, would
likely prefer that the season end this weekend rather than endure all the bad
publicity, unseemly whining and bizarre developments that are all but promised
by the next few months.

    We can report definitively this morning that Bud's fears will be realized,
and in all their poisonous karma. Having consulted with the Orco Life Extension
Institute for Telepathy, Clairvoyance, and Steam Cleaning of Scottsdale, Ariz.,
an astoundingly crystalline picture of baseball's immediate future has emerged.

    And it goes somethin' like this:

    July 15 -- The Tampa Bay Devil Rays, the only team to match the Pirates loss
for 100th loss last year, fail to meet their payroll. Eleventh-hour negotiations
between the club, Bay area banks and the St. Petersburg's mayor's office end
with this comment from the mayor: "Wait, the players for the Devils Rays get
paid?" Reporters swarm Tropicana Field but are met by bolted entrances and one
small hand-printed sign that reads "Back in 5 minutes."

    July 20 -- Giants slugger Barry Bonds, clarifying his stance on steroid use
under pressure from fried chicken titan KFC, says again that it is not drug
testing that he objects to, it's random drug testing, which happens to be the
only viable drug deterrent ever deployed. Bonds evidently wants to be alerted to
any drug test in enough time to vacate a steroids cycle or at least retain the
right to use the game's first "pinch-urinator." Critics note that Barry's
understanding of this and every other issue facing the game is best portrayed by
the three words he has in George Costanza's KFC commercial: "Not a clue."

    July 25 -- Commissioner Selig, noting that the body of Hall of Famer Ted
Williams is still hanging upside down with several severed heads in a cryonic
chamber inside the "life extension" palace of the Jerry "Dr. Evil" Lemler,
introduces a plan to move the frozen corpse of Teddy Ballgame every year to the
city that wins the World Series. Should there be one. Ever.

    July 28 -- Elias, the statistical authority, reports that for the first time
in baseball history, the temperature of a cryonically preserved former player
and the aggregate temperature of one team's offense are identical. Both Ted
Williams and Pirates batters are at minus 320 degrees. The pejorative term
"colder than Ted Williams" enters the game's lexicon forevermore.

    July 30 -- The Major League Players Association (average member's wage
$46,000/week) sets a strike date of Sept. 8. Selig says he was "shocked and
saddened" by a phone call from union hypnotist Don Fehr apprising him of the
deadline. Selig says he was virtually speechless during the call but did
remember saying to Fehr, "You realize, of course, that Sept. 8 is Oliver Onion
Bean Bag Day at PNC Park."

    July 31 -- Selig announces his intention to have his head cryonically frozen
Sept. 7.

    Aug. 12 -- During a Pirates-Cardinals broadcast, Lanny Frattare notes that
the cost in bonus money to the Cardinals of having pitcher Matt Morris selected
to the All-Star Game and the cost to Bud Selig to have his head cryonically
frozen were the same: $50,000.

    Aug. 18 -- The Texas Rangers go out of business. Club executives offer
little explanation, but General Manager John Hart tells The Best Damned Sports
Show, Period's Tom Arnold, "Maybe it had something to do with the fact that
we're paying the shortstop $300,000 more than the U.S. government offered for
information leading to the capture of Osama bin Laden, $25 million. Ya think?"

    Aug. 24 -- At a White House news conference, President Bush reacts testily
to questions about whether he plans to involve himself in the looming baseball
strike or the looming legal battle over the still-frozen remains of Ted
Williams. "Are you people nuts!" the president thunders. "I'm running a global
war against maniacal murdering terrorists, I'm trying to keep the economy from
steering off a cliff, I'm trying to keep Dick Cheney from being indicted, and I
got a columnist in the New York Times suggesting that by solving the baseball
labor situation I would 'ensure a domestic legacy no president has been able to
achieve.'

    "Oh yeah, that's what I want my legacy to be. The man who made the world
safe for the Kansas City Royals."

    Sept. 5 -- John Henry Williams, son of the late Red Sox slugger, announces
plans to sell his father's frozen "mojo" to the highest bidder.

    Sept. 6 -- Jerry "Dr. Evil" Lemler resigns his post as president of the Alco
Life Extension Foundation to become Commissioner of Baseball. "How hard can it
be?" Dr. Evil tells CNN. "You freeze the whole thing 50, 100 years, sever some
heads, by which time maybe somebody'll think of somethin' ."

    Sept. 8 -- Strike begins. Kevin McClatchy takes home 15,000 Oliver Onion
bean bags.

NOTES:
GENE THERAPY

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2002


                             1239 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       July 12, 2002 Friday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 392 words

HEADLINE: Gliatech closes deal to sell part of its assets

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Gliatech Inc. has agreed to sell some of its technology to Merck & Co. for $8
million in cash.

   Even after competing bids recently pushed up the price, five other companies
continued to seriously explore buying the Cleveland biotechnology company's
central nervous system programs, the first assets Gliatech has sold since filing
for bankruptcy May 9.

   Yet Merck's keen interest in the technology and its improved offer - the
company raised its bid to $8 million, from $5.4 million last month - were enough
in the end to fend off the handful of remaining suitors, including GeneSoft
Inc., a gene therapy developer based in San Francisco.

   "We believe we've gotten a good price," said Sean Malloy, a lawyer with the
firm McDonald, Hopkins, Burke & Haber Co., which is representing Gliatech.

   Lawyers representing Gliatech's creditors did not oppose the proposed sale,
laid out yesterday before Judge Pat Morgenstern-Clarren in the U.S. Bankruptcy
Court for the Northern District of Ohio. The transaction, which still requires
the court's blessing, would become final later this month.

   The therapies Merck wants are intended to treat different conditions
involving the central nervous system, such as schizophrenia, depression or
attention deficit disorder.

   Malloy told the court that Gliatech had been trying for more than two years
either to sell the assets or find a partner it could collaborate with to defray
costs. Finally, when it was apparent Gliatech faced a cash crunch, Malloy said,
the company pursued a sale.

   At the time Gliatech filed for bankruptcy, President Steven Basta listed the
company's assets at $7.8 million and liabilities at $16.2 million.

   The company has additional technology to put on the block as it tries to
wring the value out of assets. The most significant is a group of anti-scarring
products, including a gel called Adcon-L, the company's only commercial product.

   Gliatech is holding discussions with potential buyers for the Adcon group,
which might be sold separately or as a unit, Basta said. "It will depend on who
the buyer is," he said.

   No sale of the other assets, however, is likely for a couple of months.

   And, as negotiations continue, it's possible that some of the company could
survive, Basta said.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-4800

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2002


                             1240 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    July 10, 2002, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 758 words

HEADLINE: Cryonics gets a cold shoulder from scientists

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:
Year 2075: News reporters are tiring of stories about yet another body being
revived after decades in the deep freeze.

   Hundreds of thawed "patients" are in support groups sponsored by the
century-old Cryonics Institute, still headed by its recently thawed founder. You
can spot the newly revived by the subtle scars over the carotid arteries and
jugular veins. The scars are from incisions made in the early 2000s for tubing
to remove their blood and perfuse the body with antifreeze. Nanotechnology will
take care of their freezer burn over time; gene therapy will rejuvenate their
tissues.


   Sound like bad science fiction? Maybe, but a nasty family feud over whether
baseball legend Ted Williams' body will be frozen for a future thaw has brought
cryonics to center stage. Question is, how much of this controversy is based on
any real potential to wake up in the next century?

   Experts say the only part that's fiction is the ability to revive a human
Popsicle. About 100 people already have taken the plunge into a bath of liquid
nitrogen and are being stored at a crisp minus 197 degrees Celsius (minus 322
degrees Fahrenheit). Whether they'll ever be successfully thawed is a challenge
for science to work out in the coming decades. About 1,000 people are betting on
the science and have already signed up with non-profit institutes and for-profit
companies to be frozen after they die.

   The notion of being put into a suspended state and revived later has been
around at least since 1861, when French writer Edmond About published The Man
With the Broken Ear, a novel about a scientist who basically freeze-dries a
living subject and reconstitutes him like a Mountain House camping dinner years
later when his disease can be cured. Cryonics is a popular device for Hollywood,
too. Austin Powers is frozen in the '60s and thawed in the politically correct
'90s, much to his dismay. Woody Allen's Sleeper has a victim wrapped in tinfoil
emerging in the distant future to learn that smoking is good for you.

   Robert Ettinger, 83, is the person most responsible for pushing cryonics out
of the realm of fiction. Back in the '30s, Ettinger envisioned a more advanced
future than we have today. But medical developments over the past 30 years,
particularly those involving resuscitation of heart attack and drowning victims,
keep him encouraged.

   His bottom line: Death is relative. "Whether you call a person dead or not
does not matter," he says. "Thousands of people are revived every year after
suffering clinical death. In previous years, these people would have remained
dead. So whether it's 20 minutes or 20 years, it shouldn't matter."

   Ettinger's Cryonics Institute (CI) has 41 frozen deceased people at its
storage facility in Clinton Township, Mich., including his two wives and mother.
Ted Williams' body may be destined for storage at Alcor Life Extension
Foundation in Scottsdale, Ariz.

   Andy Zawacki, facilities manager at CI, says maintenance of frozen bodies is
simple. The bodies are stored in cylinders or rectangular tanks in sleeping bags
immersed in liquid nitrogen.

   "I top off the tanks (with liquid nitrogen) about every five days, but you
can go up to about two weeks if you have to," Zawacki says.

   Bodies are called patients. Living people who have paid $ 28,000 to be frozen
are called members. Most are middle-class folks who use life insurance policies
to pay for preservation and maintenance. Alcor also will freeze just your head
for about $ 18,000; Ettinger freezes only whole bodies. Their freezing methods
also differ, but no one knows whose is best. Alcor vitrifies the body, which
makes it more glass-like and causes water to bind to a chemical to prevent the
formation of ice crystals. Ettinger's group sticks with liquid nitrogen and
simple glycerin.

   Ettinger says more people are warming to the idea of being frozen after
death. Most of CI's members joined in the past few years. Most members are men,
but more patients are women who have been frozen by husbands or children.

   Mainstream scientists still need convincing.

   "Right now, it's a totally left-field thing," says molecular geneticist
Lawrence Donehower of Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, who researches
links between cancer-fighting genes and aging. "This is totally 30th-century
stuff. I don't see how they will ever resurrect someone this way. We just laugh
at it."

   Says Ettinger: "I won't convince all people, but the thesis becomes more
credible every year."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY (DIAGRAM); PHOTO, B/W, Warner
Bros.; Forever Young: Mel Gibson's pilot defrosted nicely after 50 years, but
that's Hollywood.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2002


                             1241 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            July 10, 2002 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 197 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Firms Sign Deal To Produce Trial Drug

BYLINE: Michael Barbaro, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    GenVec Inc., a Gaithersburg company that develops gene-based medicines,
announced a contract with biological manufacturer BioReliance Corp. to produce
its leading product, BioBypass.

    BioBypass, one of the most advanced drug candidates in the experimental
field of gene therapy, is being studied in patients with coronary artery disease
and peripheral vascular disease.

    Rockville-based BioReliance already produces BioBypass for clinical trials,
but the new agreement calls for a more-than-tenfold increase in production
levels to meet standards for late-stage clinical trials and commercialization.

    "This scale is important for regulators because they can see that a
drugmaker has locked down a safe production process," said Rob Tenerowicz,
GenVec's vice president of process development. Neither company would disclose
the financial terms of the deal, but both described it as a multi-year contract.

    BioBypass just completed its second phase of clinical trials, but the
results are sealed. After GenVec officials review the results, they will decide
whether to launch a third and final phase of the patient trials required to win
approval from the Food and Drug Administration.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2002


                             1242 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       July 9, 2002 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 426 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS In Brief

BODY:


   Vivendi, lenders near deal

   Vivendi Universal SA said yesterday that it was near an agreement with key
lenders that would let it avoid a cash crunch as new management settles in to
run the French company. Analysts said that without the deal, Vivendi could run
out of cash in a few weeks.

   Vivendi bought Boston's last big independent publishing house, Houghton
Mifflin, last year.

   Meanwhile, Moody's Investors Service eyed a rating cut on Vivendi debt, which
could spur asset sales. Vivendi recently ousted Jean-Marie Messier as CEO after
he spent $ 77 billion on corporate takeovers to transform the firm into the
world's second-largest media giant. - BLOOMBERG

   Hackers on attack

   Hacker attacks over the Internet rose 28 percent in the past six months, with
the majority of the attacks focused on technology, financial services and power
companies, Internet security company Riptech Inc. said yesterday.

   The Virginia firm said there were more than 180,000 successful Internet
attacks reported from January to June against more than 400 organizations, up
from 128,678 attacks in the last half of 2001. - STAFF

   Genzyme, TKT spar

   Genzyme Corp. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said FDA review panels will
consider their competing treatments for Fabry disease in late September. The
Cambridge rivals have been racing to be the first to win U.S. approval for their
treatments of the disease, a rare hereditary disorder that affects an estimated
5,000 people worldwide. The U.S. market for treatments is expected to be worth $
500 million. - BLOOMBERG

   EBay buying PayPal

   SAN JOSE, Calif. - Online auction giant eBay Inc. agreed to buy Internet
payment provider PayPal Inc. yesterday in a $ 1.3 billion stock deal that eBay
expects will  improve its trading site and give it a significant new chunk of
e-commerce action. - AP

   BTU has new exec

   Paul van der Wansem, president, CEO and chairman of BTU International Inc.,
yesterday named Mark Rosenzweig, formerly of The BOC Group Plc., as his
successor as president and CEO at the North Billerica-based company. Van der
Wansem remains chairman of the thermal-processing equipment supplier. - STAFF

   Fidelity lands plans

   Fidelity Investments said yesterday that it would manage retirement plans for
the Longshoremen, International Longshore and Warehouse unions and the Pacific
Maritime Association. Terms of the deal weren't disclosed. The ILWU-PMA listed
10,500 participants in its 401(k) plans, while the Longshoremen's union counts
42,000 West Coast workers as its members. - BLOOMBERG

LOAD-DATE: July 09, 2002


                             1243 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 9, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 688 words

HEADLINE: FDA PANEL TO REVIEW GENZYME, TKT BIDS TO BE SOLE FABRY DRUG PROVIDER

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. yesterday said a panel of
specialists will be convened in September by the Food and Drug Administration to
review their rival applications to be the sole provider of a drug to treat the
rare inherited Fabry disease.

   The news is the first concrete sign of progress in a controversial review
process that has dragged on for more than two years. The FDA panel will evaluate
Genzyme's application for Fabrazyme on Sept. 26 and TKT's application for
Replagal on Sept. 27, and recommend whether the drugs should be approved.

      It is unlikely to address a key question, however. FDA rules require that
only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease such as Fabry, which affects
only a few thousand people worldwide. The "orphan drug" act gives a company
seven years to sell its drug unhindered by competition in exchange for being the
first to develop a drug to treat a rare disease.

   The rule seems to turn the race for approval into a winner-take-all
proposition for one of the Cambridge companies. Both firms submitted
applications to the FDA in June 2000, and analysts say the regulatory agency has
never before been faced with two applications submitted within weeks of each
other for nearly identical drugs to treat the same rare disease.

   "Orphan drug is a separate legal issue," said Dennis Harp, an analyst with
Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown. "I suspect the panel will recommend that the two
drugs be approved. The FDA will still be left to determine how to address the
orphan drug issue."

   Many industry observers believe the FDA will seek a loophole that allows for
the approval of both drugs. Although the drugs are similar - both replace an
enzyme missing in Fabry patients - they are made differently and follow
different dosing schemes.

   Harp said the FDA may ask the panel to determine whether the drugs are
variations of the same molecular entity or different substances. If the panel
concludes the drugs are different, FDA could approve both without violating the
provisions of the orphan drug act.

   Regulators could also skirt the issue if the panel recommends the approval of
one drug and not the other. But Ron Renaud, an analyst at Bear Stearns, believes
both scenarios are unlikely. Both drugs have been on the market in Europe for
nearly a year. Studies show that both safely and effectively treat a deadly
disease for which there are no other options.

   "I think at this point it's still up in the air," Renaud said. "But if I had
to make a bet, I'd bet the panel recommends both drugs be approved, and that for
the benefit of patients, the FDA finds a way to approve them both."

   The legal question remains, however. The FDA may not have the authority to
approve both drugs if they are deemed to be the same basic substance. And if the
FDA is forced to pick one, the investment community is split on which drug it
will be. Renaud believes it will be Genzyme's drug. But Eric Schmidt, an analyst
with SG Cowen Securities in New York, said he believes TKT's drug will win out.
Replagal's sales have been somewhat stronger in Europe. And, he said, studies
show the drug has fewer side effects.

   In a winner-take-all scenario, the loss would be far more devastating to TKT
than it would to Genzyme. Replagal would be TKT's first marketed product in the
United States whereas Fabrazyme would represent a relatively modest percentage
of Genzyme's US sales.

   Either way, Schmidt said, the fact that a panel review has been scheduled is
good news for patients. Patients had hoped that one or both drugs would have
reached the market a year ago. Since that deadline passed, they have been given
little guidance from the FDA about when to expect a decision. The September
panel review, Schmidt said, means a drug could be on the market by year's end.

   "Patients who have been waiting for two years and running probably won't have
to wait much longer," Schmidt said.

   In yesterday's trading, shares of Genzyme fell 29 cents to $19.58 and shares
of TKT rose $3.20 to $37.12 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2002


                             1244 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       July 8, 2002 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. C01

LENGTH: 758 words

HEADLINE: 2 picked to oversee biotech initiative;
They will jointly administer $34 million in "greenhouse" grants pegged for
life-science research and marketing.

BYLINE: Linda Loyd Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   A Philadelphia lawyer with expertise in the biopharmaceutical industry and a
physician who worked at four start-up companies have been selected to jointly
manage a $33.8 million economic-development initiative to commercialize
promising life-science research and to create jobs.

   In April, Gov. Schweiker announced that the state would give the money to the
biotechnology "greenhouse" in Southeastern Pennsylvania to help speed promising
medical research from university laboratories to the marketplace.

   The Biotechnology Greenhouse Corp., a consortium of university and business
groups in Southeastern Pennsylvania, will administer the funds.

   The group's managing director and chief executive officer will be Barbara S.
Schilberg, who is vice president, general counsel and secretary of Locus
Discovery Inc. The co-managing director and chief operating officer will be Gary
J. Kurtzman, a hematologist and executive at the former Genovo Inc., a local
pioneering biotech company that once was a major corporate backer of
gene-therapy research at the University of Pennsylvania.

   A volunteer board overseeing the corporation selected Schilberg and Kurtzman
from 80 applicants.

   "We were originally going for one person," said Sam Katz, chief executive
officer of Greater Philadelphia First and coordinator of the greenhouse project.
"We came across two outstanding people whose backgrounds and orientations so
complemented each other - one heavily focused in business transactions and
financing, and the other heavily focused in science and biotech - it was just a
great combination."

   Schilberg, who will earn $225,000 a year as CEO, and Kurtzman who will be
paid $215,000 as COO, will have an administrative office in the Port of
Technology building, 37th and Market Streets. They plan to begin work next week.

   How the greenhouse will evaluate ideas, choose who will get funding, and
calculate how much will be invested has not been determined. Kurtzman said he
and Schilberg planned to "put together a mechanism" by early fall for how
researchers with ideas and discoveries that have commercial potential can apply
for money.

   "Our goal is to take early-stage technologies, after the federal-grant stage,
that are ready to begin the commercialization process," said Kurtzman, who lives
in Bryn Mawr.

   Schilberg was out of town and could not be reached.

   Last June, the state allocated $100 million for three life-science
greenhouses. The others are in Pittsburgh and Hershey. The funding comes from
Pennsylvania's $11.3 billion share of the settlement with the nation's tobacco
companies.

   Schweiker said the project's statewide goal was to create 4,400 new jobs,
attract or create 100 new biotechnology companies, and leverage more than $150
million in private investment over the next five years.

   The greenhouse will provide "pre-seed" investments - money that comes before
venture funding - to universities and other research institutions, primarily for
biopharmaceutical and biomedical development.

   The greenhouse will seek to fund the most promising life-science research
after federal and foundation grants run out, so the research might become
businesses or products that can be licensed by other companies.

   "The firepower that this team offers to the greenhouse has the entire board
excited," said Frank Baldino Jr., chief executive officer of Cephalon Inc., in
West Chester, and cochair of the greenhouse board.

   Before joining Locus Discovery in Blue Bell, Schilberg had senior-management
positions at Incara Pharmaceuticals Corp., Triangle Park, N.C., and at Cephalon.
Before that, she was a law partner in the Philadelphia office of Morgan, Lewis
L.L.P.

   After medical school and research training at the National Institutes of
Health, Kurtzman worked at Gilead Sciences and Avigen Inc., in California. In
1998 he joined Genovo Inc., a Philadelphia area gene-therapy start-up, as COO.
He recently was chief executive officer of Pluvita Corp., in Bethesda, Md.

   "I was commuting between here and Bethesda," Kurtzman said. "I've been trying
to get back here, and the greenhouse was the ideal opportunity."

   Kurtzman said he and Schilberg were excited about the potential for the
Philadelphia region as a life-science center.

   "Philadelphia is already on the map. We want to be at the top of the list,
not fourth or fifth, when people think of careers in life sciences. We want to
make sure we are on the cutting edge."

   Contact Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2002


                             1245 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                     July 7, 2002 Sunday City final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 02D

LENGTH: 386 words

HEADLINE: Of mice, men and genetics

BODY:

   Our position: The miracle of gene therapy portends a paradigm shift from
which there may be no turning back.

   British labs soon may be overrun by millions of rats bred for genetics
experiments. Humans are better designed than rice, even though the bland grain
has more chromosomes. That's the latest news on mice, rice and men these days,
and it's a mixed blessing, at best. The same goes for gene therapy.

   The fact that it's now possible to inject genes into a patient to either
correct abnormalities in DNA or change its makeup in select cells is absolutely
mind-boggling. The potential health applications are unprecedented. So are the
ethical ramifications.

   French researchers announced this spring that they had cured five boys born
with severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, thanks to gene therapy. Doctors
at Necker Hospital in Paris drew bone marrow from the boys. They extracted stem
cells from the marrow and infected them with a harmless virus containing a gene
able to manufacture a protein necessary to create infection-fighting cells. The
infected stem cells in turn infected the bone marrow cells, which then were
injected into each boy's bloodstream.

   Tests over time showed the boys' bone marrow cells continued to be "infected"
with the life-saving virus. A more recent study by researchers from Italy and
Israel also proved the efficacy of the treatment.

   The implication is clear: Once human genes are fully understood, they can be
manipulated, and any human illness caused by a faulty gene eventually could be
treated or prevented.

   But less clear are questions about access to and control of the technology;
population explosions that could ensue once folks stop dying according to the
actuarial charts; the whole issue of genetics' impact on the sanctity of human
life and the value of diversity.

   Those who believe in God would argue that man's continued press toward
autonomy and re-creating himself in his own image only further separates him
from his only eternal hope.

   As well-meaning people on both sides of the debate acknowledge, gene therapy
is stunning in its implications. But let's hope the mice won't take over
Parliament and the rice won't start steaming people before folks slow down and
objectively envision where this incredible new technology could take them.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2002


                             1246 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                     July 7, 2002 Sunday City final Edition

SECTION: CITY STATE; Y-PRESS; Pg. 04B

LENGTH: 955 words

HEADLINE: 10-year-old adjusts to life minus sunlight

BYLINE: BY RACHEL GOERTEMILLER, 17, MEGAN MINKER, 16, AND BRIAN REISSAUS, 16
Y-PRESS

BODY:

   Sweet and optimistic, Katie Mahar is a typical 10-year-old girl.

   The Craryville, N.Y., resident is the youngest of four children. She jumps on
her trampoline, listens to the Backstreet Boys and plays with her kitten,
Pumpkin.

   She also has a disease called xeroderma pigmentosum, a genetic disorder also
known as XP.

   Sufferers can't tolerate ultraviolet light, a form of solar radiation not
visible to the human eye.

   Suk-Hee Lee, a cancer researcher at the Indiana University School of
Medicine, studies DNA gene repair. He defines XP as "an extreme sensitivity to
ultraviolet exposure." XP patients' skin cells, he explained, can't repair
themselves after UV exposure.

   According to Lee, Katie is part of a small group with the disease -- 250,00
to 500,000 people worldwide. Some are born with it, while others acquire it.
Katie's disease is the rarest and most severe light-sensitivity disorder.

   In the past, this disease was rarely diagnosed. In 1997, a registry was begun
with 250 XP patients. Today, it lists about 3,000 patients worldwide, Lee said.

   Luckily, Katie's parents discovered her condition when she was 2 years old.
It happened when she was outside on a swing.

   "I got these little red dots on my hand and all over my face. And then they
boiled up like big blisters. . . . So it really hurts, and we have to go to an
emergency room, which makes them hurt more because it has so much more
fluorescent lighting," she said in a phone interview.

   The severity of XP varies. Some patients can go outside with minimal
protection; others can end up in the hospital simply by stepping outside.

   Besides the blisters Katie developed, other symptoms include lesions,
discoloration, inflammation, premature aging of the skin, eye problems,
neurological abnormalities and a predisposition to all forms of cancer. Unless
sufferers stay away from the sun, multiple skin cancers could result. Eyes are
equally susceptible; small amounts of ultraviolet light can damage the corneas.

   Precautions inside and out

   To maintain a safe level of lighting inside the Mahars' house, precautions
must be taken.

   "The windows are tinted around the house so I can walk around it without
wearing all my stuff on," Katie said.

   Aside from tinted windows and blinds or drapes, interior lighting also must
be restricted. Only low-wattage, incandescent bulbs may be used in the house,
and the family checks for ultraviolet rays using a light meter.

   To spend time outside, Katie's "stuff" includes SPF 45 sunscreen, light-proof
fabrics, an eye shield and melanin sunscreen.

   "I have to get lotion on. I have to lay this shield over my face so I don't
get hit by the sun, and I also have to wear sunglasses, gloves and a hat and a
jacket. . . . You know how you get a sunburn. I get it 200 times that."

   Medication is an important part of treatment.

   "I have to take a big canteen that holds pills. I have to take six of them
each and every day at school," Katie said. "In all the seasons except for
winter, I have to take (my medication) three times a day." Given the disease's
rarity and relatively recent discovery, it is not yet known how to provide the
best protection.

   Research has found two forms of XP therapy. In protein therapy, a missing
protein is introduced directly into the cell; gene therapy changes the cell's
DNA content so it can create the missing protein. Although gene therapy is at
this time nearly impossible, Lee hopes it soon will provide the cure.

   Many would assume school would be difficult. But Katie said she has no
problem with friends or schoolwork.

   "They treat me just the same as they treat each other, just I'm the only one
that has XP in my school. . . . I play at school with everyone, and sometimes
I'll have them over to sleep over, and we'll go on the trampoline, play
baseball, basketball and all sorts of stuff outside and inside," she said.

   The only difference between Katie and her classmates' school day is recess;
she plays inside.

   "Sometimes I will just read a book if I'm really bored," she said.

   Adjusting schedule

   Unlike ordinary children who spend an average of one to two hours outside
each day, Katie sleeps during the day and plays outside at night. Katie's
schedule naturally allows for a later bedtime, which she views as a great
advantage.

   "The best part about having XP is that even though my brothers and my sisters
go outside in the daytime, I still get my chance to go outside during the night.
So either way, I'll get some fresh air outside. . . . In summer, I'll stay up
till 7 a.m., then I'll go sleep and wake up at 3 in the afternoon."

   During the summer, Katie participates in Camp Sundown in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
It's a weeklong camp for children with XP. The camp runs from the unusual hours
of 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. and involves close to 300 families. Nighttime events include
field trips, hayrides and water-balloon fights. Indoor activities and crafts are
open for the campers during the day.

   In 2003, the camp plans a permanent location in Claverack, N.Y. The future
retreat building, currently under construction, includes 12 bedrooms, a kitchen,
dining room, activity room and an indoor swimming pool.

   Katie's parents, Dan and Caren Mahar, founded the XP Society, which runs the
camp and has a Web site (www.xps.org/) and support group.

   While the hope for a cure is far off, Katie is content with life.

   "They are trying to find a cure for XP so that we can go outside in the day
and enjoy it. . . . Sometimes I really want to get the disease out of my system,
but other times I'm just fine the way I am.

   "I'm just like everyone else, except I have a disease."

   ASSISTANT EDITOR: Evan Daniluck, 15.

   REPORTERS: Stephanie Ray, 11, and Kelsey Ebbert, 14.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2002


                             1247 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                              July 7, 2002 Sunday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: CITY STATE; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: 10-year-old adjusts to life minus sunlight

BYLINE: By, RACHEL GOERTEMILLER, 17, MEGAN MINKER, 16, AND BRIAN REISSAUS, 16
Y-PRESS

BODY:

   Sweet and optimistic, Katie Mahar is a typical 10-year-old girl.

   The Craryville, N.Y., resident is the youngest of four children. She jumps on
her trampoline, listens to the Backstreet Boys and plays with her kitten,
Pumpkin.

   She also has a disease called xeroderma pigmentosum, a genetic disorder also
known as XP.

   Sufferers can't tolerate ultraviolet light, a form of solar radiation not
visible to the human eye.

   Suk-Hee Lee, a cancer researcher at the Indiana University School of
Medicine, studies DNA gene repair. He defines XP as "an extreme sensitivity to
ultraviolet exposure." XP patients' skin cells, he explained, can't repair
themselves after UV exposure.

   According to Lee, Katie is part of a small group with the disease -- 250,00
to 500,000 people worldwide. Some are born with it, while others acquire it.
Katie's disease is the rarest and most severe light-sensitivity disorder.

   In the past, this disease was rarely diagnosed. In 1997, a registry was begun
with 250 XP patients. Today, it lists about 3,000 patients worldwide, Lee said.

   Luckily, Katie's parents discovered her condition when she was 2 years old.
It happened when she was outside on a swing.

   "I got these little red dots on my hand and all over my face. And then they
boiled up like big blisters. . . . So it really hurts, and we have to go to an
emergency room, which makes them hurt more because it has so much more
fluorescent lighting," she said in a phone interview.

   The severity of XP varies. Some patients can go outside with minimal
protection; others can end up in the hospital simply by stepping outside.

   Besides the blisters Katie developed, other symptoms include lesions,
discoloration, inflammation, premature aging of the skin, eye problems,
neurological abnormalities and a predisposition to all forms of cancer. Unless
sufferers stay away from the sun, multiple skin cancers could result. Eyes are
equally susceptible; small amounts of ultraviolet light can damage the corneas.

   Precautions inside and out

   To maintain a safe level of lighting inside the Mahars' house, precautions
must be taken.

   "The windows are tinted around the house so I can walk around it without
wearing all my stuff on," Katie said.

   Aside from tinted windows and blinds or drapes, interior lighting also must
be restricted. Only low-wattage, incandescent bulbs may be used in the house,
and the family checks for ultraviolet rays using a light meter.

   To spend time outside, Katie's "stuff" includes SPF 45 sunscreen, light-proof
fabrics, an eye shield and melanin sunscreen.

   "I have to get lotion on. I have to lay this shield over my face so I don't
get hit by the sun, and I also have to wear sunglasses, gloves and a hat and a
jacket. . . . You know how you get a sunburn. I get it 200 times that."

   Medication is an important part of treatment.

   "I have to take a big canteen that holds pills. I have to take six of them
each and every day at school," Katie said. "In all the seasons except for
winter, I have to take (my medication) three times a day." Given the disease's
rarity and relatively recent discovery, it is not yet known how to provide the
best protection.

   Research has found two forms of XP therapy. In protein therapy, a missing
protein is introduced directly into the cell; gene therapy changes the cell's
DNA content so it can create the missing protein. Although gene therapy is at
this time nearly impossible, Lee hopes it soon will provide the cure.

   Many would assume school would be difficult. But Katie said she has no
problem with friends or schoolwork.

   "They treat me just the same as they treat each other, just I'm the only one
that has XP in my school. . . . I play at school with everyone, and sometimes
I'll have them over to sleep over, and we'll go on the trampoline, play
baseball, basketball and all sorts of stuff outside and inside," she said.

   The only difference between Katie and her classmates' school day is recess;
she plays inside.

   "Sometimes I will just read a book if I'm really bored," she said.

   Adjusting schedule

   Unlike ordinary children who spend an average of one to two hours outside
each day, Katie sleeps during the day and plays outside at night. Katie's
schedule naturally allows for a later bedtime, which she views as a great
advantage.

   "The best part about having XP is that even though my brothers and my sisters
go outside in the daytime, I still get my chance to go outside during the night.
So either way, I'll get some fresh air outside. . . . In summer, I'll stay up
till 7 a.m., then I'll go sleep and wake up at 3 in the afternoon."

   During the summer, Katie participates in Camp Sundown in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
It's a weeklong camp for children with XP. The camp runs from the unusual hours
of 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. and involves close to 300 families. Nighttime events include
field trips, hayrides and water-balloon fights. Indoor activities and crafts are
open for the campers during the day.

   In 2003, the camp plans a permanent location in Claverack, N.Y. The future
retreat building, currently under construction, includes 12 bedrooms, a kitchen,
dining room, activity room and an indoor swimming pool.

   Katie's parents, Dan and Caren Mahar, founded the XP Society, which runs the
camp and has a Web site (www.xps.org/) and support group.

   While the hope for a cure is far off, Katie is content with life.

   "They are trying to find a cure for XP so that we can go outside in the day
and enjoy it. . . . Sometimes I really want to get the disease out of my system,
but other times I'm just fine the way I am.

   "I'm just like everyone else, except I have a disease."

   ASSISTANT EDITOR: Evan Daniluck, 15.

   REPORTERS: Stephanie Ray, 11, and Kelsey Ebbert, 14.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2009


                             1248 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                              July 7, 2002 Sunday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Of mice, men and genetics

BODY:

   Our position: The miracle of gene therapy portends a paradigm shift from
which there may be no turning back.

   British labs soon may be overrun by millions of rats bred for genetics
experiments. Humans are better designed than rice, even though the bland grain
has more chromosomes. That's the latest news on mice, rice and men these days,
and it's a mixed blessing, at best. The same goes for gene therapy.

   The fact that it's now possible to inject genes into a patient to either
correct abnormalities in DNA or change its makeup in select cells is absolutely
mind-boggling. The potential health applications are unprecedented. So are the
ethical ramifications.

   French researchers announced this spring that they had cured five boys born
with severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, thanks to gene therapy. Doctors
at Necker Hospital in Paris drew bone marrow from the boys. They extracted stem
cells from the marrow and infected them with a harmless virus containing a gene
able to manufacture a protein necessary to create infection-fighting cells. The
infected stem cells in turn infected the bone marrow cells, which then were
injected into each boy's bloodstream.

   Tests over time showed the boys' bone marrow cells continued to be "infected"
with the life-saving virus. A more recent study by researchers from Italy and
Israel also proved the efficacy of the treatment.

   The implication is clear: Once human genes are fully understood, they can be
manipulated, and any human illness caused by a faulty gene eventually could be
treated or prevented.

   But less clear are questions about access to and control of the technology;
population explosions that could ensue once folks stop dying according to the
actuarial charts; the whole issue of genetics' impact on the sanctity of human
life and the value of diversity.

   Those who believe in God would argue that man's continued press toward
autonomy and re-creating himself in his own image only further separates him
from his only eternal hope.

   As well-meaning people on both sides of the debate acknowledge, gene therapy
is stunning in its implications. But let's hope the mice won't take over
Parliament and the rice won't start steaming people before folks slow down and
objectively envision where this incredible new technology could take them.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2009


                             1249 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       July 5, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 752 words

BODY:

   With so much comment this week over whether a Sports Illustrated columnist
swerved out of bounds by asking Cubs slugger Sammy Sosa to take a steroids test,
I started wondering what I'd done with that list of good vs. bad questions I
used to carry around.

    After looking for it all day yesterday, I found it right there on the
windowsill under all my prescription medications.

    In twentysomething years of visiting the inner sanctum of baseball
clubhouses without ever getting punched (spit on, yes, but never punched), I
developed this helpful list of things to ask, and not to ask. To be clear, I'm
not telling anyone how to do their job, I'm just showin' ya my list, OK?



    Good question: Whadya hit, fastball?

    Bad question: Have ya noticed any testicular shrinkage?

    Good question: Whadya hit, slider?

    Bad question: I meant, have you noticed any testicular shrinkage of your
own?

    Good question: Whadya hit, curveball?

    Bad question: Do you still have that stripper's poll in your bedroom?

    Good question: Whadya hit, changeup?

    Bad question: In a month, how many needles would you say you go through?

    Good question: What pitch are ya lookin' for in that situation?

    Bad question: What were ya lookin' for in that neighborhood at 3:40 a.m.?

    Good question: Ever been as hot as you are now?

    Bad question: Ever killed anybody?

    Good question: Are you disappointed in not being selected for the All-Star
Game?

    Bad question: Are you still jittery about never having been charged with
trafficking?

    Good question: Can you remember seeing your first major-league game?

    Bad question: Can you account for your whereabouts the night of the Chandra
Levy disappearance?

    Good question: What's your favorite Yogi Berra-ism?

    Bad question: What's your favorite masking agent?

    Good question: I mean, other than "Smarter than the average Bear"?

    Bad question: What's the street price of your autograph these days?

    Good question: Which city in this league has the best restaurants?

    Bad question: Which city in this league has the best Night Court?

    Good question: Was there any discussion, in that situation, about walking
Bonds with first base open?

    Bad question: Was there any discussion, in that situation, about Palestinian
self determination?

    Good question: 'Sup dog?

    Bad question: Who let the dogs out?

    Good question: Do you think anybody will catch the Braves?

    Bad question: Do you think anybody will catch you using human growth
hormone?

    Good question: Have you benefited much from watching videotape?

    Bad question: Have you benefited much from videotaping the third baseman
having sex?

    Good question: How difficult was the sun out there today?

    Bad question: Is the sun worse when you're, like, really, really hungover?

    Good question: Do you think the players ought to set a strike date?

    Bad question: Do you think the players routinely strike their dates?

    Good question: Has the club approached you about a new contract?

    Bad question: Has the mob approached you about a new contract?

    Good question: What would it take to lock you up for four more years?

    Bad question: Can you avoid being locked up for four more years?

    Good question: Ginger or MaryAnn?

    Bad question: Dianabol or Nandrolone?

    Good question: Boxers or briefs?

    Bad question: Tijuana or domestic black market?

    Good question: How many of your pitches were really working for you tonight?

    Bad question: How many injections before your butt starts to feel tender?

    Good question: Is there anything that determines whether you charge the
mound, or is it strictly a degree-of-rage kind of thing?

    Bad question: Not that it has anything to do with 'Roid Rage, but have you
ever charged the mound during batting practice before?

    Good question: Any plans for the All-Star break?

    Bad question: Any interest in a three-day impotence seminar?

    Good question: To be or not to be?

    Bad question: To pee or not to pee?

    Good question: Will there ever be a salary cap in baseball?

    Bad question: How come your cap is two sizes larger this year?

    Good question: Who's the best shortstop you've seen on grass?

    Bad question: Who's the best shortstop you've seen on smack?

    Good question: Who da man?

    Bad question: Why wait to see what the players association will do; why not
step up right now and be tested?

    Good question: Would you consider taking your foot out of my colon?

    Bad question: Are you aware that this means you have more assaults than
triples?

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2002


                             1250 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                              July 5, 2002 Friday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; GENE THERAPY; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 718 words

BYLINE: GENE COLLIER

BODY:

   With so much comment this week over whether a Sports Illustrated columnist
swerved out of bounds by asking Cubs slugger Sammy Sosa to take a steroids test,
I started wondering what I'd done with that list of good vs. bad questions I
used to carry around.

   After looking for it all day yesterday, I found it right there on the
windowsill under all my prescription medications.

   In twentysomething years of visiting the inner sanctum of baseball clubhouses
without ever getting punched (spit on, yes, but never punched), I developed this
helpful list of things to ask, and not to ask. To be clear, I'm not telling
anyone how to do their job, I'm just showin' ya my list, OK?

   Good question: Whadya hit, fastball?

   Bad question: Have ya noticed any testicular shrinkage?

   Good question: Whadya hit, slider?

   Bad question: I meant, have you noticed any testicular shrinkage of your own?

   Good question: Whadya hit, curveball?

   Bad question: Do you still have that stripper's poll in your bedroom?

   Good question: Whadya hit, changeup?

   Bad question: In a month, how many needles would you say you go through?

   Good question: What pitch are ya lookin' for in that situation?

   Bad question: What were ya lookin' for in that neighborhood at 3:40 a.m.?

   Good question: Ever been as hot as you are now?

   Bad question: Ever killed anybody?

   Good question: Are you disappointed in not being selected for the All-Star
Game?

   Bad question: Are you still jittery about never having been charged with
trafficking?

   Good question: Can you remember seeing your first major-league game?

   Bad question: Can you account for your whereabouts the night of the Chandra
Levy disappearance?

   Good question: What's your favorite Yogi Berra-ism?

   Bad question: What's your favorite masking agent?

   Good question: I mean, other than "Smarter than the average Bear"?

   Bad question: What's the street price of your autograph these days?

   Good question: Which city in this league has the best restaurants?

   Bad question: Which city in this league has the best Night Court?

   Good question: Was there any discussion, in that situation, about walking
Bonds with first base open?

   Bad question: Was there any discussion, in that situation, about Palestinian
self determination?

   Good question: 'Sup dog?

   Bad question: Who let the dogs out?

   Good question: Do you think anybody will catch the Braves?

   Bad question: Do you think anybody will catch you using human growth hormone?

   Good question: Have you benefited much from watching videotape?

   Bad question: Have you benefited much from videotaping the third baseman
having sex?

   Good question: How difficult was the sun out there today?

   Bad question: Is the sun worse when you're, like, really, really hungover?

   Good question: Do you think the players ought to set a strike date?

   Bad question: Do you think the players routinely strike their dates?

   Good question: Has the club approached you about a new contract?

   Bad question: Has the mob approached you about a new contract?

   Good question: What would it take to lock you up for four more years?

   Bad question: Can you avoid being locked up for four more years?

   Good question: Ginger or MaryAnn?

   Bad question: Dianabol or Nandrolone?

   Good question: Boxers or briefs?

   Bad question: Tijuana or domestic black market?

   Good question: How many of your pitches were really working for you tonight?

   Bad question: How many injections before your butt starts to feel tender?

   Good question: Is there anything that determines whether you charge the
mound, or is it strictly a degree-of-rage kind of thing?

   Bad question: Not that it has anything to do with 'Roid Rage, but have you
ever charged the mound during batting practice before?

   Good question: Any plans for the All-Star break?

   Bad question: Any interest in a three-day impotence seminar?

   Good question: To be or not to be?

   Bad question: To pee or not to pee?

   Good question: Will there ever be a salary cap in baseball?

   Bad question: How come your cap is two sizes larger this year?

   Good question: Who's the best shortstop you've seen on grass?

   Bad question: Who's the best shortstop you've seen on smack?

   Good question: Who da man?

   Bad question: Why wait to see what the players association will do; why not
step up right now and be tested?

   Good question: Would you consider taking your foot out of my colon?

   Bad question: Are you aware that this means you have more assaults than
triples?

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2009


                             1251 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             July 4, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: EAST NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 259 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Researcher recognized

   Tulane stem cell researcher Carl A. Gregory received recognition for the best
scientific abstract submitted to the eighth annual meeting of the International
Society for Cellular Therapy held in Barcelona, Spain.

   The abstract, co-authored by Harpreet Singh, Jason Smith and Darwin J.
Prockop, reported the discovery of a remarkable factor that is synthesized and
secreted by adult stem cells that are the focus of research in the Tulane Center
for Gene Therapy. The factor dramatically increases the growth of the same adult
stem cells that produce it and should be extremely useful for growing the cells
for clinical trials in diseases such as spinal cord injury, Parkinson's,
osteoporosis and lung diseases.

   Gregory works under the supervision of Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the
Tulane Center for Gene Therapy.

Jewish publication cited

   The Jewish News earned its first Simon Rockower Award for Excellence in
Jewish Journalism, given annually by the American Jewish Press Association.

   Jewish News editor Gail Naron Chalew accepted the award at a ceremony during
the recent AJPA conference in Evanston, Ill.

   Chalew took third place honors in the Excellence in Commmentary category for
newspapers under 15,000 circulation for two "From the Editor" columns.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to Applause,
The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429. Items must be
received by Thursday to be included in the following Thursday's editions.

GRAPHIC: Carl A. Gregory

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2002


                             1252 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2002 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                     July 3, 2002 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1150 words

HEADLINE: DRUG LAWSUIT NAMES OHSU, SCHOOL DISTRICTS

SOURCE: JOE ROJAS-BURKE - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: The class-action lawsuit says a school-based drug testing study
violates the rights of students

   A federally funded study of school-based drug testing violated the rights of
thousands of Oregon high school students, alleges a lawsuit naming Oregon Health
& Science University and 14 Oregon school districts.

   The class-action lawsuit, filed in U.S. District Court in Oregon on Friday,
seeks an injunction to halt the drug-testing study and compensation for
"psychological, social and economic harm" suffered by students and parents.

   Spearheading the case is a New Jersey law firm that has gained a national
reputation for challenging the ethics of human experiments at some of the
nation's leading medical institutions, including Seattle's Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Center.

   In the case against OHSU and the Oregon schools, lawyers said student
athletes were coerced to take part in the drug-testing experiment, which the
lawyers call a violation of legal and ethical requirements for voluntary
participation in human research.

   Students who refused to go along with random urine tests were barred from
playing sports and, according to the lawsuit, subjected to harassment and
intimidation.

   "That's hardly voluntary," said lead attorney Alan Milstein of Pennsauken,
N.J. "Everybody knows, after Nuremberg, informed consent must be voluntary," he
said, referring to the code of research ethics established after German
experiments during World War II.

   OHSU denies any wrongdoing. A spokesman said the study, known as Saturn,
complies with all state and federal regulations. An institutional review board,
comprising OHSU researchers and lawyers responsible for protecting the rights
and welfare of research volunteers, approved the study before it began, said
spokesman Martin Munguia . The panel has repeated the reviews each year of the
study, he said.

   Dallas School District Superintendent Dave Novotney said most student
athletes and their parents have accepted the use of mandatory drug-testing since
his district joined the Saturn study.

   "There has been only very mild protest at this point," Novotney said. He said
Dallas High School was experiencing "significant issues" with drug and alcohol
abuse among athletes when asked to join the Saturn study.

   "We had identified a problem but didn't have the resources to implement a
randomized drug testing program," Novotney said. "This seemed to be an ideal
solution for us."

   At least two Dallas High School students, Amy Cordy and Beth Wade, strongly
objected to the testing program and have become plaintiffs in the lawsuit. In
the lawsuit, they say they suffered humiliation, anguish, physical and emotional
distress and damaged reputations as a consequence of the drug-testing study. Two
Portland lawyers representing the plaintiffs declined to discuss further details
of the allegations.

   Novotney said he couldn't respond to the allegations until the district
received a copy of the lawsuit.

   Dr. Linn Goldberg, a professor of medicine at OHSU, designed the Saturn study
to show whether a program of random screening could reduce drug use. Goldberg is
a prominent researcher on the problem of drug use among athletes. He received a
$3.6 million grant from the National Institutes of Health in 2000 to carry out
the three-year study at 18 Oregon high schools.

   The study ends next year. Preliminary results are due to be published later
this year.

   Student athletes at seven of the schools face random drug tests with no
advance warning. Researchers collect urine samples and test them for anabolic
steroids and street drugs including cocaine, marijuana and methamphetamine.
Students at six other schools serve as a control group with no drug-testing
policy.

   Five schools in Lincoln County dropped out amid the controversy that erupted
within weeks after the study began. Parents in Lincoln County were the first to
challenge the drug testing required by the experiment, prompting the exit of the
schools from the study.

   Oakridge High School Student Ginelle Weber, who was barred from school sports
after refusing to go along with the drug testing being assessed in the study,
has appealed a circuit court ruling upholding the school district's use of
mandatory drug testing.

   In defense of the study, Goldberg, the lead investigator, has argued that
drug screening is no more intrusive than required physical examinations for
student athletes, and that the goal is the same: promoting health. Students at
study schools who test positive receive confidential medical help and are not
punished and remain eligible for sports, he pointed out in a newspaper editorial
defending the study last year.

   "Why is it acceptable for businesses to protect their private interests but
unacceptable for schools to protect students from injury . . .?" he wrote.
Goldberg was unavailable for comment Tuesday.

   Lawsuits attempting to stop school-based drug testing have largely failed
since a landmark U.S. Supreme Court ruling on an Oregon case in 1995. The court
upheld Vernonia School District's policy of mandatory drug testing for athletes.
Tom Christ, a Portland lawyer representing a 12-year-old Vernonia boy, argued
that mandatory drug tests subjected students to a degrading, intrusive
experience without reasonable cause.

   Last week, a Supreme Court decision paved the way for expanded use of school
drug tests by upholding their use as a condition for all extracurricular
activities.

   But the legality of school testing is not at issue in the lawsuit against
OHSU, said Milstein, the New Jersey attorney for Sherman Silverstein Kohl Rose
and Podolsky.

   "It's about whether it's constitutional to compel school kids to participate
in a human experiment because the researcher got a $3.5 million grant," he said.

   OHSU maintains that schools adopted the use of mandatory drug tests, and that
the screening program wasn't imposed on students by the researchers, according
to Munguia, the OHSU spokesman.

   "The drug testing itself is not a part of the study," he said.

   The study grant pays for the drug testing at the 13 schools, and OHSU
researchers administer the tests. Munguia said that is necessary to maintain a
consistent standard of testing among all of the schools.

   Milstein said an advocacy group brought the OHSU study to his attention. His
firm came to national prominence representing the family of Jesse Gelsinger, an
18-year-old who died in a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   The firm is representing the families of patients who died in a controversial
clinical trial at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. It has brought
similar actions against the University of Oklahoma, Ohio State University and
the University of California at Los Angeles.

   Although Milstein has gained multimillion dollar settlements in some cases,
his legal theories remain untested in a trial.

GRAPHIC: Sidebar - Targets of Lawsuit

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2002


                             1253 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 28, 2002, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1114 words

HEADLINE: 'BUBBLE BOY' CASES REPORTED CURED USING GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   An international scientific team yesterday announced that two toddlers with
so-called "bubble boy" syndrome were cured using gene therapy, the most
effective reported application of the promising but controversy-plagued
treatment to date.

   A one-time infusion with DNA to fix a genetic defect revitalized the
children's almost nonexistent immune systems, allowing them to emerge from their
clinically sterilized homes - their bubbles - to crawl, walk, and interact
freely with the world around them, the researchers reported. Two years later,
both remain healthy.

      The groundbreaking work unfolded in Jerusalem, when a Jewish doctor risked
his career to attempt the highly experimental procedure on the first patient, an
Arab infant, even as political turmoil raged around him.

   "This is a complete cure. The child is completely cured," said Dr. Shimon
Slavin, chairman of the bone marrow transplantation department at
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center in Jerusalem, and an author of the
paper describing the success, which appears in this week's edition of the
journal Science.

   Gene therapy, the surgical insertion of genes that essentially reprogram the
body to eliminate disease, was born amid much fanfare a decade ago. But, despite
the investment of hundreds of millions of dollars, the field has thus far
produced no clinically widespread treatments. The field suffered a serious blow
in 1999, when a teenaged patient died during a gene therapy clinical trial at
the University of Pennsylvania, prompting a wave of federal government
investigations and the suspension of several research programs.

   But in recent months, gene therapy researchers say the field has turned a
corner from those dark days, with several labs, including one at St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center in Boston, reporting progress in the use of genes to treat
disease. The challenge of gene therapy is to get the right genes to the right
place in the body in the right amounts. Hundreds of experiments, involving more
than 2,000 patients in the United States alone, are underway to figure out this
equation for a variety of diseases, though most of the experiments remain in
preliminary stages.

   So far, researchers have been most successful in treating the rare "bubble
boy" syndrome, also called severe combined immunodeficiency or SCID, which
renders children extremely vulnerable to infection. The affliction gained
attention after media coverage of David, a 12-year-old Texas boy who died in
1984 after spending his life in a sterile tent.

   Worldwide, only a few hundred people have some form of SCID. But gene therapy
researchers consider the disease a good experimental target for their work
because the insertion of a single gene, in small amounts, appears sufficient to
cure it.

   Last April, a French team announced that gene therapy allowed four SCID
children to live normal lives two years after treatment. Technically, scientists
cannot pronounce a patient cured until they've lived a full life free of
disease. But the French researchers found their inserted gene had significantly
revitalized the childrens' immune systems, which gene therapy researchers saw as
proof enough.

   The new study, an Italian-Israeli joint venture, involved a more complex form
of the immune disorder, called ADA-SCID. The researchers employed a new twist on
the gene therapy method used by the French team, which beat them to publication
by just two months, though both teams completed their work at roughly the same
time. First, they removed bone marrow from the patients' pelvises. Bone marrow
is filled with blood stem cells that eventually proliferate to support the
immune system. These stem cells were removed from the marrow, then infected with
a harmless virus that researchers equipped with healthy copies of a crucial
immune system gene called ADA. The two children had inherited defective ADA.

   Then came an innovation: the toddlers were given a mild dose of a
chemotherapy drug that suppressed their natural bone marrow production. As a
result, when the gene therapy-treated stem cells were injected, they faced no
competition for space from the toddlers' natural marrow. They proliferated,
spreading the healing gene.

   According to the paper, a wide variety of properly functioning immune cells
resulted. The first patient is now 2 years old, living in Israel. "She's a
normal child," said Slavin. "Just like other children."

   The experiment was replicated in Italy, and the two teams collaborated on
yesterday's paper. The name of the child treated by the Italian team was not
released. The researchers said gene therapy should now automatically be
considered instead of a bone marrow transplant, the standard treatment, if
doctors cannot find a genetically matched marrow donor. They also said the
approach could be attempted on other afflictions.

   Dr. Claudio Bordignon, with the Universita Vita-Salute San Raffaele in Milan,
leader of the Italian team, said Italian authorities already have approved the
use of gene therapy for some AIDS patients. The trial is expected to start soon.

   Local gene therapy expert Dr. David A. Roth, director of hemophilia research
at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, said of the new successes, "It's
fantastic to hear reports of promising early clinical results that validate the
general strategy of using gene transfer."

   The first surgery in yesterday's report took place in Jerusalem on Sept. 6,
2000, even as Israelis and Palestinians were at the United Nations attempting to
hammer out a peace plan. Under heated dispute was East Jerusalem, claimed by
both sides.

   But Israeli doctors picked up 7-month-old infant Salsabil, daughter of an
Arab-Israeli cake maker, from her East Jerusalem house. Her last name has been
withheld for reasons of privacy. The review board at Hadassah-Hebrew Medical
Center was wary; they made Slavin sign a form requiring him to personally pay
for Salsabil's lifetime treatments if the gene therapy failed. The bill would be
a bankruptcy-causing high six figures, said Slavin. Some Israeli doctors have
said that Jewish patients come first for treatment with transplants and rare
diseases where organs and medicines are scarce.

   "That was not an issue at all," said Slavin. "If two patients come, the one
that is more urgent will be treated first, even if they were a Palestinian
bomber who came to kill you. They are humans first."

   Slavin still visits the family in East Jerusalem, dispite the violence in the
region, drawing hope from his star patient.

   "The Middle East could be a Garden of Eden if we could set aside this stupid
killing," he said.

   Raja Mishra can be reached at rmishra@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Dr. Shimon Slavin with his 2-year-old gene therapy patient,
Salsabil.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                             1254 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              June 28, 2002 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A MAIN NEWS; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 250 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
Gene Cell Therapy Reportedly Corrects 'Bubble Boy' Disease

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A single injection of genetically modified stem cells is all it took to cure
two children of a complex form of an inherited immune system disorder often
referred to as "bubble boy disease," researchers report.

   An experimental technique that altered genes in bone marrow stem cells
restored the immune systems of the children, researchers from Italy and Israel
said in a study appearing in the journal Science.

   The children were born with what experts said was the most complex form of
severe combined immunodeficiency disorder, or SCID.

   "Both children have been cured but ... will be closely followed to see how it
develops in the future," said Maria Grazia Roncarolo of the San Raffaele
Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan, Italy.

   The children, 7 months and 2 1/2 years old when the therapy began, were
released with healthy, functioning immune systems 15 to 24 months ago, Roncarolo
said.

   Their form of SCID was caused by a gene flaw that blocks production of an
enzyme called ADA, which is essential to make disease-fighting immune cells.

   Injections of bone marrow stem cells, altered to contain the missing enzyme
gene, were used.

   SCID strikes about 50 children a year. In the past, the disorder was always
fatal, with the children usually dying in infancy.

   In the 1960s, doctors began treating SCID by isolating patients in sterile
environments. A Houston boy, called "David the bubble boy," spent all 12 years
of his life in a plastic bubble filled with filtered air. He died in 1984.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                             1255 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      June 28, 2002 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. A24

LENGTH: 262 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells cure 2 with 'bubble boy disease'

BYLINE: Paul Recer Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A single injection of genetically modified stem cells is all it took to cure
two children of a complex form of an inherited immune system disorder often
referred to as the "bubble boy disease," researchers said.

   An experimental technique that altered genes in bone marrow stem cells
restored the immune systems of the children, researchers from Italy and Israel
said in a study appearing in the journal Science. The children were born with
what experts said was the most complex form of severe combined immunodeficiency
disorder, or SCID.

   "Both children have been cured but... both will be closely followed to see
how it develops in the future," said Maria Grazia Roncarolo of the San Raffaele
Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan, Italy.

   The children, who were seven months and 21/2 years old when the therapy
began, were released with healthy, functioning immune systems between 15 months
and 24 months ago, Roncarolo said in Milan.

   Their form of SCID was caused by a gene flaw that blocks production of an
enzyme called ADA, which is essential to make disease-fighting immune cells.

   The treatment consisted of injections of bone marrow stem cells that were
altered to contain the missing enzyme gene.

   French researchers announced in April that they had corrected genetic flaws
in the immune systems of five boys who had X-linked SCID, the most common form
of the immune system disorder.

   SCID strikes about 50 children a year. In the past, the disorder was fatal,
with the children usually dying in infancy of uncontrollable infections.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                             1256 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 28, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-5

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CORRECTS 'BUBBLE BOY' DISORDER IN 2

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A single injection of genetically modified stem cells is all it took to cure
two children of a complex form of an inherited immune system disorder often
referred to as the "bubble boy disease," researchers report.

    An experimental technique that altered genes in bone marrow stem cells
restored the immune systems of the children, researchers from Italy and Israel
said in a study appearing in the journal Science. The children were born with
what experts said was the most complex form of severe combined immunodeficiency
disorder, or SCID.

    "Both children have been cured but ... both will be closely followed to see
how it develops in the future," said Maria Grazia Roncarolo of the San Raffaele
Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan, Italy.

    The children, who were seven months and 2 1/2 years old when the therapy
began, were released with healthy, functioning immune systems between 15 months
and 24 months ago, Roncarolo said in Milan.

    Their form of SCID was caused by a gene flaw that blocks production of an
enzyme called ADA, which is essential to make disease-fighting immune cells.

    The treatment consisted of injections of bone marrow stem cells that were
altered to contain the missing enzyme gene.

    French researchers announced in April that they had corrected genetic flaws
in the immune systems of five boys who had X-linked SCID, the most common form
of the immune system disorder.

    Dr. W. French Anderson, a University of Southern California researcher and a
pioneer in the field, said the new research is an important advance in gene
therapy.

    "It proves our basic premise that if you can get enough gene-engineered
cells into the patient it will cure the disease," Anderson said in a telephone
interview.

    Anderson was the first to try genetic engineering to cure ADA, or adenosine
deaminase, a form of SCID. His technique changed the gene in blood cells instead
of the bone marrow. Two of Anderson's early patients have led normal lives since
the 1990 procedure, but they require periodic shots of the ADA enzyme.

    He said the technique used by the Italian and Israeli researchers appears to
be a cure that will require no more shots.

    SCID strikes only about 50 children a year. In the past, the disorder was
always fatal, with the children usually dying in infancy of uncontrollable
infections.

    Starting in the 1960s, doctors treated SCID patients by isolating them in
sterile environments. One of the most famous such patients was a Houston boy who
spent all 12 years of his life in a plastic bubble filled with filtered air.
Known as "David the bubble boy," the youngster died in 1984 when, at his
insistence, doctors tried a bone marrow transplant.

    Since then, researchers have tried to cure some forms of SCID with gene
therapy, but the new study is the first reported complete success for ADA-SCID,
Anderson said.

    Shimon Slavin of the Hadassah University Medical Center in Jerusalem and a
co-author of the new study said one of the children -- the fourth child born to
an East Jerusalem Arab couple -- had a quick recovery from the therapy.

    "It was one small syringe of modified cells," Slavin said. "No antibiotics,
no blood transfusion, no fever."

    The second child in the study was the daughter of a Colombian family. She
had been treated unsuccessfully in Miami and the family then sought gene therapy
at San Raffaele.

    "The girl can now have a normal life and has returned home," said Alessandro
Aiuti of San Raffaele, first author of the study.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2002


                             1257 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  June 28, 2002 Friday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS ; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 314 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CURES "BUBBLE BOY DISEASE," RESEARCHERS SAY

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A single injection of genetically modified stem cells is all it took to cure
two children of a complex form of an inherited immune system disorder often
referred to as the "bubble boy disease," researchers report.

   An experimental technique that altered genes in bone marrow stem cells
restored the immune systems of the children, researchers from Italy and Israel
said in a study published today in the journal Science. The children were born
with what experts said was the most complex form of severe combined
immunodeficiency disorder, or SCID.

   "Both children have been cured but ... both will be closely followed to see
how it develops," said Maria Grazia Roncarolo of the San Raffaele Telethon
Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan, Italy.

   The children, who were 7 months and 2 1/2 years old when the therapy began,
were released with healthy, functioning immune systems 15 months to 24 months
ago.

   Their form of the disorder was caused by a gene flaw that blocks production
of an enzyme called ADA, which is essential to make disease-fighting immune
cells.

   The treatment consisted of injections of bone marrow stem cells that were
altered to contain the missing enzyme gene.

   French researchers announced in April that they had corrected genetic flaws
in the immune systems of five boys who had X-linked SCID, the most common form
of the disorder.

   SCID strikes about 50 children a year. In the past, the disorder was always
fatal, with the children usually dying in infancy of uncontrollable infections.

   Starting in the 1960s, doctors treated SCID patients by isolating them in
sterile environments.

   One of the most famous such patients was a Houston boy who spent all 12 years
of his life in a plastic bubble filled with filtered air. Known as "David the
bubble boy," the youngster died in 1984 when, at his insistence, doctors tried a
bone marrow transplant.

NOTES:
HEALTH & SCIENCE

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                             1258 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              June 28, 2002 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: New Genes Cure Rare Disorder in 2 Children;
Procedure Boosts Hope for Therapy

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Two children born with a life-threatening immune system disorder appear to
have been cured after being given new genes, marking the second pair of
successes in as many years for the long-beleaguered field of gene therapy.

    Moreover, some are promoting the treatment as a symbolic monument to Middle
East peace. One of the cured babies was born to a family of Muslims living in an
Arab neighborhood of Jerusalem, and was treated by a Jewish Israeli doctor.

    The apparent cures will require years of follow-up to ensure they are
lasting. Moreover, the disease that was treated -- a form of "severe combined
immunodeficiency disorder," or SCID -- is regarded by experts as more amenable
to genetic correction than most other ailments.

    Nonetheless, the positive results offer vindication for an experimental
approach that was plagued with failure for more than a decade.

    "I'm relieved," said W. French Anderson, the University of Southern
California scientist who led the first U.S. gene therapy trial in 1990, but was
not involved in the latest work. "We've known it ought to work, and fortunately
it did. This tells us that if you can get a high enough percentage of cells
fixed, gene therapy will cure you."

    The children were treated by a team of Italian and Israeli researchers about
15 months ago when the Jerusalem baby was seven months old and the other child,
from Colombia, was 2 1/2. Both were born with a form of SCID caused by a
defective version of the ADA gene, which is crucial to the proper functioning of
immune system cells.

    Their disease left them constantly at risk of death from otherwise benign
infections. It can be treated by transplanting bone marrow from a healthy
relative or with regular injections of a drug that costs thousands of dollars
per year.

    Lacking access to either of those, the parents enrolled their children in an
experiment in which scientists tried to repopulate the childrens' immune systems
with cells that had been genetically engineered to contain normal ADA genes.

    Tests indicate that those cells have taken up permanent residence in the
children's bone marrow, where they are doing the work the children's own cells
could not do. After years of frequent illness, both patients are healthy, the
researchers report in today's issue of the journal Science.

    "Their problem has been clinically solved," said Claudio Bordignon, who led
the Italian team at the San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy in
Milan. "They are living normal lives."

    The results resemble those reported two years ago by researchers in France,
who used a similar approach to treat two children with SCID-X1. That's the form
of SCID that affected David the "Bubble Boy," who died in 1984 after living
virtually all of his 12 years in a sterile tent in a Texas hospital.

    Alain Fischer, who led that French effort, said yesterday that those two
children are still in good health, with no evidence that their new genes are in
any way failing. Seven of 8 other patients with the same disease whom he has
treated since have similarly benefited, he said, adding credence to the idea
that the gene approach is safe and effective for this class of disease.

    The children in the newest experiments -- whose full identities were not
released -- had the same form of SCID that afflicted the two American girls that
Anderson and his colleagues treated in their landmark 1990 effort. Neither girl
was cured, nor was any of the thousands of patients treated with gene therapy
for a wide variety of diseases in the ensuing decade.

    The field hit its nadir in the fall of 1999 when an 18-year-old Arizona
patient died in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment. The Food
and Drug Administration later said it violated many federal safety rules.

    As in previous efforts, the new work involved the removal of immune system
cells from the patients, the addition of new genes to those cells with the help
of gene-injecting viruses and the infusion of those "fixed" cells back into the
patients. Bordignon said the latest effort succeeded because drugs were used to
kill much of the children's bone marrow before the repaired cells were
reinfused, making more "space" in the normally crowded bone marrow for the
repaired cells to settle.

    Also helpful, Bordignon said, were recent improvements in the ability to get
new genes into patients' stem cells -- a kind of cell that, when given back to
patients, is more likely to take root in the bone marrow and produce genetically
competent daughter cells throughout the patient's lifetime.

    Treatment of the Arab child -- identified only by her first name, Salsabil
-- was led by Shimon Slavin of Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center in
Jerusalem, in collaboration with Bordignon's team in Italy.

    Both Bordignon and Anderson said they believed it was ethically justifiable
to offer the children the experimental therapy without offering the alternative
of a long-term supply of the established lifesaving drug, because previous
studies had so strongly suggested that the gene treatment could be curative in
the absence of the drug.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                             1259 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2002 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    June 26, 2002 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. E13

LENGTH: 1458 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL WATCH PROTEINS NEW OUTPOST ON MEDICAL FRONTIER

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Several programs in the Northwest look more closely at when and how
the body manufactures the molecules

   Just two years after scientists sketched out the human genetic code -- and
slipped the word "genome" into popular speech -- biologists are taking on a
bigger, harder, more promising puzzle.

   This puzzle involves what genes make: proteins.

   Cells use the information stored in genes to constantly churn out long,
folded molecules of protein, which actually perform the bulk of the body's work.
If the genome is a recipe book, proteins are the unending feast streaming from a
cell's kitchen.

   Protein scientists want to catalog these creations, discover what the
proteins look like and learn how they work together to make changes in the body.
The science is wide-ranging, probing basic questions (Which proteins are
involved in building muscle?) and urgent medical problems (Can we change the
shape of a cystic fibrosis protein to stop the disease?).

   "It will cover the whole of biology," said Peter Spencer, a senior scientist
at Oregon Health & Science University. "This will truly be of great benefit to
human health in the future."

   Of course, as a hot science poised to hit headlines and drugstores, protein
study has its own hard-to-handle name: proteomics.

   "Proteomics is an invented word, and it parallels the genome and genomics,"
said Dr. Karin Rodland, a researcher at eastern Washington's Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, which wants to be a leading U.S. proteomics center. "The
proteome is all the proteins that are made in a certain cell type under a
certain set of conditions."

   Although a person's DNA changes slightly with mutations, for the most part
every cell in the body has the same genetic code as every other cell. But a
person's proteome is different from one minute to the next. Rodland's analogy is
a huge factory that can make anything from lawn mowers to jet planes.

   "The genome is the blueprint. It tells you what is possible," she said. "The
proteome tells you what is actually being built and in this factory at this
time."

   Adapting to changing temperature, weather or pollution; drinking alcohol;
eating food; getting sick; taking drugs; moving; living -- all affect a cell's
environment and the proteins it makes. Add together the number of cells in a
body, and over time the catalog of proteins the human body can make grows huge
-- hundreds of thousands by most scientists' estimates.

   Complexity is a big reason proteomics is only now developing. Biologists have
understood proteins' crucial role for decades. But they are so hard to study, in
all their shapes and forms, that it takes advanced tools and supercomputers to
fully make sense of the science.

   Using traditional techniques, a biologist might spend 20 years studying how
three genes and their proteins interact to create a disease, Spencer said. Now
researchers can run one high-powered, high-tech experiment and discover 25 more
genes that interact with these three.

   Instead of studying proteins one at a time, biologists can use tools such as
gene chips and mass spectrometers to "look at everything at once," Rodland said.

   That means experiments can be run in a hundredth of the time it used to take,
while producing 100 times the data, Spencer said.

   It also means biologists have to be trained much more in computer science and
statistics than before. In fact, OHSU and other schools are increasingly
training people in "bioinformatics," the study of how to collect, categorize and
make sense of masses of data, said Dr. Bill Hersh, head of OHSU's Division of
Medical Informatics.

   This year, the program had more than 50 applicants, a record, and accepted
25. The program typically graduates 10 to 12 students a year.

   The ability to create floods of data has remade basic ideas of how to do
biology, Hersh said. Researchers now head to the lab to collect and winnow data
to help them form a hypothesis, instead of just to test one.

   "It's not really a philosophy change but the ability to open a new window,"
Spencer said. "And see the whole forest, instead of just a few trees."

   While biologists and medical researchers nationwide are increasingly using
proteomic tools, several Oregon and Washington sites hope to make the Northwest
a key national player in the science. OHSU, Pacific Northwest National Lab and
Seattle's Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center are sharing equipment, staff
and knowledge to tackle a wide array of biological problems. Here are three
snapshots of work under way:

   Toxics studies at OHSU Protein profiling will be a key tool for scientists at
a federally financed OHSU center that will research how workplace and
environmental toxics affect the brain and nervous system. The Portland
university and Seattle's Hutchinson center are among five U.S. sites picked in
November to create a National Institutes of Health research consortium for
toxicogenomics -- the study of how genes and the environment interact in healthy
people and to create disease.

   The OHSU group will work with other sites to lay the foundation of the new
science, said Spencer, director of the Center for Research on Occupational and
Environmental Toxicology, which works with OHSU's pediatrics department in the
toxicogenomics center.

   To start with, the sites will try to create standards on how to do
experiments, looking at proteins and genes, to make sure they get the same
results. They will move on to such questions as why a given toxic substance may
hurt DNA all over the body but only damage the brain and not other organs.

   At the same time, OHSU researchers will tackle several projects of their own.
Some will study how certain organic solvents cause nerve disease, examining what
proteins they cause the body to make and how those affect people.

   The center will also study why the cancer drug taxol sometimes damages nerves
as a side effect; the impact of insecticide and fungicide on brain development;
and a rare disease that affects small populations in Guam, Japan and New Guinea,
Spencer said. Better cancer detection At Pacific Northwest National Lab in
Richland, Wash., Rodland is trying to figure out what happens when a normal
ovarian cell turns cancerous. She's also trying to find new proteins that will
help doctors detect ovarian cancer earlier. Today, she said, most women are
diagnosed in the disease's late stage, "where 95 percent of the women will be
dead in three years, no matter what you do."

   Rodland is studying what proteins healthy ovarian cells produce, then turning
the cells cancerous and watching how that production changes. There are "dozens
to hundreds" of different proteins made in healthy ovarian cells versus
cancerous ones, she said. Rodland hopes to find a unique protein made at the
earliest stages of cancer, the presence of which could tip doctors off to the
growth.

   Rodland used to work at OHSU but moved to the Richland lab because it has
supercomputers, high-tech protein tools and many data specialists who can help
her sift through protein data, she said. She has kept ties to OHSU and is
working on proteomics projects with several doctors there.

   She is helping Jay Nelson, director of OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy
Institute, study the changes heart cells go through when infected by a virus
called cytomegalovirus and whether that contributes to blockages of the
arteries. She also is working with Dr. Brian Druker of OHSU to look for protein
changes that might show whether patients are developing resistance to Gleevec,
the cancer-fighting drug Druker helped develop. Trying to beat radiation Another
Richland protein scientist, Mary Lipton, is helping create a speedier way to
identify proteins.

   Now, biologists often identify a cell's proteins by putting a mixture of them
into a plate of gel. They apply an electrical current that causes the molecules
to separate according to their different weights and electric charges. Then the
researchers cut each spot out of the gel and identify it.

   Lipton has developed a way to run proteins through two different kinds of
tools called mass spectrometers, speeding the process.

   She is proving her method on bugs, including two bacteria with unusual
qualities. One can withstand 10,000 times the radiation that a person can. The
other bacteria can create a chemical process that turns dissolved uranium into
insoluble uranium oxide but aren't as hardy in radioactive environments.

   Lipton hopes to discover which genes and proteins make the first bacteria so
radiation-resistant. If the second bacteria could be spurred to act similarly,
they could be used to clean up highly radioactive places. You can reach Andy
Dworkin at 503-221-8239 or by e-mail at andydworkin@news.oregonian.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2002


                             1260 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 26, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 971 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   PriceSmart ups sales, posts profit

   PriceSmart Inc. yesterday reported a third-quarter net income of $1.3
million, or 14 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $431,000, or 7 cents a
share, a year earlier.  The San Diego-based company said revenues jumped 36
percent to $162.7 million.

   PriceSmart, which operates 26 membership warehouse stores in Central America,
the Caribbean and Asia, opened two new stores in Asia and one each in Guam and
in the Philippines during the last year.

   The company is "on track to meet our revenue goal of $650 million for this
fiscal year," said Gil Partida, PriceSmart's president and chief executive
officer.

   Meanwhile, PriceSmart, which currently owns 60 percent of the Aruba
PriceSmart business in Aruba, said it has entered into an agreement to increase
its ownership to 90 percent.  It has also entered into an agreement to expand
ownership in the Barbados PriceSmart business from 51 percent to 100 percent.

   Shares of PriceSmart closed yesterday at $40.30, up 12 cents.

   L.A. utility denies power manipulation

   The Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, the nation's largest municipal
utility, yesterday denied allegations it had moved power across state lines to
avoid a cap on power prices in California.  Documents released over the weekend
by state Sen. Joseph Dunn included e-mail from an energy trader with PG&E Corp.
unit PGT which suggested such action in a trade with the municipal utility.

   Dunn, a Democrat, is chairman of a legislative panel probing alleged
manipulation of power prices by electricity generators and marketers during
California's power crisis. Reuters

   Biotech enters research pact

   FeRx has entered into a research collaboration with the National Cancer
Center Research Institute of Japan to develop ways to improve delivery of gene
therapies using FeRx's magnetic field technology.  The privately held San Diego
biotechnology company did not disclose financial terms of the agreement.

   Women First buys product rights

   Women First HealthCare Inc. announced it has paid $38.5 million for the
worldwide rights to Vaniqa, a cream used to slow the growth of unwanted facial
hair in women.  The San Diego drug marketer purchased the rights from a joint
venture formed by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Gillette.  Women First also purchased
the right to pursue an over-the-counter version of the drug and to develop
enhanced versions of it.

   Vaniqa is expected to generate revenue of $13 million to $15 million in 2003,
the company said.  Vaniqa was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in
July 2000 and is the only prescription drug available for the condition, the
company said.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Andersen seeks to toss out verdict

   Lawyers for Arthur Andersen LLP yesterday asked U.S. District Judge Melinda
Harmon in Houston to throw out the firm's felony conviction for shredding and
doctoring Enron Corp.-related documents last year.  The 80-page filing called
the guilty verdict "insupportable" and said the Chicago-based firm was convicted
of obstruction of justice on the basis of "conduct that was not criminal."
Associated Press

   Vivendi board backs chairman

   The board of Vivendi Universal, in torment after its share price tumbled to a
13-year low, expressed its support for Chairman Jean-Marie Messier yesterday
amid new speculation that his days at the helm of the media and utility giant
may be numbered.  The board met in Paris just hours after Bernard Arnault, the
chief of luxury goods company LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton and a top Messier
ally, quit Vivendi's board -- raising questions about the future of the
boyish-looking chairman. Associated Press

   FedEx reports robust profits

   FedEx Corp. reported fourth-quarter profits that more than doubled from a
year ago, but the cargo company projected earnings for the next quarter that
will fall short of Wall Street's expectations.  The package delivery company
reported net earnings of $236 million, or 78 cents per share for the quarter
that ended May 31, vs. earnings a year ago of $113 million, or 38 cents per
share.  Analysts had expected 77 cents for the fourth quarter. Associated Press

   Tax benefit helps Rite Aid earnings

   Drugstore chain Rite Aid Corp., which has been struggling in the aftermath of
accounting irregularities that led to the indictment of four former or current
executives, swung to a slight first-quarter profit with the help of a huge tax
benefit.  The nation's third largest drugstore chain said it earned $2.6 million
in the three months ended June 1. That amounted to a loss of 1 cent a share
after paying preferred stock dividends not included in net income.

   Rite Aid lost $211.1 million, or 56 cents per share, in the same period last
year.  The company had a one-time income tax benefit of $44 million in the first
quarter that helped give it a profit. Associated Press

   Microsoft sets Tablet PC launch

   Microsoft Corp. said yesterday it will launch its pen-based personal
computing platform Tablet PC on Nov. 7 and said its Pocket PC operating system
for mobile telephones would debut in the United States this summer.  Microsoft
has been hawking its vision of Tablet PCs at industry events for the past two
years.  Tablet PCs are fully equipped personal computers that allow users to
take notes on touchscreens instead of keyboards. Reuters

   DuPont increases profit estimate

   DuPont yesterday increased its estimate for second-quarter earnings, citing
higher sales across most of its businesses, saying it expects to earn between 64
and 67 cents per share for the quarter ending this month, up from its previous
estimate of 55 cents per share.

   On the New York Stock Exchange, DuPont shares gained 13 cents to close at
$43.24. Associated Press


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                             1261 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 26, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 950 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA PriceSmart ups sales, posts profit PriceSmart Inc.
yesterday reported a third-quarter net income of $1.3 million, or 14 cents a
share, compared with a net loss of $431,000, or 7 cents a share, a year earlier.

   The San Diego-based company said revenues jumped 36 percent to $162.7
million. PriceSmart, which operates 26 membership warehouse stores in Central
America, the Caribbean and Asia, opened two new stores in Asia and one each in
Guam and in the Philippines during the last year. The company is "on track to
meet our revenue goal of $650 million for this fiscal year," said Gil Partida,
PriceSmart's president and chief executive officer. Meanwhile, PriceSmart, which
currently owns 60 percent of the Aruba PriceSmart business in Aruba, said it has
entered into an agreement to increase its ownership to 90 percent.

   It has also entered into an agreement to expand ownership in the Barbados
PriceSmart business from 51 percent to 100 percent. Shares of PriceSmart closed
yesterday at $40.30, up 12 cents. L.A. utility denies power manipulation The Los
Angeles Department of Water and Power, the nation's largest municipal utility,
yesterday denied allegations it had moved power across state lines to avoid a
cap on power prices in California.

   Documents released over the weekend by state Sen. Joseph Dunn included e-mail
from an energy trader with PG&E Corp. unit PGT which suggested such action in a
trade with the municipal utility. Dunn, a Democrat, is chairman of a legislative
panel probing alleged manipulation of power prices by electricity generators and
marketers during California's power crisis. Reuters Biotech enters research pact
FeRx has entered into a research collaboration with the National Cancer Center
Research Institute of Japan to develop ways to improve delivery of gene
therapies using FeRx's magnetic field technology.

   The privately held San Diego biotechnology company did not disclose financial
terms of the agreement. Women First buys product rights Women First HealthCare
Inc. announced it has paid $38.5 million for the worldwide rights to Vaniqa, a
cream used to slow the growth of unwanted facial hair in women.

   The San Diego drug marketer purchased the rights from a joint venture formed
by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Gillette.

   Women First also purchased the right to pursue an over-the-counter version of
the drug and to develop enhanced versions of it. Vaniqa is expected to generate
revenue of $13 million to $15 million in 2003, the company said.

   Vaniqa was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in July 2000 and is
the only prescription drug available for the condition, the company said. WORLD
AND NATION Andersen seeks to toss out verdict Lawyers for Arthur Andersen LLP
yesterday asked U.S. District Judge Melinda Harmon in Houston to throw out the
firm's felony conviction for shredding and doctoring Enron Corp.-related
documents last year.

   The 80-page filing called the guilty verdict "insupportable" and said the
Chicago-based firm was convicted of obstruction of justice on the basis of
"conduct that was not criminal." Associated Press Vivendi board backs chairman
The board of Vivendi Universal, in torment after its share price tumbled to a
13-year low, expressed its support for Chairman Jean-Marie Messier yesterday
amid new speculation that his days at the helm of the media and utility giant
may be numbered.

   The board met in Paris just hours after Bernard Arnault, the chief of luxury
goods company LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton and a top Messier ally, quit
Vivendi's board -- raising questions about the future of the boyish-looking
chairman. Associated Press FedEx reports robust profits FedEx Corp. reported
fourth-quarter profits that more than doubled from a year ago, but the cargo
company projected earnings for the next quarter that will fall short of Wall
Street's expectations.

   The package delivery company reported net earnings of $236 million, or 78
cents per share for the quarter that ended May 31, vs. earnings a year ago of
$113 million, or 38 cents per share.

   Analysts had expected 77 cents for the fourth quarter. Associated Press Tax
benefit helps Rite Aid earnings Drugstore chain Rite Aid Corp., which has been
struggling in the aftermath of accounting irregularities that led to the
indictment of four former or current executives, swung to a slight first-quarter
profit with the help of a huge tax benefit.

   The nation's third largest drugstore chain said it earned $2.6 million in the
three months ended June 1. That amounted to a loss of 1 cent a share after
paying preferred stock dividends not included in net income. Rite Aid lost
$211.1 million, or 56 cents per share, in the same period last year.

   The company had a one-time income tax benefit of $44 million in the first
quarter that helped give it a profit. Associated Press Microsoft sets Tablet PC
launch Microsoft Corp. said yesterday it will launch its pen-based personal
computing platform Tablet PC on Nov. 7 and said its Pocket PC operating system
for mobile telephones would debut in the United States this summer. Microsoft
has been hawking its vision of Tablet PCs at industry events for the past two
years.

   Tablet PCs are fully equipped personal computers that allow users to take
notes on touchscreens instead of keyboards. Reuters DuPont increases profit
estimate DuPont yesterday increased its estimate for second-quarter earnings,
citing higher sales across most of its businesses, saying it expects to earn
between 64 and 67 cents per share for the quarter ending this month, up from its
previous estimate of 55 cents per share. On the New York Stock Exchange, DuPont
shares gained 13 cents to close at $43.24. Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1262 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             June 25, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: National drug firm set for La. lab;
Covington company has Shreveport plans

BYLINE: By Ed Anderson; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- A national drug development and marketing company based in
Covington will be the anchor tenant of a state-financed lab complex in
Shreveport designed to attract bioscience and pharmaceutical start-ups,
officials announced Monday.

   Pan American Laboratories will start a "sister company," Red River Pharma, at
the Intertech Science Park near the Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center in Shreveport, state Economic Development Secretary Don Hutchinson said.

   Red River Pharma will commit $25 million to the science park and will be its
major tenant, he said. When fully operational, the company is expected to create
about 180 jobs with an average salary of about $50,000.

   Pan American Laboratories markets its own products, including prescription
cough and cold medicines, said Samuel Camp, the company's chairman and chief
executive officer.

   The creation of bioscience incubator programs in the state was one of Gov.
Foster's chief goals in the recent special economic development and fiscal
legislative sessions. Construction will start this fall and is expected to be
finished by October or November 2003, Hutchinson said.

   Steve Moye, director of the life sciences development arm of the state
economic development agency, said a similar program in New Orleans should begin
operating in the fall of 2003. That project will be in the Wirth Building on
Canal Street, which will undergo renovations later this year.

   Major tenants of the New Orleans incubator and another in Baton Rouge should
be announced by early fall, officials said.

   The New Orleans facility will also house the Gene Therapy Research
Consortium, which will do research and development on adult stem cells.

   Camp said his company now spends about $13 million a year outside of the
state for pharmaceutical product "formulation and manufacturing"; that can be
done at the Shreveport facility once it is in full operation. He said other
companies outside of Louisiana also could use the Shreveport lab.

   As the first occupant of the Shreveport incubator, Red River Pharma will
occupy about 25,000 square feet of space and will include a pharmaceutical
product development and quality-control labs, as well as a pilot-scale
manufacturing facility.

   The second stage of the project calls for an expansion, including a
30,000-square-foot pharmaceutical-manufacturing plant.

   Red River Pharma will provide $5 million for additional equipment, $5 million
to cover 18 months of working capital, and $15 million to construct and outfit
the expanded manufacturing facility, which should be operating by fall 2004,
said Barry LeBlanc, president and chief operating officer of Pan American Labs.

   The company also is eligible for tax credits and exemptions for its
investments, according to laws adopted in the recent sessions, Hutchinson said.

   . . . . . . .

Ed Anderson may be reached at eanderson@timespicayune.com or (225) 342-7315.

GRAPHIC: Don Hutchinson Says Red River Pharma will be eligible for tax credits
and exemptions

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2002


                             1263 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       June 23, 2002 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 1974 words

HEADLINE: Alzheimer's: Patient ;
BRAIN STORM;
A WAVE OF BREAKTHROUGHS;
Alzheimer's: Patient, family living life in reverse;
Retrogenesis theory being applied to caregiving

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Like a family film, Lester Johnson's life is being rewound, replayed and
erased.

   As millions of his brain cells die, he no longer can find his mailbox or
understand Christmas or remember how his first son died.

   But ask Lester about his other son, Gary, now his playtime companion, and he
perks up like a little boy.

   "He's my bud," Lester says.

   The fact that 79-year-old Lester now looks up to his 50-year-old son is a
touching example of how Alzheimer's disease reverses mental processes and
relationships. It's part of a process that some call retrogenesis -- a mental
walk backward through life to a childlike state.

   First coined three years ago, retrogenesis means that a person with
Alzheimer's disease loses life skills and memories in roughly the reverse order
that they were acquired from infancy.

   Examples can be striking. Patients who haven't smoked for decades take up the
habit. People who learned English as a second language revert to speaking in
their native tongue. With the right musical cue, unresponsive patients may begin
singing a song they learned as children.

   Others may attempt to go "home" to a house they haven't lived in since
childhood, or they'll talk about just landing a job they had as a youth.

   When a nurse asked Lester what he did for a living, he said he was a house
painter. And he was. For a brief time in 1947.

   He forgot about the three decades he worked as a mail carrier in the Waukesha
area.

   And he continues to descend.

   "I would describe him as a 10-year-old, a happy 10-year-old," said Rosemary
Johnson, his wife of 54 years.

   Brain development essentially is a mirror image of the stages of neurological
decline in Alzheimer's disease, said Barry Reisberg, the psychiatrist who
developed the retrogenesis theory.

   Alzheimer's disease has seven major stages that correspond closely to the
stages of infant and child development.

   For instance, a person in stage 6 of Alzheimer's displays behavior similar to
a child going through the "terrible twos." A person in stage 7 is like an infant
and progressively loses the ability to talk, walk, babble, sit up, smile and
hold up his head.

   The areas of the brain that are damaged first by Alzheimer's are the last
ones to fully develop as a person matures. As a result, the highest and most
complex mental functions, including recent memories as well as complex decision
making, are first to go.

   Recently, neuroscientists have come up with a biomolecular explanation for
retrogenesis.

   They've found that early on, the cellular assault caused by Alzheimer's
strikes neurons in brain regions responsible for higher functions, such as the
hippocampus, which is crucial to memory. Later, regions involved in simpler
functions, such as the frontal cortex, which controls movement and basic speech,
are hit. Those are the areas formed early in life.

   "The theory makes sense, biologically," said Piero Antuono, a professor of
neurology and an Alzheimer's specialist at the Medical College of Wisconsin.

   Advanced regions of the brain that allow for language and complex thinking
were the last to evolve in humans, he said. That evolution took place when the
human life span was much shorter.

   "Our brains may not be engineered to resist the test of time," Antuono said.

   Reisberg and others say that retrogenesis is more than just a newfangled
academic term to explain an age-old human condition.

   If caregivers understand that Alzheimer's patients are like regressing
children and provide the appropriate care depending on the stage, the descent
will be less painful, said Reisberg, a professor of psychiatry and clinical
director of the Silberstein Aging & Dementia Research Center at New York
University.

   "You have to talk to an infant and play with an infant and give it love," he
said.

   Reisberg first presented the retrogenesis concept in 1999 at a meeting of the
International Psychogeriatric Association. He will present more research on
retrogenesis in July at the eighth annual International Conference on
Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders in Stockholm.

   He's already making converts.

   Some professionals now are applying the retrogenesis concept to their
caregiving, said Lilian Thorpe, an associate professor of psychiatry at the
University of Saskatchewan and vice president of the Canadian Academy of
Geriatric Psychiatry.

   "Just as a 6-month-old needs its mother around, a person with Alzheimer's at
the 6-month level needs someone around rather than just larger doses of drugs
that knock them flat," she said.

   In many ways, the newfound relationship between Lester and Gary is just such
an example.

   Gary's presence has helped his father as he declines, while making it easier
on his mother.

   Their relationship is not yet a common circumstance for families facing
Alzheimer's.

   Gary suffered his own neurological damage 25 years ago in a motorcycle crash
that left him nearly blind. He lives at home with his parents. And now he is his
father's regular companion.

   Because Lester's eyes and reflexes are fine, he still drives, but it is
something he could never do alone. People with Alzheimer's can wander and get
lost. So Gary acts as his vision-impaired navigator, making sure they get to
their destination and back home.

   "He knows everything about turning here and turning there," Lester says. "He
knows how to get there."

   Outings are numerous

   They go bowling or to the health club to walk laps. They play billiards in
their basement.

   "Gary is his right arm," Rosemary said.

   Still, Lester's illness has taken its toll on the Johnsons.

   In other families, Alzheimer's can be even more devastating.

   About 4 million people in the United States have Alzheimer's. Unless better
preventive measures or a cure is developed, by mid-century, 14 million Americans
are expected to have it.

   The biggest obstacle to finding a cure is understanding what causes the
disease. It's still largely a mystery.

   At a molecular level, the disease is similar to another deadly, but rare,
brain disorder called Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, which is closely related to
chronic wasting disease in deer and mad cow disease. When mad cow disease
infects people, it's called variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

   Misfolded proteins are found in several neurological disorders, including
Alzheimer's and Creutzfeldt-Jakob, which researchers describe as a fast-acting
Alzheimer's disease.

   In Creutzfeldt-Jakob, a misshaped protein known as a prion can infect normal
proteins in the brain and cause them to adapt their dysfunctional shape. As
these clumps of misshaped protein form, brain cells die.

   In Alzheimer's, so-called tangles of tau protein and plaques of the protein
amyloid-beta build up in the brain. A healthy brain is able to clear the
plaques.

   "We all have plaques and tangles in our brains, but not enough to cause
dementia," said Antuono, who practices at the Froedtert & Medical College
Neurology Clinics.

   It is not known whether the tangles and plaques kill off the brain cells or
whether some other mechanism causes the cell death.

   However, recent animal research published in the journal Nature suggests that
amyloid-beta sticks to and disrupts synapses, the crucial communication
junctions between brain cells.

   "That may be why people lose their memory," said Dominic Walsh, a neurologist
at Harvard Medical School and co-author of the article in Nature.

   Genetics plays a role in determining who gets Alzheimer's. One theory is that
those who are genetically vulnerable to the disease are unable to clear the
amyloid-beta clumps, whereas those who can, don't get the disease.

   It also has become evident that the damage caused by the cell disease may
begin many years before symptoms show up.

   In brain imaging studies, Antuono and other Medical College researchers have
seen degeneration in the hippocampus of people with a condition known as mild
cognitive impairment.

   "It's basically a pre-Alzheimer's state," he said.

   Researchers are hoping to develop a test that can predict who will get the
disease 10 to 20 years before major symptoms begin.

   Those people then could begin preventive strategies, such as taking the B
vitamin folic acid, which helps control the level of the amino acid
homocysteine. Higher levels of homocysteine are linked to an increased risk for
cardiovascular disease.

   Other preventive measures include controlling cholesterol with a statin drug;
exercising; taking aspirin and anti-inflammatory pain relievers such as
naproxen; and staying mentally active.

   Hormone therapy also may help reduce the risk of getting the disease.

   At the moment, however, even the best treatments are not effective.
Generally, they treat symptoms -- not the processes that cause the disease --
and delay the disease's progression by only a matter of months.

   In March, a clinical trial of an Alzheimer's vaccine was halted when 15 of
360 vaccinated patients developed brain inflammation, a serious side effect. New
compounds are being tested and eventually another vaccine trial may be
attempted.

   Meanwhile, researchers at the University of California at San Diego have
begun a small gene therapy trial on Alzheimer's patients. The experiment
involves inserting genes that control the production of nerve growth factor in
the brain. In monkey experiments, the approach produced substantial improvements
in restoring atrophied brain cells.

   An initial gene therapy trial on eight patients should be completed in
September, said Mark Tuszynski, an associate professor of neurosciences at UCSD.

   Lester's family also hopes that a new drug he is taking as part of a clinical
trial will improve or stabilize his condition.

   The drug, memantine, limits the action of the neurotransmitter glutamate,
which is crucial to learning and memory. But too much glutamate, a consequence
of amyloid-beta accumulation, can kill brain cells. Memantine essentially blocks
the effects of excess glutamate production.

   Lester had to stop taking another Alzheimer's medication to enter the trial,
in which half the patients get a placebo. Neither the patients nor their doctors
know who is getting a placebo and who is getting the experimental drug.

   Rosemary said she hopes memantine works better than the drug he was on and
possibly even reverses some symptoms. As part of the trial, those in the placebo
group will be allowed to start taking the drug after six months.

   Meanwhile, Rosemary and Gary try to keep Lester occupied.

   "He does a lot around here," Rosemary said. "He does all the ironing. He does
the vacuuming."

   Suddenly, Lester, who has been gazing out the window, chimes in.

   "I have to have something to do," he says.

   Rosemary knows it's not likely to be that way for much longer.

   "I try not to think about the later stage because it's not going to be
pleasant," she says.

   Lester doesn't seem to notice her comment.

   COMPARISON

   LIFE SKILLS

   Retrogenesis is a concerpt that describes the loss of life skills that occurs
with Alzheimer's isease. The stages of decline are a reversal of the stages of
child development.

   CHILD DEVELOPMENT ACQUIRED ABILITIES ALZHEIMER'S STAGE APPROXIMATE AGE IN
CHILD DEVELOPMENT LOST ABILITIES CONTRACTS IN ALZHEIMER'S ALZHEIMER'S

   12 or older Hold a job 3 Incipient 8 - 12 Handle simple finances 4 Mild 5 - 7
Select proper clothing 5 Moderate 5 Put on clothes unaided 6 Moderately severe 4
Shower unaided 4 Toilet unaided 3 - 4 1/2 Control urine 2 - 3 Control bowels 15
months Speak 5 - 6 words 1 year Speak 1 world 1 year Walk 6 - 10 months Sit up 2
- 4 months Smile 1 - 3 months Hold up head BIRTH DEATH (ARROW UPWARDS) (ARROW
DOWNWARDS

   Source: Barry Reisberg, Silberstein Aging & Dementia Research Center

   RIKA KANAOKA / Journal Sentinel

   (FOR GRAPHIC SEE MICROFILM OR BOUND FILE)


LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2002


                             1264 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  June 23, 2002 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: CELL ACTIVITY IS MONITORED IN SEARCH OF CANCER'S SILVER BULLET

BYLINE: Judith VandeWater Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   * Scientists at the newly-chartered molecular imaging center at Washington
University School of Medicine bring together an imaging brain trust to fight
cancer.

   Research physicians and scientists at the newly chartered molecular imaging
center at Washington University's School of Medicine are working to decipher
communications between healthy and abnormal cells. As they do, the plot and
progress of cancer and other diseases should start to become clearer.

   Dr. David R. Piwnica-Worms, a professor of radiology, molecular biology and
pharmacology, recently won a $9.4 million, five-year grant from the National
Cancer Institute to establish the center for basic science and clinical
research.

   It is one of five NCI designated centers in the country. Four others will be
funded in the next four years.

   The Washington University center has a core staff of 16. Like the other
centers, it brings together a brain trust of imaging scientists, experts in
radiopharmaceutical chemistry, physicists, geneticists, molecular and cellular
biologist, oncologists and immunologists.

   The centers' charge: Combine advances in cancer biology, pharmacology and
genetics to develop non-invasive imaging techniques that accurately diagnose and
stage the disease -- and point oncologists to the most appropriate treatments.

   As scientists learn to read the genes and chart the behavior of a malignant
mass at the cellular level, they will become better predictors of which drug or
combination will be most effective in curing or containing the disease.
Ultimately, this may lead to silver-bullet chemotherapy drugs, custom-crafted
for an individual patient and even a particular tumor, said Piwnica-Worms.

   "We are very, very early in this process," he said. "We are at the beginning
of understanding that every cancer is different at a molecular-genetic level. We
are on the cusp of a change in medical therapy in general and cancer therapy
specifically.

   "We are hoping to tailor therapy to patients based on their genetic signature
so we won't be treating everybody the same in the future."

   Guiding treatments

   There is limited experimental clinical application of individualized
therapies now. But Piwnica-Worms believes medicine is 20 years away from
individualized therapy for each cancer patient.

   The necessary components -- the breakthroughs in pharmaceuticals, the
clinical application of genetic information, the progress in imaging sciences --
are more theory than practice now.

   To explain the potential for molecular imaging in cancer treatment, Dr. John
Hoffman, chief of the molecular imaging branch of the biomedical imaging program
of the National Cancer Institute, points to the "tremendous" clinical utility of
one type of molecular imaging technology -- positron emission tomography, or PET
scans -- in improving cancer treatment.

   With PET, a patient is injected with radioactive molecules and scanned. The
images allow doctors to assess tumor metabolism and metastasis.

   Hoffman said the scans are in use in clinical research to monitor whether
chemotherapy drugs are hitting target receptors. This kind of feedback someday
could guide doctors to effective treatments.

   "We are doing the research and trying to understand this test better,"
Hoffman said. "In the next five to ten years this will be a commonly performed
test."

   Currently, patients must wait weeks or months to get the same treatment
effectiveness information from a computed tomography, or CT, scan. These scans
produce anatomical images that doctors use to determine if a tumor has shrunk in
response to treatment.

   Cancer is a derangement in basic cell biology. Chemotherapy agents, the
poisons used to kill dysfunctional cells, also heavily damage healthy cells.
Drugs that could bypass healthy cells would reduce side-effects.

   That's why drug companies are trying to find drugs that can home in on
abnormal enzymes or receptors in cancer cells, Hoffman said.

   "We are trying to move toward a more speedy assessment of whether the drug is
working," he said. "It would be nice to know after a few doses the drug is doing
what you want it to do."

   The molecular imaging centers also will explore how tumors proliferate and
how genetic abnormalities affect treatment response.

   A young science

   Molecular imaging is a young science. About two-thirds of the work at the
Washington University center will be basic science, Piwnica-Worms said.

   Among the experiments is one exploring the use of fluorescent light enzymes
to track delivery of gene therapy. Other researchers will use bioluminescence
techniques to gain insight into the influence of defective genes and the work of
proteins in cancer cells.

   Research will help identify specific radioactive tracer elements, which on
the molecular scan highlight the cell function that is suspect in the disease
process.

   Some progress has been made in this area in breast cancer. Researchers at
Washington University are using the radioactive tracer Tc-Sestamibi to determine
whether tumors are multi-drug resistant. In these tumors, a protein called
P-glycoprotein is thought to be capable of pumping an array of front-line
chemotherapy drugs from mutant cells, rendering the drugs ineffective.

   But P-glycoprotein also pumps the tracer molecule from cancer cells. So, as
the image of a breast tumor fades over time in this test, it indicates which
tumors have P-glycoprotein and are therefore drug-resistant.

   One of four inaugural core research projects at Washington University's
center will explore whether a PET scan image of small cell lung cancer can
detect the presence of the drug-resistant protein.

NOTES:
Reporter Judith VandeWater; E-mail: jvandewater@post-dispatch.com; Phone:
314-340-8201

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC GRAPHIC Color graphic, chart by Melinda Curtis , Post-Dispatch
-Detecting drug-resistant cancer cells
Some drug-resistant cancers that expel chemotheraphy also spit outselect
radiopharmaceutical tracers. Washington University researchershave applied this
knowledge, using body scans to identifydrug-resistant breast cancers.
The process: drug-resistant cancer cell
1. Chemotherapy drug or tracer enters the cell
2. A protein pumps out the drug or tracer.
Cell membrane
Interior of the cell
Protein pump

The Effect:
The images show a breast tumor and other orgms following the injectionof a
tracer molecule.
Fading indicates the presence of the drug-resistant factor that willmake the
disease harder to treat.
Th eliver is not visible at four hour because it functioned normallyto clear the
tracer molecule.
Source: Washington University, nuclear images by Dr. Farrokh Dehdashti

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2002


                             1265 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 21, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 725 words

BODY:

   Frequent visitors to our fascinating Health & Science pages probably have
already absorbed the best sports story of the week, but for the rest of you, I'm
providing this recap at no extra cost.

    The Israeli Archeologists, a team of clutch performers everyone agrees has
all the tools, has discovered the remains of a massive stadium next to the Sea
of Galilee that dates from the time of Jesus.

    Not Jesus Alou, spastic brother of Felipe and Matty. Jesus Christ. Yep, the
original Dr. J. Son of God. King of Kings, that guy.

    The bog mindles.

    Now surely, everyone accepts that if Jesus were alive today, He'd be signing
with the Steelers for the veteran minimum salary because, you know, it's not
about the money with Him. And he'd be saying things like, "The thing is, I've
done a lot of things. Raised the dead, walked on water, made the blind see, the
lame walk, even came back from the dead when everybody wrote me off, but the one
thing I haven't done is get that Super Bowl ring. That's the reason I'm here
today. Not cleansing the world of sin this time; I just want to get to San Diego
for Super Bowl XXXVII, although I gotta say those Roman numerals are frankly a
little creepy."

    It's true there was no evidence in the Associated Press story about this
archeological dig that suggests that Jesus ever got close to beautiful Sea of
Galilee Stadium, even on Straight A Student Day, or that He himself was an
athlete, but you know he was. Had to be. With those skills?

    Likely a quarterback at Galilee Tech, can you imagine the pre-draft analysis
of Ishmael Kiper Jr. on this kid?

    "Stays in the pocket and flat out works miracles. Sees the whole field.
Scary smart. Doesn't need time to learn the system. He knows the system. Impact
player doesn't begin to describe him. Throws the deep ball well. Not only can he
throw it, he can catch it. Can't be intimidated. Some defensive coordinators
salivate at idea of converting him to linebacker. Lacks inside backer size but
could compensate just by being literally everywhere. Literally, figuratively,
spiritually everywhere. So, he can't be a holdout. Will be in camp.

    "Tiberias has the first pick. If they pass on this kid, may they wander the
NFL desert for at least the next two millenia "

    But let's not speculate. This stadium story had enough facts to stand on its
own.

    The place was built right on the shores of the Sea of Galilee, no doubt
affording fans in the upper stands a view of the Galilee Clipper as it floated
by nightly with the dinner cruise crowd. According to Flavius Josephus, ancient
Jewish historian, Jerusalem Tablet sports writer and aspiring talk show host,
the Romans also may have used Sea of Galilee Stadium to hold thousands of Jewish
prisoners after a naval battle. The Romans say they held 37,000 such prisoners,
although wise cracking columnists of the day claimed that was just so they could
say attendance was 37,000 when it was actually more like 15,000, much the way
Pitt does it for home football games.

    Josephus further wrote that old and weak prisoners were executed and
stronger ones sold as slaves, an observation modern historians assign to the
reality that Sea of Galilee Stadium never drew a common nickname of that era:
The Friendly Confines.

    Modern archaeologists say the stadium played host to horse racing, track and
field events and boat races on long man-made pools. The boat races part is
principally an inference based on signs of mud discovered there, but it could
just as easily have been caused by the natural erosion of a swimming pool just
beyond the right-field wall like the one in Bank One Ballpark in Arizona.
Eventually, political pressure no doubt mounted for a horse racing-only stadium
that would optimize revenue streams, but the history of Sea of Galilee Stadium
likely stretched into the centuries, and doubtless included Bobblehead Centurion
night.

    Still, the find was expected to run up against funding constraints, so that
it's probable only part of Sea of Galilee Stadium will eventually be unearthed.
It is not the only stadium unearthed in the Holy Land. According to the story,
the remains of several amphitheaters, stadiums and hippodromes have been
uncovered, including one currently in use in Caesarea.

    That would be, obviously, your Rome Gazette Amphitheater.

    No need to thank me.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2002


                             1266 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      June 20, 2002 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 040

LENGTH: 481 words

HEADLINE: TELEVISION REVIEW; Showtime launches promising 'Odyssey'

BYLINE: By Liz Matson

BODY:

   "Odyssey 5."

   Series premiere tomorrow at 10 p.m. on Showtime.Two and a half stars (out of
four)

   A good science-fiction thriller has a complex but understandable plot that
combines the imagined and the bizarre with a dose of reality.

   "Odyssey 5," premiering tomorrow at 10 p.m. on Showtime, almost fits the bill
with an additional twist - the bulk of the story takes place on Earth, not in
space.

   The series does start in space, on the space shuttle Odyssey 5, where Capt.
Chuck Taggart (Peter Weller, "RoboCop") is leading a routine mission to retrieve
a satellite. His crew consists of mission pilot Angela Perry (Tamara Craig),
specialist Matt Walsh (Craig Eldridge) and Taggart's whiny son, Neil
(Christopher Gorham, "Popular"). Also on board are ambitious television reporter
Sarah Forbes (Leslie Silva) and Dr. Kurt Mendel (Sebastian Roche), a womanizing
scientist.

   The crew is communicating with NASA officials when a blast rocks the shuttle
and a fiery cloud envelops Earth. When the astronauts regain control of their
spinning ship, they've lost one crew member and another is unconscious. There is
an eerie scene as a mangled car floats by and the reality sinks in that
something catastrophic has happened back on Earth.

   With their oxygen running out, crew members prepare for their inevitable
deaths. Instead they wake up on an alien ship where they meet The Seeker (Sir
John Neville). He has been tracking inhabited planets throughout the universe,
but they've all been destroyed before he has made contact.

   The shuttle crew members are the first living beings The Seeker has
encountered. Although Earth is vaporized, he has the power to send the crew back
in time five years to prevent the cataclysm.

   Crew members wake up in their various homes and jobs - Neil wakes as a high
school senior at a party and Angela wakes up in the middle of another shuttle
mission. There are some clever personal plot lines that make this time jump
intriguing. Crew members cannot let those around them suspect anything, but they
have the power to alter their lives because they know what's coming.

   The group meets covertly to figure out how to find and foil what is going to
destroy Earth in five years. Taggart informs them that the satellite they were
retrieving was actually a top-secret project. He noticed that a second before
Earth was destroyed, the satellite received a message from Earth, so this is
their starting point. Here, however, you have to really pay attention. The plot
gets a bit confusing as the team suddenly chases leads having to do with a gene
therapy experiment.

   There are few other plot holes as well, but these may fill in as the series
progresses. The dialogue is somewhat predictable and the characters are
by-the-book, but the series has an interesting hook and the space visuals are
great. You may find "Odyssey 5" worth the trip.


LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2002


                             1267 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 16, 2002, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: GLOBE WEST; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2155 words

HEADLINE: GLOBE WEST 1 / WELLESLEY;
HOPING FOR A RARE FIND A WELLESLEY FAMILY WORKS TO FUND, PROMOTE RESEARCH ON
SON'S DISEASE

BYLINE: By Gail Spector, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   In many ways, Ben and Noah Siedman have a typical brotherly relationship.
They play football, ride scooters, fight over the television, and chase each
other with water balloons. The two Wellesley boys share a bedroom, with one side
dominated by Ben's passion - farm animals - and the other reflecting Noah's
interests in science and space.  Noah, 8, gets frustrated sometimes when his
6-year-old brother can't keep up with him, but in true younger sibling fashion,
Ben looks up to his big brother.

   The boys' games and antics may be typical, but their lives are not.  At an
early age, Ben was diagnosed with Sanfilippo syndrome, a rare and fatal genetic
disorder.  Unless a cure is found, Noah will not watch his younger brother grow
up.

      Sanfilippo syndrome falls into a category of diseases called lysosomal
storage disorders, said Dr. Mark Korson, Ben's physician at the Floating
Hospital for Children at Tufts New England Medical Center.

   Korson, who specializes in pediatric metabolic diseases, explained that
children afflicted with Sanfilippo are missing an enzyme that is needed to break
down a complex body sugar.  As this sugar molecule accumulates in the cells,
tissues, and brain, it causes progressive damage, leading to a loss of language
and cognitive skills, the ability to walk, and, ultimately, death. In cases of
Sanfilippo syndrome, Korson said, "the brain is the most affected organ."

   Children with this disease have an average life expectancy of 10 to 15 years,
although there are exceptions, depending on the severity of the disease,
according to Dr. Robert Yu, director of the Institute of Molecular Medicine and
Genetics at the Medical College of Georgia.

   Ben's family has had to undergo an unwanted education about the illness. Noah
offers this analogy to explain his brother's disease:

   "Let's say you have a garbage truck in your body to take stuff out," he said.
"Benjamin doesn't have that.  So it all builds up.  And then it takes over -
mostly in his brain and legs."

   Ben's and Noah's parents have been talking to them gradually about Ben's
situation. Ben knows he is special, said his father, Stuart, 39. They have been
counseled to wait until Noah asks questions and answer them honestly.

   "Ben doesn't exhibit a lot of things that will come," said his father.

   He has experienced some symptoms, though. His flexibility, strength, and
range of motion have decreased noticeably in the past nine months, leaving him
unable to sit cross-legged or stand up from a sitting or lying position.

   Emotionally and behaviorally, he is having an increasingly difficult time
staying focused and sitting still. He is quicker to break down than he used to
be, and he is getting more frustrated with his inability to do what he sees
other children doing.  And he has always been hit harder by common illnesses,
such as colds or flu, than normally developing children, said his father.

   Cognitively, he is still on the upswing, said Stuart, although he is well
behind most children his age.  His language continues to develop and his ability
to construct complex sentences and recognize letters is still improving.

   Because he was diagnosed early, he was taught sign language to help him
converse.  Although he did not start speaking until he was nearly 4, "once we
broke down that barrier, it all came out in a rush," Stuart said.

   Right now, Ben is a polite, active child with an engaging smile, who is eager
to lose his first tooth.  He is integrated into a regular kindergarten class at
Bates Elementary School. He rides a bike, goes to classmates' birthday parties,
and rides horses as part of a special needs program.  He also plays with his
younger sister, Isabelle, 3.

   Ben's mother, Jennifer, 36, said that he is doing remarkably well for a child
with Sanfilippo syndrome.

   "There could be another 6-year-old who is wheelchair-bound, who never learned
to speak, and who is further progressed.  There's a range of how this
progresses."

   At some point, Ben will plateau and then begin to lose skills.

   "When he'll get there, we don't know," said Stuart.  "It'll all go downhill
from there.  There's going to be a point when even if a cure is found, it'll be
too late.

   "I don't know when I'm going to lose that smile," he said tearfully. "That's
going to be the hardest time."

   "It was very hard when he turned 6 years old," said Jennifer.  "He's 6, and
that could be half his life."

   Ben was diagnosed with Sanfilippo when he was 15 months old.  The Siedmans
had taken him to Children's Hospital after a high fever had sparked a seizure.

   "I'm positive that without that chain of events, we wouldn't have known it
until he was 2 or 3," said Stuart.

   "It was a surreal moment," said Jennifer, "when you're standing in the room
with your baby and the CAT-scan-room lady is behind the glass, and all of a
sudden, there's only one lady, and then there's a phone call and there's two,
then there's another phone and there are four people in the room.  And then the
books are coming off the shelf."

   Sanfilippo was identified in 1963, and when Ben was diagnosed, little had
been written about the disease.  Stuart said that when doctors were pulling
books off shelves, "They were showing us a paragraph, not a chapter."

   It is still a relatively unknown disease that often goes undiagnosed until
age 5 or 6, said Korson, when children exhibit obvious speech and language
problems.

   "Doctors are not very well trained about metabolic disorders," he said. "It's
hard to diagnose what you've never seen or heard about."

   A Sanfilippo child might develop normally for a few years, Korson said, but
then may develop upper respiratory problems, recurrent ear infections, and
delayed speech.  It's not until the accumulation of sugar causes symptoms such
as hyperactivity, irritability and restlessness, sleep disorders, stiffening
joints, and further delayed development that the pieces get put together.

   The disease affects about 1 in 25,000 births, according to the National MPS
(Mucopolysaccharides) Society.  Both parents must be carriers of the gene,
something the Siedmans were not aware of when they married 13 years ago.

   After Ben was diagnosed, the Siedmans joined forces with parents of a
Sanfilippo child in Chicago to raise money for research on the disease. Stuart
took advantage of a one-year paid social service leave offered by his employer,
Xerox Corp., and spent the year working on behalf of the Children's Medical
Research Fund.

   In honor of Ben's fifth birthday, the Siedmans established their own
association, the Sanfilippo Research Foundation, one of a handful of foundations
across the country that raises funds individually but works collaboratively on
funding research.

   "We want to make sure that something that's viable doesn't go unfunded," said
Stuart.

   The Sanfilippo Research Foundation has held a variety of fund-raisers, said
Stuart, the biggest one being an annual golfing event at the Sandy Burr Country
Club in Wayland in mid-August.

   "Birdies for Ben," first held on behalf of the Children's Medical Research
Fund three years ago, had a first-time goal of $20,000, said Stuart.  "We ended
up raising over $72,000.  That activity really enabled us to say, 'We can do
something,' " he said.  Many local businesses have held fund-raisers, friends
have run marathons, and strangers have sent money, all on behalf of the
foundation, Stuart said.

   "I'm still looking for that million-dollar donor, because I truly believe the
research will reach the point where there will be a treatment or cure," he said,
adding that $100,000 funds about one researcher for a year.  "I don't know how
many diseases there are out there that have been cured by one person in one
year."

   In addition to his own research at the Medical College of Georgia,

   Yu listed the University of California, University of North Carolina, and
Michigan State University as some of the academic institutions researching a
cure.

   Locally, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. in Cambridge, a biopharmaceutical
company, is also conducting research on lysosomal storage disorders, according
to president Richard Selden.

   "The most important thing is to learn how to deliver the missing protein to
the brain," said Selden, who lives in Wellesley.

   The brain is naturally protected by a biological shield called the
blood-brain barrier, he said, and "solving the problem - getting past the
blood-brain barrier - is very important" in curing diseases such as Sanfilippo.

   "We're committed to finding a way to break down the barrier," Seldon said. "I
just don't know how long.  This is among the most important challenges in
medicine today."

   For his part, Noah does what he can to help his younger brother, including
setting up lemonade stands to raise money.  He has contributed proceeds of $19
to the foundation, and he is hoping to move his stand to a site with more
traffic.

   "I still would like to help him more," Noah said.  "We all would."

   The second-grader recently wrote a letter to CBS after learning that "The
Early Show" was sponsoring a "Week of Wishes." He asked for a horse for his
younger brother so that he could ride and take care of it whenever he wanted.

   "I could go with Ben and do things with him that he loves to do so much," he
wrote, with help from his mother.  "That would be special for me cause I think
someday I will not have Ben to share things.

   "Mostly, I want my brother to grow up but that is a very complicated wish so
for now a horse would be just fine," he continued.

   Noah's wish was not selected.

   Perhaps the hardest part, said Jennifer, is the thought that Noah and
Isabelle will grow up living with Ben's loss.

   "I'm going to have the pain of losing a child, but I will have lived for 27
years without that pain," she said. "My son and daughter will essentially have
that pain for their whole lives."

   Always aware that the clock is ticking, the Siedmans try to balance their
work with the foundation with their family activities.

   "We know that time is precious, not only for Benjamin, but also for his
siblings with Benjamin.  We really want to make the most of it," said Stuart.

   For more information, contact the Sanfilippo Research Foundation, P.O. Box
81268, Wellesley 02481, call 617-899-4158, or visit www.bensdream.org.  SIDEBAR:
RESEARCH STILL IN EARLY STAGES   Sanfilippo syndrome is a rare and fatal genetic
disorder that affects about 1 in every 25,000 live births.  It takes its name
from Dr. Sylvester Sanfilippo, one of the doctors who first described the
condition in 1963.

   Sanfilippo, also known as MPS III, is a mucopolysaccharide disorder. It falls
within a broader group of genetic disorders known as lysosomal storage
disorders.  Children with Sanfilippo lack an enzyme needed to break down natural
compounds called mucopolysaccharides - long chains of sugar molecules used to
build connective tissues in the body. Instead, the molecules are stored in cells
in the body, causing progressive damage.  This accumulation leads to loss of
development and skills and ultimately results in death.

   The average life expectancy for a child with Sanfilippo syndrome is 10 to 15
years, according to Dr. Robert Yu, director of the Institute of Molecular
Medicine and Genetics at the Medical College of Georgia.

   Infants born with Sanfilippo typically appear normal at birth, but as cells
become damaged, symptoms appear, including recurrent upper respiratory tract
infections and ear infections, a coarse facial appearance, hyperactivity and
irritability, and delayed development of cognitive and motor skills.  As the
disease progresses, the build-up of mucopolysaccharides causes further
hyperactivity, sleep disorders, loss of speech, mental retardation, dementia,
and, finally, death.

   At present, there is no cure for Sanfilippo syndrome, but researchers are
investigating gene therapy, cell therapy, and enzyme replacement, according to
Yu.  Gene therapy would deliver the missing gene to the central nervous system,
but it carries serious risks, including brain tumors, Yu said, and cell therapy
would deliver normal cells into the body.  Enzyme replacement therapy has been
successful in treating some other lysosomal storage disorders, Yu said, but it
is more difficult with Sanfilippo syndrome because the disease affects the
brain.

   "The brain is protected from circulating blood components by the blood-brain
barrier," he said.  "Otherwise, you'd have a stroke.  It prevents enzymes from
getting into the central nervous system.  People are trying to figure out how to
open up this barrier, even temporarily, to allow enzymes to enter."

   Research on Sanfilippo is four to five years old in the United States, Yu
said, and he hopes that there will be a cure within 10 years.  "That's too long
for some patients. I know that," he said.

   For more information on Sanfilippo syndrome, visit www.mpssociety.org.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Ben Siedman waters the family garden. He suffers from a rare
genetic disease. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / DAVID KAMERMAN 2. Stuart and Jennifer
Siedman with their children (from left) Noah, 8, Ben, 6, and Isabelle, 3. Ben
has been diagnosed with Sanfilippo syndrome, a rare and fatal genetic disorder.
/ GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / DAVID KAMERMAN

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2002


                             1268 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             June 15, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 798 words

HEADLINE: Researchers display latest in bionics at conference;
20 million living with artificial help

BYLINE: By Kevin Coughlin; Newhouse News Service

BODY:

   NEW YORK -- A 27-year-old stockbroker named Dennis slid behind the wheel of a
sporty blue convertible and cruised an empty parking lot. Unremarkable, except
for one fact: Dennis is blind.

   Wearing glasses that hint of "Star Trek" character Geordi LaForge, Dennis
drove for the first time since a gruesome crash stole his vision seven years
ago.

   A television camera on the eyeglasses relayed images to a belt-pack computer,
which in turn triggered phosphenes, pinpoints of light, via electrodes implanted
in the visual cortex of his brain. Flickering phosphenes gave fuzzy, narrow
outlines of a Dumpster and other large obstacles in his path.

   "As computers get better, I hope someday to drive with confidence, as I used
to with sight," he said at the 48th annual meeting of the American Society for
Artificial Internal Organs.

   The three-day gathering of doctors and researchers that runs through Saturday
spanned the frontier of bionics. Experts are sketching a future of spare parts
borrowed from Silicon Valley, crafted atom by atom by chemists, or coaxed from
the body's own tool kit of genes, proteins and stem cells.

   "Most meetings you go to because you're required to go," said O. Howard
Frazier, a specialist from the Texas Heart Institute who is president of the
1,400-member society. "I always learn something when I come here."

Adding life

   Although the society's members cannot promise immortality, Frazier said, they
may end premature death and make life less painful.

   "We want to add life to the years, not years to the life," said Michael
Lysaght, a bioengineer from Brown University.

   Already, Lysaght said, about 20 million patients worldwide are living with
some kind of artificial help, from implanted joints to pacemakers to cochlear
implants.

   Though the society faces challenges -- such as the debate over research on
human embryonic stem cells and ethical and medical concerns about transplanting
pig organs into people -- the tenor of the meeting was upbeat.

   William Haseltine of Human Genome Sciences Inc. said scientists are poised to
tame the body's aging process, as tissue engineering, genetic therapies, cell
transplants and nanotechnology converge. He said clinical trials of artificial
arteries, grown in sheets, are only a year or two away.

   "We have the opportunity to restore worn, damaged, aged bodies to normal
health," Haseltine said. "We are limited only by our imagination."

   Topics at the conference ranged from freeze-dried heart replacement valves
from cows to skin grown from hair follicles and a bio-glue that promotes suicide
of cells that cause endometriosis.

   An artificial lung implant has worked smoothly for a week in sheep and could
be ready for human tests within two years, said Robert Bartlett, a surgeon from
the University of Michigan who displayed a prototype resembling a Tupperware
flask. Air passes through porous fibers to oxygenate blood pumped from the
heart.

   Bartlett said he and other scientists want a device that lasts weeks or
months -- long enough for a patient with lung disease to get a transplant.

Improving results

   Hand transplants, meanwhile, have gotten a boost from improved pills and
ointments that suppress the body's rejection of foreign tissue, said surgeon
Scott Gruber of Wayne State University.

   Gruber said he is involved with two of the eight hand transplants performed
so far around the world. Both his patients received transplants up to the
mid-forearm from cadavers after losing hands in fireworks accidents. A team in
Louisville, Ky., performed the operations -- one in 1999, the other a year ago.

   Both patients now have near-normal sensation that enables them to write, use
cell phones and handle other routine tasks, Gruber said.

   One of the most eye-opening presentations came from William Dobelle, a
pioneer of cochlear implants who has spent two decades pursuing artificial
vision.

   Over the years, he has overseen implantation of electrodes into the brains of
more than 60 blind patients to stimulate phosphenes. When he began the research
at the University of Utah and Columbia University, converting images to
electrical pulses required eight hours and 4,000 pounds of computing equipment.

   Now, a battery-driven processor fits on a belt and transmits the equivalent
of 30 frames per second. And the electrodes can spark 140 phosphenes at once --
still crude, yet an eightfold improvement over early versions.

   Dobelle said video processing circuitry detects edges of objects and screens
out background clutter. The field of artificial vision is a narrow box.
Surprisingly, he said, half the eight volunteers have experienced colors, "like
a Chinese lantern."

   "We don't know all the capabilities of the system yet. It's a learning
curve," Dobelle said.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2002


                             1269 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             June 15, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 798 words

HEADLINE: Researchers display latest in bionics at conference;
20 million living with artificial help

BYLINE: By Kevin Coughlin; Newhouse News Service

BODY:

   NEW YORK -- A 27-year-old stockbroker named Dennis slid behind the wheel of a
sporty blue convertible and cruised an empty parking lot. Unremarkable, except
for one fact: Dennis is blind.

   Wearing glasses that hint of "Star Trek" character Geordi LaForge, Dennis
drove for the first time since a gruesome crash stole his vision seven years
ago.

   A television camera on the eyeglasses relayed images to a belt-pack computer,
which in turn triggered phosphenes, pinpoints of light, via electrodes implanted
in the visual cortex of his brain. Flickering phosphenes gave fuzzy, narrow
outlines of a Dumpster and other large obstacles in his path.

   "As computers get better, I hope someday to drive with confidence, as I used
to with sight," he said at the 48th annual meeting of the American Society for
Artificial Internal Organs.

   The three-day gathering of doctors and researchers that runs through Saturday
spanned the frontier of bionics. Experts are sketching a future of spare parts
borrowed from Silicon Valley, crafted atom by atom by chemists, or coaxed from
the body's own tool kit of genes, proteins and stem cells.

   "Most meetings you go to because you're required to go," said O. Howard
Frazier, a specialist from the Texas Heart Institute who is president of the
1,400-member society. "I always learn something when I come here."

Adding life

   Although the society's members cannot promise immortality, Frazier said, they
may end premature death and make life less painful.

   "We want to add life to the years, not years to the life," said Michael
Lysaght, a bioengineer from Brown University.

   Already, Lysaght said, about 20 million patients worldwide are living with
some kind of artificial help, from implanted joints to pacemakers to cochlear
implants.

   Though the society faces challenges -- such as the debate over research on
human embryonic stem cells and ethical and medical concerns about transplanting
pig organs into people -- the tenor of the meeting was upbeat.

   William Haseltine of Human Genome Sciences Inc. said scientists are poised to
tame the body's aging process, as tissue engineering, genetic therapies, cell
transplants and nanotechnology converge. He said clinical trials of artificial
arteries, grown in sheets, are only a year or two away.

   "We have the opportunity to restore worn, damaged, aged bodies to normal
health," Haseltine said. "We are limited only by our imagination."

   Topics at the conference ranged from freeze-dried heart replacement valves
from cows to skin grown from hair follicles and a bio-glue that promotes suicide
of cells that cause endometriosis.

   An artificial lung implant has worked smoothly for a week in sheep and could
be ready for human tests within two years, said Robert Bartlett, a surgeon from
the University of Michigan who displayed a prototype resembling a Tupperware
flask. Air passes through porous fibers to oxygenate blood pumped from the
heart.

   Bartlett said he and other scientists want a device that lasts weeks or
months -- long enough for a patient with lung disease to get a transplant.

Improving results

   Hand transplants, meanwhile, have gotten a boost from improved pills and
ointments that suppress the body's rejection of foreign tissue, said surgeon
Scott Gruber of Wayne State University.

   Gruber said he is involved with two of the eight hand transplants performed
so far around the world. Both his patients received transplants up to the
mid-forearm from cadavers after losing hands in fireworks accidents. A team in
Louisville, Ky., performed the operations -- one in 1999, the other a year ago.

   Both patients now have near-normal sensation that enables them to write, use
cell phones and handle other routine tasks, Gruber said.

   One of the most eye-opening presentations came from William Dobelle, a
pioneer of cochlear implants who has spent two decades pursuing artificial
vision.

   Over the years, he has overseen implantation of electrodes into the brains of
more than 60 blind patients to stimulate phosphenes. When he began the research
at the University of Utah and Columbia University, converting images to
electrical pulses required eight hours and 4,000 pounds of computing equipment.

   Now, a battery-driven processor fits on a belt and transmits the equivalent
of 30 frames per second. And the electrodes can spark 140 phosphenes at once --
still crude, yet an eightfold improvement over early versions.

   Dobelle said video processing circuitry detects edges of objects and screens
out background clutter. The field of artificial vision is a narrow box.
Surprisingly, he said, half the eight volunteers have experienced colors, "like
a Chinese lantern."

   "We don't know all the capabilities of the system yet. It's a learning
curve," Dobelle said.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2002


                             1270 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2002 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                      June 14, 2002 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; CHASER; EAST ZONER; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1092 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS LINK BREAST CANCER, RARE ANEMIA

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: OHSU researchers join in the discovery, which could lead to better
cancer treatments

   Thursday's announcement of a close link between one of the world's rarest
diseases and breast cancer is being called an important, elegant and surprising
medical breakthrough.

   Researchers at Oregon Health & Science University and elsewhere found that a
mutated form of a gene called BRCA2, already known to increase breast cancer
risk, also can cause a rare, deadly genetic disease called Fanconi anemia. The
findings could help doctors better understand what causes the anemia and several
cancers and could point to new cancer treatments.

   "This has tremendous implications," said Lynn Frohnmayer, co-founder of the
Eugene-based Fanconi Anemia Research Fund. She and her husband, University of
Oregon President David Frohnmayer, created the fund in 1989 after learning that
some of their children had the disease. "I think it's absolutely stunning that
researchers supported by our fund have made such dramatic discoveries in such a
short period of time."

   The researchers discovered that genes causing the anemia and two genes linked
to breast and reproductive cancers join to form one system in every cell in the
human body. That system is important for repairing DNA, which stores a person's
genetic code.

   "The importance of this finding is that it connects two previously different
bodies of work on DNA repair," British breast cancer experts Emily Witt and Alan
Ashworth wrote in Thursday's online version of the journal Science, where the
study's results were published. "Doubtless this will fuel progress into
understanding both breast cancer and FA."

   The British experts were not involved in the research.

   A breakdown in the newfound system can cause the rare anemia or breast,
uterine or ovarian cancer, depending on where and how it breaks down, said Dr.
Markus Grompe, an OHSU professor who worked on the study. It also may influence
other cancers.

   "Any cell that lacks BRCA2 or a Fanconi gene has a propensity to become
cancer," Grompe said. "Any cell in the body."

   Grompe and OHSU colleagues Barbara Cox and Susan Olson conducted the research
with doctors from Harvard University and medical schools in Holland and Japan.

   The two breast cancer genes are relatively well known. By 1994, doctors had
found BRCA1 and BRCA2 and showed that mutated forms of those genes add risk for
breast, ovarian and uterine cancers.

   In contrast, few people have heard of Fanconi anemia. About 3,000 people in
the world are known to have the disease, which develops when a child inherits
two bad copies of a Fanconi gene. Children born with the disease have severe
anemia, are prone to cancers -- especially a severe type of leukemia -- and may
have birth defects. Few live to adulthood.

   "This is really an ugly, ugly disease," Lynn Frohnmayer said. "If you were to
pick a genetic disease you really did not want to have, close to the top of the
list would be Fanconi anemia." Two of the Frohnmayers' daughters died of the
disease.

   What seems surprising, in light of the findings, is that few Fanconi anemia
patients develop breast cancer. That is partly because most patients "succumb to
their disease at an early age, really before the onset of breast and ovarian
cancer," said Dr. Alan D'Andrea, a Harvard professor involved in the research.
Also, women with the disease tend to have small ovaries and lower estrogen
production, which may help stave off those cancers, he said.

   Doctors had long suspected that Fanconi anemia was linked to other common
cancer processes, however, because so many sufferers get cancers. Over time,
researchers identified five genes that can cause Fanconi anemia and suspected at
least two more to exist.

   Last year, Grompe's lab discovered and cloned a sixth gene, called FANCD2.
Grompe showed that gene works with the breast-cancer gene BRCA1 to fix broken
DNA.

   D'Andrea said researchers looked deeper after seeing that under a microscope,
breast cancer cells from women with faulty BRCA2 genes and Fanconi-affected
cells have similar breaks in their chromosomes, the long strands of DNA that
hold genes.

   The scientists examined DNA from patients with two types of Fanconi anemia
who did not have problems with the six known Fanconi genes. They studied the two
BRCA genes in those patients. None had BRCA1 mutations. But they all had two bad
copies of the BRCA2 gene, one seriously mutated and one less so, D'Andrea said.

   The research showed that two undiscovered Fanconi genes are identical to each
other and BRCA2: They are different forms of the same gene. For proof, they
grafted a "good" BRCA2 gene onto cells with one of the two forms of Fanconi
anemia and found that it made them act like normal cells.

   Grompe said his lab would now try to fully understand what this newly
discovered system does and whether any other genes play roles in it. Such an
understanding could lead to better treatments for some cancers, even those
unrelated to Fanconi anemia.

   Doctors might be able to make those tumors mimic Fanconi-affected cells,
which respond strongly to two common cancer medicines, Grompe said. But he
cautioned that researchers need more time to fully understand this DNA-repair
system.

   Scientists must now test whether the previously known Fanconi genes also are
breast-cancer risk genes, D'Andrea said. They also must study parents and
siblings of Fanconi anemia patients who carry one copy of the bad gene to see
whether they are at greater risk of contracting cancer, which now seems likely.

   "This is not good news for these families," D'Andrea said.

   The research brings limited hope to Fanconi anemia patients.

   Knowing that the disease is part of a complicated DNA-repair process "makes
it pretty unlikely" that a standard drug could treat it effectively, Grompe
said. Gene therapy, in which medicine actually alters the genetic code, probably
is the best hope, he said.

   Lynn Frohnmayer said she isn't worrying about any increased cancer risk that
she or her husband might face. Rather, she focuses on her 15-year-old daughter,
Amy, who just finished her freshman year at South Eugene High School. The honor
student is stable now, Frohnmayer said, but has some anemia.

   "She's fine today. But we know too much about this disease. It will get
worse," Frohnmayer said. "At some point, we will be forced to intervene fairly
dramatically. We desperately hope that science will catch up in time." You can
reach Andy Dworkin at 503-221-8239 or by e-mail at
andydworkin@news.oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Sidebar - Fanconi Anemia

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2002


                             1271 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 14, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg.A-21

LENGTH: 717 words

HEADLINE: HEIRS VS. TEACHERS;
 THAT'S HOW DEMS SHOULD FRAME ESTATE-TAX DEBATE

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   Since it's only polite to be grateful for small sanities, let's cheer the
Democratic Senate's "courageous" vote Wednesday to kill the Republican House's
plan to repeal the estate tax, a move that would have showered at least $30
billion a year on a few thousand wealthy heirs, all under the cynical guise of
"saving the family farm" (a rescue easily made with various mend-it-don't-end-it
alternatives).

    But is it too much to ask Democrats to more aggressively shape the debate
about national priorities in a way that contrasts these tax cuts for the very
top with affirmative uses of the same resources?

    Today Democrats feel the only safe alternatives they can peddle are to "pay
down the national debt," "stop raiding Social Security" (something they've
happily done themselves on and off for 30 years), or preserve a poll-tested
"fiscal discipline."

    What's missing -- out of misguided political fear -- is a positive vision of
government-funded action that most Americans would support.

    Take the desperate shortage of quality teachers, especially in urban
schools. We know that President Bush cares about this; indeed, Education
Secretary Rod Paige's new report on the teacher crisis this week shows how
unready America is to meet the federal decree that "thou shalt have a quality
teacher in every class by 2006."

    But as with most of his "compassion," Bush is set to commit everything but
money to the cause. The teacher contract announced in New York City the other
day captures precisely why money has to be part of the answer.

    All sides in the Big Apple hailed a deal that will lift salaries from 16 to
22 percent. Superintendent Harold Levy and union president Randi Weingarten made
the customary noises to the effect that New York is now serious about attracting
and retaining the best talent.

    These officials have to say this because they're doing the best they can in
a fiscal straitjacket. But in their hearts they know the truth: Changing the
starting teacher salary in New York from $31,000 to $39,000 will not change the
trajectory of career choices of top college graduates -- the kind of talent
urban America needs to lure to its schools.

    Nor will it change the reality that nearby affluent suburbs like Scarsdale
and Great Neck pay teachers nearly twice as much on average as New York, while
offering better working conditions and easier-to-teach kids

    At a conference I hosted last year, Levy observed that in 1970 the
difference between the starting salary for a teacher and a lawyer at top New
York law firms was about one or two thousand dollars. Today, it can be in excess
of $120,000! "Not tough for me to see what we need to do," he added dryly.
Market-loving conservatives who are serious about equal opportunity acknowledge
that urban districts arguably need the best teaching talent. They also know
you'll never get these folks without paying at least as much as nearby suburbs,
if not more. They have trouble making the final connection that this requires
M-O-N-E-Y, but who knows? New gene therapies may soon help conservatives put
America's cash where their compassion is.

    That day will come too late, alas, for their current leader. George Bush has
thrown about $700 million a year into the federal pot for teacher development,
which he hypes as a "25 percent increase" because the pot is tiny to begin with.

    Then he talks about giving teachers a deduction for the $400 a year most
spend out of their own pockets for classroom supplies. Now, that's compassion!
Would Bush offer soldiers a deduction for ammunition they buy out of their own
pockets -- or insist they have the equipment and resources to do their job
right?

    A chunk of the $30 billion a year Bush wants for a handful of wealthy heirs
could fund creative teacher salary incentives for urban districts that would
make a real difference in recruitment and retention.

    Billions for heirs whose lifestyles won't change an iota either way -- or
billions for a new deal for hundreds of thousands of teachers to make equal
opportunity for poor kids more than a hollow ideal?

    I say, let the people decide! Now, if only there were a political party in
America interested in framing our choices in ways that actually let people see
things this clearly.

NOTES:
Matthew Miller is a syndicated columnist with Tribune Media Services His e-mail
address is mattino@worldnet.att.net.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2002


                             1272 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 14, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 742 words

BODY:

   As last Saturday delivered Tyson-Lewis to quench our thirst for impending
sports violence, this one virtually promises something called Clemens-Estes,
which, on the face of it, looks nothing like a fight, but vaguely like the
hyphenated name of some leggy supermodel.

    Also among the midnight guests at a new Manhattan club so exclusive we're
not even allowed to know the name of it was leggy supermodel Raquel
Clemens-Estes.

    But in fact, Clemens-Estes will unfold tomorrow afternoon at Shea Stadium,
home of the sniveling New York Mets, who have all but sworn that New York
Yankees Intercontinental Champion Stone Cold Roger Clemens will get his
comeuppance (whatever that means) from the unlikely Shawn Estes, and only about
two years too late.

    The history here is still relatively fresh.

    Clemens drilled Mets' superstar pretty boy Mike Piazza right in the coconut
in a similar round of interleague play in the summer of 2000, and when the teams
met in the World Series that October, sawed the bat off in Piazza's hands early
in Game 2. The barrel of Piazza's bat sailed near the pitcher's mound at Yankee
Stadium, and Clemens picked it up and flung it at Piazza like a "Survivor"
contestant trying to impale a wart hog.

    Piazza's response was merely to stare at Clemens as if he'd lost his mind,
which was the emotional equivalent of no response, since people had been looking
at Roger that way for about 15 years. If ever a legitimate reason to charge the
mound existed, that was it. Piazza not only had had a Clemens fastball crash
into his skull, but now he'd also had his own bat thrown at him. Had Clemens
been able to conceal the components, a Molotov cocktail might have been next.

    Politically, competitively, and on the principle that the brilliant Yankees
right-hander had always been something of a jackass, Clemens really needed to be
slugged at that moment. But if Piazza's response was merely inadequate, the
reaction of the Mets' pitching staff in the subsequent innings was downright
cowardly. While it was impossible, thanks to the designated hitter rule, for
anyone to retaliate against Clemens directly, no Yankees hitter got so much as
dusted. No retribution was taken, and, not coincidentally, the Yankees won the
Series in five games

    Tomorrow in Flushing, N.Y., in one of his rare opportunities at playing real
baseball, Clemens must stand in the batter's box, unless, of course, the Mets'
offense chases him almost immediately, a possibility similar to that of the
Mets' lineup replacing the Joint Chiefs of Staff. So, the Mets are talking
tough, on the condition of anonymity of course, by suggesting that when Clemens
joking mentioned that he might "introduce himself" to Barry Bonds last week when
the Yankees faced the Giants, then indeed drilled him, that he was trying to get
himself suspended for this series.

    That's beyond ludicrous. Clemens isn't afraid of the Mets. It's the other
way around.

    "They had a chance to retaliate," Yankees pitcher David Wells told the New
York Post's Steve Serby. "They could have retaliated on somebody else. They wait
[until now] to try to get revenge. I think it's bull. You end it the next
inning. Somebody's gotta pay."

    Uh-huh. And that's your problem. Nobody paid. It's an outstanding debt, and,
frankly, Clemens should not be allowed to get away with what he did in that
World Series. That brings us to Estes, who was not even with the Mets when all
this happened.

    Should Estes drill him? Youbetcha. First pitch. Fastball. Above the waist.
And then, if the authorities handle it correctly, Estes should be ejected. Mets
Manager Bobby Valentine should have a starter-in-waiting all picked out.

    There are certain circumstances in which the game's umpires can issue a
pregame warning that anything that looks remotely fishy from a pitcher will
result in his immediate ejection. That option is rarely deployed, but hello,
these are those circumstances. Of course, that won't happen. It would require
Major League Baseball to do something right. Naturally, baseball has already
decided against it.

    So here's what else Wells said.

    "If they're gonna get him, they better get him good. They'd better knock him
out of the game, because I wouldn't want to be in that box if he's pitching and
he's pissed off, I'll tell you that."

    Knowing the Mets, it wouldn't surprise me if that quote alone scared them
into their own version of "No mas, no mas."

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2002


                             1273 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2002 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  June 13, 2002 Thursday STREET FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1141 words

HEADLINE: CANCER GENE BREAKTHROUGH

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Oregon researchers help discover that a gene known to boost breast
cancer risk can cause a rare disease affecting the Frohnmayer family

   Scientists have made a surprising discovery about the process behind several
kinds of cancer by closely linking one of the world's rarest diseases to one of
the deadliest: breast cancer.

   Researchers at Oregon Health & Science University and elsewhere said today
that a mutated form of the BRCA2 gene, already known to increase women's risk
for breast and reproductive cancers, also can cause Fanconi anemia, a deadly
genetic disease that affects Oregon's prominent Frohnmayer family.

   The work proves that five genes known to cause Fanconi anemia and two genes
linked to inherited breast cancers are part of one system, present in every cell
in the body, said Dr. Markus Grompe, an OHSU genetics professor.

   The body uses that cell system to repair damaged DNA, he said. Depending on
where and how that system breaks down, it can cause the rare anemia or breast,
uterine or ovarian cancer -- and might contribute to other cancers.

   "Any cell that lacks BRCA2 or a Fanconi gene has a propensity to become
cancer," Grompe said. "Any cell in the body."

   The findings could speed research into both Fanconi anemia and the inherited
breast cancers, because separate groups studying the two can join forces.

   "Tremendous work has been done on both sides, and now both sides are coming
together," said Lynn Frohnmayer, who helped start a Eugene foundation that
finances Fanconi research. "I think it's absolutely stunning."

   The work may help develop treatments for patients with other cancers, such as
lung cancer. Doctors might be able to make those tumors mimic Fanconi-affected
cells, which respond strongly to two common cancer medicines, Grompe said. He
cautioned that he and others need time to study this DNA-repair system and
understand how it affects the body and cancers.

   "We'll know within a couple of years whether this will change the medical
world or not," Grompe said.

   Grompe and OHSU researchers Barbara Cox and Susan Olson worked on the study
with doctors from Harvard University and medical schools in Holland and Japan.
The online version of the journal Science published the results today.

   Many of the researchers have been supported by the Fanconi Anemia Research
Fund, which Frohnmayer established in 1989 with her husband, David Frohnmayer,
University of Oregon president. The family's three daughters were born with the
disease, and two have died. Their two sons do not have it.

   About 500 U.S. residents are known to have Fanconi anemia, which develops
when a child inherits two bad copies of one of the six genes known to cause the
disease. Children born with the disease have severe anemia, are prone to cancers
-- especially a severe type of leukemia -- and may have birth defects. The
majority die before adulthood.

   "This is really an ugly, ugly disease," Lynn Frohnmayer said. "If you were to
pick a genetic disease you really did not want to have, close to the top of the
list would be Fanconi anemia."

   What seems surprising, in light of the findings, is that breast cancer is not
common among Fanconi anemia patients. That is partly because most such patients
"succumb to their disease at an early age, really before the onset of breast and
ovarian cancer," said Dr. Alan D'Andrea, a Harvard professor involved in the
research. Also, women with the disease tend to have small ovaries and lower
estrogen production, which may help stave off breast and reproductive cancers,
he said.

   Doctors had long suspected that Fanconi anemia was linked to more common
cancer processes because so many sufferers get cancers. Over time, researchers
identified five genes that cause Fanconi anemia and suspected at least two more
to exist.

   Separately, two BRCA genes were discovered in 1994 and shown to increase a
woman's risk for breast and reproductive cancers. Doctors later discovered that
the BRCA genes help repair strands of DNA that break over time through wear and
tear.

   A link between the two findings surfaced last year, after Grompe's lab
discovered and cloned a sixth Fanconi gene, called FANCD2. The researchers
showed that gene works with BRCA1 to repair DNA damage.

   D'Andrea said researchers looked deeper after seeing that, under a
microscope, breast cancer cells from women with faulty BRCA2 genes and
Fanconi-affected cells have very similar breaks in their chromosomes -- the long
strands of DNA that hold genes.

   Checking their hunch, the scientists looked at cells from patients with two
types of Fanconi anemia who did not have problems with the six known Fanconi
genes. They studied the two BRCA genes in those patients. None had BRCA1
mutations. But D'Andrea said they all had two bad copies of the BRCA2 gene --
one seriously mutated and one less so.

   The research showed that two undiscovered Fanconi genes are identical to each
other and BRCA2: They are different forms of the same gene. For proof, they
grafted a "good" BRCA2 gene onto cells with one of the two forms of Fanconi
anemia and found that it made them act like normal cells.

   Grompe said his lab would now try to fully understand what this newly
discovered system does and whether any other genes play roles in it.

   Scientists also need to test whether the previously known Fanconi genes also
are breast-cancer risk genes, D'Andrea said. Researchers will screen families
with histories of breast and reproductive cancers, but without defective BRCA1
or BRCA2 genes, and see whether their other Fanconi genes are defective.

   Scientists also must study parents and siblings of Fanconi anemia patients
who carry one copy of the bad gene, to see whether they are at greater risk of
contracting cancer, which now seems likely. "This is not good news for these
families," D'Andrea said.

   The research brings limited hope to Fanconi anemia patients themselves.
Knowing the disease is part of a complicated DNA-repair process "makes it pretty
unlikely" that a standard drug could treat it effectively, Grompe said. Gene
therapy, in which medicine actually alters the genetic code, probably is the
best hope for patients, he said.

   Lynn Frohnmayer said the research is quite exciting. She added that she
doesn't worry about any increased cancer risk that she or her husband might
face. Rather, she focuses on 15-year-old daughter, Amy, who just finished her
freshman year at South Eugene High School. The honor student is stable now,
Frohnmayer said, but has some anemia.

   "She's fine today. But we know too much about this disease. It will get
worse," Frohnmayer said. "At some point, we will be forced to intervene fairly
dramatically. We desperately hope that science will catch up in time."

   You can reach Andy Dworkin at 503-221-8239 or by e-mail at
andydworkin@news.oregonian.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2002


                             1274 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      June 13, 2002 Thursday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: Merck raises bid for Gliatech assets;
Rival offer makes price go up

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Merck & Co. has raised by almost 50 percent its bid for certain assets of
local biotechnology company Gliatech Inc., which filed for bankruptcy last
month.

   Merck increased its offer for the company's central nervous system and
glycerin transporter programs to $8 million from $5.4 million after GeneSoft
Inc., a gene therapy developer based in San Francisco, indicated it would pay
that much, said attorney James Lawniczak, who is representing Gliatech's
creditors.

   When creditors learned of GeneSoft's interest, they objected to Merck's
initial bid, court documents show.

   Even at the sweetened price, the sale would merely cut in half the debt faced
by Northeast Ohio's first biotechnology company. When Gliatech filed for Chapter
11 bankruptcy protection on May 9, company President Steven Basta listed assets
at $7.8 million and liabilities at $16.2 million.

   Other potential bidders, including GeneSoft, now have until July 3 to tell
the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of Ohio that they will join
the auction.

   "We have had a number of interested parties" for the assets, said Adam
Gridley, Gliatech's director of business development. But he could not confirm
whether there will be other formal bids submitted.

   The company's creditors, however, are holding out hope that other bidders
will join the auction, said Lawniczak, who is with the Cleveland firm of Calfee
Halter & Griswold.

   Gliatech has other assets to sell, too, such as Adcon-L, an anti-scarring gel
that was the company's only commercial product.

   The company's largest creditor is the federal government; Gliatech owes $1.2
million for a fine levied by the U.S. Department of Justice for providing false
or incomplete data to the FDA about Adcon-L. The company's former chief
executive, Thomas Oesterling, is owed $470,000 in severance, the bankruptcy
filing shows.

   Contact Becky Gaylord at:

   bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2002


                             1275 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      June 13, 2002 Thursday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: Merck raises bid for Gliatech assets;
Rival offer makes price go up

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Merck & Co. has raised by almost 50 percent its bid for certain assets of
local biotechnology company Gliatech Inc., which filed for bankruptcy last
month.

   Merck increased its offer for the company's central nervous system and
glycerin transporter programs to $8 million from $5.4 million after GeneSoft
Inc., a gene therapy developer based in San Francisco, indicated it would pay
that much, said attorney James Lawniczak, who is representing Gliatech's
creditors.

   When creditors learned of GeneSoft's interest, they objected to Merck's
initial bid, court documents show.

   Even at the sweetened price, the sale would merely cut in half the debt faced
by Northeast Ohio's first biotechnology company. When Gliatech filed for Chapter
11 bankruptcy protection on May 9, company President Steven Basta listed assets
at $7.8 million and liabilities at $16.2 million.

   Other potential bidders, including GeneSoft, now have until July 3 to tell
the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of Ohio that they will join
the auction.

   "We have had a number of interested parties" for the assets, said Adam
Gridley, Gliatech's director of business development. But he could not confirm
whether there will be other formal bids submitted.

   The company's creditors, however, are holding out hope that other bidders
will join the auction, said Lawniczak, who is with the Cleveland firm of Calfee
Halter & Griswold.

   Gliatech has other assets to sell, too, such as Adcon-L, an anti-scarring gel
that was the company's only commercial product.

   The company's largest creditor is the federal government; Gliatech owes $1.2
million for a fine levied by the U.S. Department of Justice for providing false
or incomplete data to the FDA about Adcon-L. The company's former chief
executive, Thomas Oesterling, is owed $470,000 in severance, the bankruptcy
filing shows.

   Contact Becky Gaylord at:

   bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2002


                             1276 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    June 12, 2002, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BIOTECHNOLOGY; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1610 words

HEADLINE: TRIALS AND ERRORS STRICTER RULES FOR CLINICAL STUDIES SOUGHT TO
PROTECT PATIENTS

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   TORONTO - Jesse Gelsinger was 18 when he volunteered to be part of a clinical
trial for gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania. Within hours of the
treatment, his organs began to fail, and three days later he was dead. An
investigation later revealed that the university and lead researcher in the
trial stood to gain millions from the drug being tested and had ignored early
warning signs.

   The 1999 case shocked the public and the research community, and along with a
handful of other highly publicized deaths in clinical trials, it cast grave
doubt on the ability of the existing system to protect patients. As a result,
federal legislators and regulators are considering stricter regulation of
clinical trials. And in a somewhat surprising twist, the pharmaceutical industry
- the chief sponsor of such research - also is calling for tougher rules.

      "Patients are our business," Heidi Wagner, head of government affairs for
California biotechnology giant Genentech Inc., said during a panel discussion
this week on protecting people in clinical trials, at the annual meeting of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization here. "We wouldn't be anywhere without the
patients who volunteer for these trials."

   Biotech and pharmaceutical companies depend on volunteers for clinical
studies of their drugs to prove that they are safe and effective and to bring
the drugs to market. More than 3,000 trials were taking place in Boston-area
hospitals and clinics at any given time last year. If patients lose faith in the
system meant to protect them, industry officials said, they will shy away from
clinical trials. And this is a risk the industry simply cannot afford to take.

   More than 80 percent of biotech and pharmaceutical companies already miss
their deadlines for enrolling patients, in some cases by more than a year. And
every day a trial is delayed costs an estimated $1.3 million in direct and lost
opportunity costs, according to CenterWatch Inc., a Boston publishing company
that focuses on clinical trials.

   The stakes only promise to get higher as the pace of scientific research
continues to accelerate. Since 1993, the number of drugs in company pipelines
has doubled. Innovations in technology and the mapping of the human genome are
expected to herald an unprecedented age of discovery, meaning more drugs, more
trials, more competition for study volunteers, and more money to lose.

   "In the past, we've responded when there's been a problem," said Dr. Greg
Koski, head of the Office of Human Research Protection, the agency that oversees
all federally funded research. "We've got to move to a more proactive system,
one that will prevent harm, because that's what will build the public trust."

   After Jesse Gelsinger's death, the gene therapy study at Penn was shut down.
Federal investigators found that researchers had violated their own protocol and
federal safety rules, ignoring signs seen in earlier patients that the treatment
could be harmful and failing to disclose financial conflicts. Penn set up a $1.5
million, 13-member Office of Human Research to train, assist, and monitor
researchers. The lead researcher quit in April as head of Penn's gene-therapy
institute, and the FDA has begun a process that could bar him from human
research overseen by the agency.

   Though the Gelsinger case is certainly cause for concern, Koski and industry
officials said, such cases remain the exceptions. By and large, they said, the
system does protect patients. Deaths are rare - only about 1 in 10,000 subjects
die. But the system has become bogged down in procedural and bureaucratic
complexities that don't necessarily protect study volunteers. Koski said the
system needs to be streamlined; protections must focus on protecting people in
clinical trials rather than the institutions running them, and on preventing
lapses rather than reacting to them.

   Informed consent must go beyond getting a person's signature on a form, said
Koski, who prefers the term "informed participation." Study volunteers need to
understand the risks and benefits of the clinical trial. They should be informed
about the study's goals and results from earlier trials, and be told of any
developments as the study progresses.

   Koski favors a more centralized system of third-party review. Currently, all
research centers that conduct clinical trials must have institutional review
boards, or IRBs, that oversee a study to ensure it follows standard protections
established for human research. The boards are generally made up of volunteers
from the institution.

   The system leads to redundancies, especially in cases where many different
institutions are involved in a single trial, Koski said. Rather than having IRBs
from every institution review the same study, a single IRB could oversee the
entire trial.

   He also supports a voluntary accreditation system for IRBs that would
encourage them to go beyond what is legally mandated and strive for a standard
of excellence. And he believes separate boards should be established to review
potential conflicts of interest, monitor trials for any safety concerns, and
watch for any violations of protocol.

   Koski's office and industry leaders disagree on relatively few points. One
key point of dissension, however, is in dealing with financial conflicts.
Genentech's Wagner supports full disclosure of all potential conflicts -
financial or otherwise - to IRB members and study volunteers but does not
believe such relationships should automatically disqualify a researcher from
participating in a study. Koski believes there should be a presumption against a
scientist who stands to gain significantly from the success of a drug being
involved in its development.

   "No matter how well intended people are, bias creeps in," he said.

   At the panel discussion Monday, Genentech's Wagner, the sole industry
representative, was the most vocal in support of strong federal legislation.
Companies navigate an increasingly layered system to run clinical trials, she
said. The industry is regulated primarily by the Food and Drug Administration,
while many of the academic researchers with whom the industry collaborates on
trials are regulated by Koski's office. Yet other laws regulate the privacy of
patient information in clinical trials.

   Many states also have their own sets of regulations that companies must meet.
And when working with 50 different academic research centers, Wagner said,
companies are often left negotiating the details of informed consent and study
protocols with 50 different IRBs - a task that greatly adds to the time and
complexity of managing clinical trials.

   "It's adding burdens and costs to the system that don't necessarily add to
the safety of patients," she said.

   Wagner said the industry wants one set of rules to extend to all researchers
- regardless of whether they are funded by industry or government and regardless
of the state in which they are conducting research. She would like to see a move
toward a more centralized review process, encouraging institutions to work with
a single independent IRB that oversees and monitors large, multisite trials.

   "Strong federal legislation is the only way to get that kind of unified
system," Wagner said, "because it's the only way to preempt state law."

   Wagner believes that a bill, proposed by US Representatives Diana DeGette,
Democrat of Colorado, and Jim Greenwood, Republican of Pennsylvania, to extend
protections under federal law to all human-research subjects would be a giant
step in the right direction. US Senator Edward M. Kennedy also is drafting a
bill to increase protections for people who volunteer for clinical trials.

   "Right now, there is growing public distrust," said Ken Getz, president of
CenterWatch. "If some of the regulations being considered are passed, it may be
another way for industry and legislators to signal that they are doing as much
as they can."

   Audits of both federally funded and industry-sponsored clinical research have
found that the most common problems are failing to comply with study protocols,
falsifying data, and failing to properly comply with informed-consent rules.
But, Getz said, historically less than 3 percent of those cases are serious
violations that put patients at significant risk.

   Nonetheless, Getz said, patients need to feel confident they are being
protected. They need to be treated as partners in the research, rather than as
subjects of study. And critical to that endeavor is to educate people about the
importance of clinical research for medical progress as well as to be brutally
honest about the risks involved.

   Although Wagner believes that streamlining clinical trials could reduce their
time and costs, Getz said other measures may increase their cost and length,
driving up prescription drug prices. But he believes the trade-off is worth it.
Better research means better protection for volunteers in studies, and also for
the public at large because the more that is learned in clinical trials, the
better equipped regulators and physicians are to decide whether to approve or
prescribe a drug.

   "At the end of the day, what matters most is the protection of patients and
study volunteers," Getz said. "It benefits all of us if research is safer and
has better oversight."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.  SIDEBAR1:

   THE NUMBER OF PATIENTS INVOLVED IN CLINICAL TRIALS IN THE US ROSE 65 PERCENT
BETWEEN 1995 AND 2001, AS BIOTECH AND DRUG FIRMS RACE TO INTRODUCE NEW PRODUCTS.
PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.  SIDEBAR2:

   AN EXPANDING PIPELINE PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO   CHART, GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / TOM LANDERS

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2002


                             1277 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                            June 12, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 151

LENGTH: 835 words

HEADLINE: Just a 'roid herring

BYLINE: Carol Slezak

HIGHLIGHT:
Testing is irrelevant to fans, who think they already know the answers

BODY:


   While major-league baseball is figuring out what to do about steroids,
baseball fans are playing a new game: name that steroid user. I've seen it
played many times recently--at the gym, in bars, over dinner with friends.

   Invariably, the game begins with a statement.

   "I believe Jose Canseco," someone will say. "Look around the league. These
guys are too big. Everyone is on something."

   "No kidding," another will respond. Look at Barry Bonds, Jason Giambi, Sammy
Sosa. You can tell just by looking at them."

   A third person will join in: "Yeah, look at their jaws, their hairlines,
their shoulders. Geez, remember Mark McGwire? It's so obvious."

   Whether the named athletes have ever actually used steroids is not known. Nor
is it particularly relevant. What matters is that the players of this game
believe the named athletes are users.

   After a while, someone will pose a question. For instance: "OK, what big-name
pitcher with a huge long-term contract is constantly getting hurt and going on
the disabled list?"

   After the others give up, the questioner will supply the name and add,
"'Roids."

   It continues, player after player. Even some little guys are named, if
they're perceived as particularly fast or moody, or have developed hamstring
problems or a recent proclivity for the long ball. And while the game begins
with baseball, it invariably moves on to football.

   It's a hard game to resist. I've joined in on a couple of occasions. I'll
tell the other players about a guy I once knew. He was a college football
player, and he used steroids. Shot the juice straight into his butt with a
syringe. This was 15 years ago. He played Division III ball.

   "Geez," someone will say. "Division III, 15 years ago? Then by now there
probably are some kindergartners being fed the stuff by their parents."

   And everyone will laugh, although no one thinks it's funny.

   Everyone will then agree that athletes have been using steroids for a very
long time. And everyone will agree there's really no way to stop them. Sure, the
NFL tests for steroids, and occasionally a test yields positive results. But it
was probably some dumb guy who forgot to switch his urine specimen, or counted
the days wrong during his latest steroid cycle.

   "People don't grow that big, not without help," someone will say. "Shaquille
O'Neal excepted."

   Everyone has noticed how football players revert to human form shortly after
their careers are over. Someone will mention that more and more football players
are wearing braces on their teeth, a sign that their jaws have become
misaligned--from what, if not from steroid use? Yeah, sure, the NFL tests. For
what good it's worth.

   "Football players know how to get around the testing," someone will say.
"Just like the Tour de France and Olympic athletes know how to get around it."

   Sure, some are caught--but how many cheaters get away?

   And when Major League Baseball finally gets around to banning steroids and
instituting a testing system, will steroids be eradicated from the game? Anyone
who believes that will happen must also believe the NFL and Olympics are clean.
Steroid users always have been a step ahead of the testing system. And with
advances in gene therapy promising to make their presence even more difficult to
detect, there's no reason to think that will change anytime soon.

   It seems like ages ago that a bottle of androstenedione was spotted in
Mc-Gwire's locker, but in fact it was just four seasons ago. Thousands of home
runs have been hit since. How many were hit by steroid users, we'll never know
for sure. But people have their suspicions, and they've had them for a while. In
1998, some questioned the legitimacy of McGwire's home run record, because the
androstenedione he admitted taking, while not officially classified as a
steroid, affects the body in a similar manner. Others simply looked at Mc-Gwire
and wondered how it was possible for a person to get so big. Oh, for the good
old days when a steak dinner gave a player a competitive advantage.

   It came as no surprise to most fans, then, to hear from Canseco and Ken
Caminiti that steroid use is rampant in baseball. How rampant, no one ever will
know for certain--but the game I call name that steroid user" certainly hasn't
lacked candidates. Whether people believe steroid use is immoral or stupid or
both, they realize it's been part of professional baseball for at least the last
20 years.

   And while lack of surprise shouldn't be confused with approval, the
prevailing attitude I've encountered is one of resignation. American sports fans
are resilient, baseball fans more so than most. Maybe because over the years
they've had to accept a gambling scandal, sign stealing, spitters, a midget
pinch hitter, grooved home run pitches and the specter of juiced balls as part
of their game's legacy.

   Adding steroids to that list is like adding pine tar to a corked bat. Sure,
it makes it dirtier. But it was never all that clean to begin with.

GRAPHIC: Getty Images, Mark McGwire made androstenedione a household word and
fueled a thousand conversations about juiced" players.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2002


                             1278 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                            June 12, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: SPORTS; THE INSIDE STORY; Pg. 144

LENGTH: 1153 words

HEADLINE: This battle may go to the strong

BYLINE: Greg Couch

HIGHLIGHT:
Science might not be able to catch up with the next generation of cheaters

BODY:


   The one good thing that can happen when dirty little secrets finally come out
is reform. Former baseball stars Jose Canseco and Ken Caminiti admitted they
were juiced up on steroids as players and pointed the finger at between 50 and
85 percent of the other players in the majors. The next step for baseball seems
to be testing players for steroids.

   Think about what that could mean: clean players shrinking back to normal
human proportions, hitting the ball normal, human distances and bringing back
the honest romance of the game.

   Now, think again.

   Doctors and scientists do not necessarily hold that same vision. In science,
there is no going back.

   Some question whether baseball is a little late coming to this steroid party,
uncovering its problem just as science is about to take the next evolutionary
step in performance enhancement. Steroids, a new problem? No, steroids might be
just about past their time.

   And in the meantime? Well, there is dispute over whether testing would do any
good, anyway.

   "This whole thing about steroids in baseball and drug use in sport and it
being bad is like people saying, 'I just heard that smoking causes lung
cancer,"' said Dr. Charles Yesalis, a Penn State professor who wrote The
Steroids Game. "Doping has been an epidemic in sport for 40 years. And in
baseball, steroid use has been a problem since the late 1980s.

   "But drug testing is done for public relations, and only stupid and careless
people get caught. It is done to make the dwindling number of naive fans feel
good, and naive journalists feel good. Right now, baseball is just
rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic, anyway, before this thing sinks once
and for all."

   Yesalis, whose new book with Dr. Michael Bahrke, Performance Enhancing
Substances in Sport and Exercise, is to be released today, believes anyone with
money (like baseball players) can afford to buy masking agents and pass a
steroid test while taking steroids.

   And he looks at the next step, gene doping, as possibly an unsolvable
problem. Scientists say within the next four years, athletes will be able to
receive injections of genes that will lead the body to make certain substances.
For example, the body might make a dramatic increase in the number of red blood
cells. Bodies would be mass-producing substances they are already making
naturally, leaving nothing illegal in the system.

   Nothing for drug tests to find.

   This is not science fiction. Testing on gene therapy, which could be used
legitimately to help people with serious diseases and illnesses, has shown mice
gain up to 30 percent muscle mass in two weeks. Yesalis said this could be
sport's big issue as early as the 2004 Olympics.

   Imagine Jose Canseco 30 percent bigger.

   "What they do is inject into the body a new genetic code," he said. "If you
want a bigger chest or more red blood cells, let's say you want more fast-twitch
muscles to improve as a swimmer, well, why not go up the central nervous system
for quicker reaction time.

   "Once that starts to happen ... I think the ball is unraveling already.
Frankly, if it gets down to gene doping--if we don't see some highly substantial
inroads in the next few years in drug-testing--I think we're going to have to
just throw up our hands and get out of the drug-testing business."

   Not everyone is as fatalistic. But even those who are hopeful acknowledge
that the credibility of sports is at risk.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency held a conference in March in New York, bringing
together more experts and scientists to discuss what can be done.

   "What we're trying to do is get a little bit ahead of the curve," Dick Pound,
head of WADA, told the Sun-Times at the Winter Olympics this year. "We'll bring
together geneticists and legal experts and say, 'Listen, what do you see
coming?' And try to figure out what sport's response ought to be to that.

   "Sport is in the hands of the scientists now."

   Gary Wadler, a New York physician who helped to arrange the conference, said
WADA has set up a strong foundation in trying to figure out what to do, bringing
together Olympic movements and governments.

   "I definitely don't think this is hopeless," he said. "We're staying a step
ahead, thinking about methods of detection [of gene-doping in the body]. I think
it's a breakthrough. I don't think this is a time for hyperbole, but for
reasoned thinking."

   Wadler said it is too early to give up on finding acceptable testing methods
for gene doping. And he would step up the fight against steroids.

   "Year-round, unannounced random testing," he said. "That's the way baseball
should go. If it's not all of those things, then it is an IQ test. 'OK, they're
coming to test on Tuesday. Steroids stay in the system for so long.' Just
backtrack before that and stop taking.

   "It literally has to be where 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a
year, someone could knock on a player's door and say, 'I need a specimen.' That
has been very effective in other sports."

   But couldn't players just be taking masking agents with their steroids, and
pass tests year-round?

   "Masking is much more difficult than the press or rumor would have it," he
said. "I'm not saying it isn't possible. But it's gotten more hype than it
should have gotten."

   Pound said he also believes testing has become effective on steroid use. He
cited the positive drug tests at the Olympics as examples.

   But Yesalis believes Pound is kidding himself.

   "Name one star athlete at the Olympics who has been busted since Ben Johnson
[in 1988]," Yesalis said. "Yes, some bobsledders tested positive for nandrolone,
but that's a separate topic. They were guilty of taking [dietary] supplements
that were tainted. But if you separate out all the nandrolones, all you have is
maybe some kayaker who canot afford the sophistication to pass the test."

   Yesalis said the testing is done not to level a playing field, but to satisfy
fans that no one is cheating. If steroids were a problem in baseball in the late
1980s, he asks, then why didn't baseball start testing minor-leaguers until
2000?

   Because the sport needed a public-relations boost, he said, after St. Louis'
Mark McGwire admitted to using androstenedione.

   So now, if baseball goes to steroid testing, will that solve anything? Or
will science just move on?

   Simon Eassom, head of Sports Studies at de Montfort University in the United
Kingdom, sides with Yesalis.

   "Steroids are so old hat," he said on an ABC radio interview. "I think at the
moment, the authorities concerned ... are running around just in despair
thinking there is no way they're going to be able to deal with this.

   "It's certainly going to sort of blow the whole issue of performance
enhancement wide open. There is no point in having laws, policies, rules or
whatever, if it's totally impossible to detect whether anybody's breaking them."

GRAPHIC: Getty Images; Associated Press, Ken Caminiti (top photo) and Jose
Canseco (above) admitted taking steroids only after their careers had ended, and
their cases are considered just the tip of the iceberg both in baseball and
international sports.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2002


                             1279 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 12, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-4

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: Connections: You just can't live without them

BYLINE: SUMITA ANANT; Sumita Anant is a postdoctoral fellow in the Clayton
Laboratories for Peptide Biology at the Salk Institute. Life Watch is written by
Salk scientists.

BODY:
 If you are happy and you know it clap your hands!  This line from a childhood
song nicely illustrates the range of activities controlled by our brain.

   The roughly 10 trillion nerve cells in our brain control our emotions, motor
coordination, learning and cognitive abilities and memory.  Being happy,
realizing you are happy and clapping your hands in response to being happy all
involve incredibly rapid communication between neurons that dwell in various
regions of the brain.  This communication occurs through an intricate network of
connections.

   Neurons talk to each other and to their various target organs, such as skin,
muscle, and organs, etc. through junctions called synapses.  At the synapse, the
message carried by the neuron in the form of an electrical signal is converted
to a chemical signal.  This signal is released in the form of molecules that
diffuse across the tiny gap separating the transmitting cell from the receiving
cell.  The receiving cell, present in various target organs, has receptors on
its surface exactly aligned to capture as much of the signal as possible.  The
signal is then processed and the cell responds accordingly.

   For example if the target is a muscle cell, it will respond by contracting.

   A large number of human diseases arise due to a breakdown in synaptic
communication.

   Alzheimer's disease is characterized by a progressive decline in cognitive
abilities.  In the brains of these patients there is a widespread loss of
synapses.  Abnormal synaptic function is observed in other neurodegenerative
diseases.  Thus synaptic defects either cause disease or occur as a result of
diseases; in both cases normal cognitive and motor abilities are compromised.

   Mechanical injury to nerves and muscle caused by accidents can also damage
synapses, in some cases leading to paralysis.  Current therapies for these
ailments target synaptic molecules by replenishing them or stimulating them so
they respond normally.

   Scientists at the Salk Institute's Clayton Laboratories for Peptide Biology
study how synapses develop.  Using the synapse between a nerve and a muscle as a
simple model system, they have identified key molecular components of the
synapse.  Their experiments used genetically modified mice lacking specific
components of the synaptic machinery.

   The deficiency causes improperly assembled synapses.  Such experiments may
help identify targets for therapy.

   One way to do this would be to treat the patient with drugs designed to
repair damaged synapses or boost synaptic function.  Newer technologies such as
gene therapy may be used to deliver genes that can make the molecular components
needed to build a synapse.

   Yet another option might be to replace the damaged neuron by an entirely new
one using stem cell therapy.  Stem cells have the potential to generate a
dizzying array of mature cell types such as neurons or muscle cells in a
laboratory tissue culture dish.  Neurons derived from stem cells could then be
transplanted into a patient.

   Would such neurons be able to find their correct target cells and make
synapses?  These are difficult tasks.  However, by studying normal synapse
development in animal models we gain insights into the conditions needed to
remake synapses lost by injury.

   Lastly, the study of synapse formation and function is relevant not only to
disease but also to our daily life.  Throughout our lives, synapses are formed
and lost.  This process underlies our ability to constantly learn new skills,
while those used less often get "rusty."

   In response to activity, synaptic form and function can be altered, sometimes
permanently, leading to the formation of memories.  This property, termed
synaptic plasticity, holds out hope for all of us.


LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2002


                             1280 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 12, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: ZONE;Pg. NC-6; NI-5

LENGTH: 602 words

HEADLINE: A family's mission; Annual wiffle ball tourney raises money for cystic
fibrosis research

BYLINE: Robbin O'Neal; COMMUNITY NEWS WRITER

BODY:
 RANCHO SANTA FE -- What started out as a group of fraternity brothers having a
good time on the beach has become part of a family's mission.

   The Hearne family is committed to raising as much money as it can to help
fund a cure for cystic fibrosis.

   And thanks to its recent annual Summer Solstice Wiffle Ball Tournament, the
family has once again added to the coffers of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
All of the event proceeds go to the foundation for research.

   It all started in 1988 when Bill Hearne invited seven friends from Loyola
Marymount University, in Los Angeles, to spend a weekend with him in Solana
Beach before his wedding.

   "The first year my husband and his buddies went to the grocery and bought out
all the Wiffle balls on the shelves," Nancy Hearne said.  "It was that simple.
We never thought about it going anywhere.

   "It was just a bunch of guys getting together to play a game.  They acted
like kids and played Wiffle ball all weekend." she said.

   They had so much fun that they decided to make it an annual event.  When they
got together the following June, the Summer Solstice Wiffle Ball Tournament was
formed.

   Shortly thereafter, the Hearnes learned that their baby would be born with
health problems.

   "Our friends simply stood by us.  They said, 'No matter what -- we're with
you, and we'll all support you with this child,' " she said.

   Liam Hearne was born with cystic fibrosis.  He is 10 now and leads as active
a life as possible.  Wiffle ball is still a big part of the Hearne family, which
now includes 8-year-old Shannon.

   The first year, the Hearnes raised about $600 through a small silent auction
that featured items such as a bicycle and some T-shirts.

   "Then this wonderful group of eight guys that we've nicknamed 'the original
eight' said, 'Why stop there?  Let's take it to the next level.' And they became
a core group of more than 20 people who actively support us," Hearne said.

   "They come, they play, they help raise money through pledges and
sponsorships."

   This year's tournament was played at the San Diego Polo Club. A dinner and
silent auction followed at Morgan Run Resort & Club.

   One part of the event was extra special.

   "We're especially grateful for who we call our 'silent angel,' " she said.

   "For several years, this wonderfully kind person in our community, who wants
to remain anonymous to everyone else, has matched 50 cents on the dollar
everything we raise.  It's such a miracle the way everything comes together,"
she said.

   Although the invitation-only event offers a lot of fun, it is all done with
serious intent.  The Hearnes don't open it to the public for two reasons.

   "We want it to be a family time, so that parents will feel comfortable
bringing their children.  And we want to be sure to keep the focus on the cause,
on finding a cure," Hearne said.

   The Hearne family relies on adult and teen volunteers to help things go
smoothly on the big day.  But their family spends about six months getting
things ready before and about two months wrapping things up after the event.

   "It gets a little crazy around here, especially the week or so before the
tournament," she said.  "And I'm not sure when I last saw my dining room table.

   "But they're saying that this disease will be cured in the next five years
because of genetic research and gene therapy.  And since we're that close, we
just concentrate on that."

   Do you have a story idea for Rancho Santa Fe? Contact Robbin O'Neal at (760)
476-8215 or robbin.oneal@uniontrib.com. For special events, please alert us at
least four weeks in advance.  We work ahead!


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Courtesy photo; Liam Hearne's family hosts an invitation-only
Wiffle ball tournament every year to raise money for cystic fibrosis research.
Liam, 10, has the disease.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2002


                             1281 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 12, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-4

LENGTH: 615 words

HEADLINE: Connections: You just can't live without them

BYLINE: SUMITA ANANT, Sumita Anant is a postdoctoral fellow in the Clayton
Laboratories for Peptide Biology at the Salk Institute. Life Watch is written by
Salk scientists.

BODY:

   If you are happy and you know it clap your hands!

   This line from a childhood song nicely illustrates the range of activities
controlled by our brain. The roughly 10 trillion nerve cells in our brain
control our emotions, motor coordination, learning and cognitive abilities and
memory.

   Being happy, realizing you are happy and clapping your hands in response to
being happy all involve incredibly rapid communication between neurons that
dwell in various regions of the brain.

   This communication occurs through an intricate network of connections.
Neurons talk to each other and to their various target organs, such as skin,
muscle, and organs, etc. through junctions called synapses.

   At the synapse, the message carried by the neuron in the form of an
electrical signal is converted to a chemical signal.

   This signal is released in the form of molecules that diffuse across the tiny
gap separating the transmitting cell from the receiving cell.

   The receiving cell, present in various target organs, has receptors on its
surface exactly aligned to capture as much of the signal as possible.

   The signal is then processed and the cell responds accordingly. For example
if the target is a muscle cell, it will respond by contracting. A large number
of human diseases arise due to a breakdown in synaptic communication.
Alzheimer's disease is characterized by a progressive decline in cognitive
abilities.

   In the brains of these patients there is a widespread loss of synapses.

   Abnormal synaptic function is observed in other neurodegenerative diseases.

   Thus synaptic defects either cause disease or occur as a result of diseases;
in both cases normal cognitive and motor abilities are compromised. Mechanical
injury to nerves and muscle caused by accidents can also damage synapses, in
some cases leading to paralysis.

   Current therapies for these ailments target synaptic molecules by
replenishing them or stimulating them so they respond normally. Scientists at
the Salk Institute's Clayton Laboratories for Peptide Biology study how synapses
develop.

   Using the synapse between a nerve and a muscle as a simple model system, they
have identified key molecular components of the synapse.

   Their experiments used genetically modified mice lacking specific components
of the synaptic machinery. The deficiency causes improperly assembled synapses.

   Such experiments may help identify targets for therapy. One way to do this
would be to treat the patient with drugs designed to repair damaged synapses or
boost synaptic function.

   Newer technologies such as gene therapy may be used to deliver genes that can
make the molecular components needed to build a synapse. Yet another option
might be to replace the damaged neuron by an entirely new one using stem cell
therapy.

   Stem cells have the potential to generate a dizzying array of mature cell
types such as neurons or muscle cells in a laboratory tissue culture dish.

   Neurons derived from stem cells could then be transplanted into a patient.
Would such neurons be able to find their correct target cells and make synapses?

   These are difficult tasks.

   However, by studying normal synapse development in animal models we gain
insights into the conditions needed to remake synapses lost by injury. Lastly,
the study of synapse formation and function is relevant not only to disease but
also to our daily life.

   Throughout our lives, synapses are formed and lost.

   This process underlies our ability to constantly learn new skills, while
those used less often get "rusty." In response to activity, synaptic form and
function can be altered, sometimes permanently, leading to the formation of
memories.

   This property, termed synaptic plasticity, holds out hope for all of us.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1282 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 12, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: ZONE; Pg. NC-6; NI-5

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: A family's mission;
Annual wiffle ball tourney raises money for cystic fibrosis research

BYLINE: Robbin O'Neal, COMMUNITY NEWS WRITER

DATELINE: RANCHO SANTA FE

BODY:

   RANCHO SANTA FE -- What started out as a group of fraternity brothers having
a good time on the beach has become part of a family's mission. The Hearne
family is committed to raising as much money as it can to help fund a cure for
cystic fibrosis. And thanks to its recent annual Summer Solstice Wiffle Ball
Tournament, the family has once again added to the coffers of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation.

   All of the event proceeds go to the foundation for research. It all started
in 1988 when Bill Hearne invited seven friends from Loyola Marymount University,
in Los Angeles, to spend a weekend with him in Solana Beach before his wedding.
"The first year my husband and his buddies went to the grocery and bought out
all the Wiffle balls on the shelves," Nancy Hearne said.

   "It was that simple.

   We never thought about it going anywhere. "It was just a bunch of guys
getting together to play a game.

   They acted like kids and played Wiffle ball all weekend." she said. They had
so much fun that they decided to make it an annual event.

   When they got together the following June, the Summer Solstice Wiffle Ball
Tournament was formed. Shortly thereafter, the Hearnes learned that their baby
would be born with health problems. "Our friends simply stood by us.

   They said, `No matter what -- we're with you, and we'll all support you with
this child,' " she said. Liam Hearne was born with cystic fibrosis.

   He is 10 now and leads as active a life as possible.

   Wiffle ball is still a big part of the Hearne family, which now includes
8-year-old Shannon. The first year, the Hearnes raised about $600 through a
small silent auction that featured items such as a bicycle and some T-shirts.
"Then this wonderful group of eight guys that we've nicknamed `the original
eight' said, `Why stop there?

   Let's take it to the next level.' And they became a core group of more than
20 people who actively support us," Hearne said. "They come, they play, they
help raise money through pledges and sponsorships." This year's tournament was
played at the San Diego Polo Club. A dinner and silent auction followed at
Morgan Run Resort & Club. One part of the event was extra special. "We're
especially grateful for who we call our `silent angel,' " she said. "For several
years, this wonderfully kind person in our community, who wants to remain
anonymous to everyone else, has matched 50 cents on the dollar everything we
raise.

   It's such a miracle the way everything comes together," she said. Although
the invitation-only event offers a lot of fun, it is all done with serious
intent.

   The Hearnes don't open it to the public for two reasons. "We want it to be a
family time, so that parents will feel comfortable bringing their children.

   And we want to be sure to keep the focus on the cause, on finding a cure,"
Hearne said. The Hearne family relies on adult and teen volunteers to help
things go smoothly on the big day.

   But their family spends about six months getting things ready before and
about two months wrapping things up after the event. "It gets a little crazy
around here, especially the week or so before the tournament," she said.

   "And I'm not sure when I last saw my dining room table. "But they're saying
that this disease will be cured in the next five years because of genetic
research and gene therapy.

   And since we're that close, we just concentrate on that." Do you have a story
idea for Rancho Santa Fe? Contact Robbin O'Neal at (760) 476-8215 or
robbin.oneal@uniontrib.com. For special events, please alert us at least four
weeks in advance.

   We work ahead!

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Liam Hearne's family hosts an invitation-only Wiffle
ball tournament every year to raise money for cystic fibrosis research. Liam,
10, has the disease.; PHOTOBY: Courtesy photo

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1283 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      June 11, 2002 Tuesday Metro Edition

SECTION: Metro News; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Disease is hereditary, incurable, slowly fatal

BYLINE: NICK TATE

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   Huntington's disease is a cruel hereditary disease, caused by the
degeneration of nerve cells in the brain. It often strikes in mid-adulthood and
progresses slowly until eventually causing death.

   Scientists identified the gene for HD in the 1990s, making it possible for
doctors to determine who will develop the disease by examining a person's DNA
from a blood sample.

   But with no known cure, gene testing for HD can be a mixed blessing, notes
Dr. Paul Fernhoff, a medical geneticist with Emory University Healthcare. He
spoke with The Atlanta Journal-Constitution about HD, its causes, symptoms and
how genetics counselors work to help HD patients.

   Q: Who's most at risk of developing Huntington's?

   A: The disease is inherited, so anyone with a blood relative with HD may be
[at risk]. If you have a parent who is affected, you've got a 50-50 risk of
developing the disease.

   Q: Who should be tested for the HD gene?

   A: Clearly, the main group is people with someone in their family who has
Huntington's. The first step, we advise, is to ask your doctor: Am I at risk for
Huntington's? And if there's a concern, people should speak with a genetics
counselor about the positives and negatives of getting tested.

   Q: Does everyone with the Huntington's gene develop the disease?

   A: It's my understanding that nearly everyone who turns up positive will
develop signs and symptoms. Based on the DNA pattern, it might be able to
predict the severity of the course for specific patients.

   Q: When do symptoms typically show up?

   A: It ranges. They can begin as early as childhood. The youngest child I've
seen is a 7-year-old. But for the vast majority of cases, it's around age 40.

   Q: What are the signs and symptoms?

   A: Loss of motor control. Movement disorders, jerks or tremors, and they can
get progressive over time. You can also get, occasionally, some psychiatric
changes --- forgetfulness, perhaps, and a whole range of things. And this can
look like a lot of other conditions, so for someone showing signs and symptoms,
it's important to bring this out to your doctor.

   Q: Are the children in all HD families at equal risk?

   A: It depends on who's involved. The typical story is this: You have a
grandparent who's already diagnosed, then, say, a parent who has no signs or
symptoms and then a child or several children. In that case, what we'd recommend
is confirming the diagnosis on the grandparent. Then for all their family
members, if they want, we have them come in and consider the positives and
negatives of testing for the parents. We never test children for this.

   Q: What are some of the advantages of getting tested?

   A: On the positive side, if a new treatment becomes available, the earlier a
patient would start such a treatment the better. The second advantage would be,
for most people, the ability to get involved in life planning. That is: How
would you arrange your life, if you knew you would develop this disease later in
life? The other important consideration would be . . . if you're having
children.

   Q: And the downsides?

   A: There are some very practical ones. Getting the information that you have
the gene can be troubling psychologically. Probably the big thing people might
worry about is the status of their health insurance or life insurance.

   Q: How do genetics counselors help?

   A: What we do is give people information to guide them, based on what other
families have done in various situations. We also have people go home and think
about it before they even do the test. It's an incredibly personal decision, so
we try to give everybody what information we can.

   Q: How is HD treated?

   A: Treatment is aimed at alleviating the signs and symptoms. It's pretty much
drugs and life adaptations, altering the environment for people. The other thing
we usually recommend is palliative care, or hospice care to make sure people are
comfortable in the end stages of the disease.

   Q: Is there anything new on the horizon for treatment that you're aware of,
like gene therapy, since HD is gene-based?

   A: I'm unaware of anything out there, in terms of new treatments.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Paul Fernhoff of Emory University says practically everyone
who carries the Huntington's gene will develop symptoms of the disease, which
usually hits around age 40. / BEN GRAY / Staff; Graphic: HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE

* What it is: A genetically linked condition characterized by abnormal body
movements, dementia and psychiatric problems. It was first described in 1872 by
George Huntington, an American physician.

* Cause: HD is inherited as a single faulty gene on chromosome No. 4. There is a
part of the gene that is repeated in multiple copies. The greater the number of
repeats, the more likely it is that the person will develop symptoms and the
greater the chance they will occur at a younger age.

* How common: In the United States, about 30,000 people have HD; estimates of
its prevalence are about 1 in every 10,000 persons. At least 150,000 others have
a 50 percent risk of developing the disease.

* Symptoms: Behavior changes, irritability, moodiness, restlessness, fidgeting,
antisocial behaviors, psychosis, paranoia, hallucinations, facial movements,
progressive dementia.

* Treatment: There is no cure for HD, and no way to stop its progression.
Medication is aimed at slowing progression and maximizing ability to function
for as long as possible. Dopamine blockers (haloperidol, phenothiazine) may
reduce abnormal behaviors and movements. Antipsychotic drugs, such as
haloperidol (Haldol), or other drugs, such as clonazepam (Klonopin), may also
help. Reserpine and other medications have been used, with varying success.
Drugs like Tetrabenazine and Amantidine are used to try to control extra
movements.

* For more info: Huntington's Disease Society of America: 1-800-345-4372,
www.hdsa.org National Institutes of Health:
www.ninds.nih.gov/health_and_medical/pubs/huntington_disease-htr.htm#
Sources: National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health and Emory
University.
ME: METRO VERSION LONGER

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002


                             1284 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 11, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. B9

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: GENE RESEARCHERS PONDER ENHANCEMENT FOR ATHLETES

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Gene-therapy researchers paused their annual research-filled convention in
Boston Friday for two hours to discuss the possibility of genetically enhanced
super-athletes during a highly speculative seminar that underscored the renewed
confidence bubbling in this once-troubled field.

   Gene therapy, the science of inserting healing or corrective human genes, was
once touted, perhaps prematurely, as the next major advance in modern medicine.
But the science has moved more slowly than anticipated, nearly grinding to a
halt in 1999 when a Pennsylvania gene-therapy clinical trial killed a young test
subject. Numerous federal investigations of gene therapists ensued, leaving the
field's reputation tarnished.

      But last week, talk at a high-profile seminar at the American Society of
Gene Therapy meeting downtown focused on shot-putters with inserted
muscle-growing genes, distance runners with endurance-enhancing genes added, and
entire Olympic teams engineered for triumph. Gene therapy could not deliver such
feats today. But just beneath the speculation was a sense the field would soon
be able to insert human genes at will, transforming medicine by granting people
the ability to modify their fundamental genetic programs. And while athletes
were the stated topic of discussion, participants said yesterday that almost any
human desiring improvement would be tempted by gene therapy.

   "We live in a culture where individuals seek to maximize performance by
whatever means necessary," said Dr. Gary L. Wadler, a sports physician at the
New York University medical school.

   The seminar room was filled with graduate students and post-doctoral fellows,
and many of the 2,000-plus conference registrants were starting careers, a sign
the field may indeed make leaps forward soon, researchers said.

   "We're now coming out of the pall from the last few years. It is a real field
of medicine and it's on the upswing," said Dr. Theodore Friedman of the
University of California at San Diego medical school.

   For the moment, gene therapy's only clinical success remains the treatment of
four French boys with severe immunodeficiency, so-called "bubble boys," who have
thrived for 2 1/2 years after immune-boosting gene-therapy treatments. Promising
gene-therapy clinical trials for cancer and hemophilia are underway as well,
researchers said. But caution still abounds: "This scientific organization knows
better than most that we are dealing with risks we don't yet understand,"
Friedman said.

   Gene therapy works by inserting desired genes into harmless viruses, then
allowing the viruses to infect and spread the genes in patients. Some
researchers, notably a team at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Brighton,
directly inject genes into damaged tissue.

   But ensuring the gene is spread in precise quantities remains difficult.
Several of the high-profile seminars at the four-day conference dealt with
improving these so-called "vectors."

   Once safe methods are perfected, any gene, not just those that heal,
theoretically could be inserted. Researchers yesterday predicted that athletes,
as well as soldiers and police, would be among the first to try nonmedical
gene-therapy enhancement.

   "We believe that the technology you all will develop will be so fantastic
that there will be no health risk," said Johann Olaf Koss, a five-time Olympic
medal speed skater from Norway and antidoping activist, explaining to the
scientists gathered that competitive pressure would eventually push elite
athletes to try gene therapy.

   International sporting officials met last month with geneticists in Cold
Spring Harbor, N.Y., to discuss preventing future Olympic gene-therapy doping.
But that will likely be difficult: Testing would be unreliable, even with
powerful CAT scans, which themselves are expensive and unlikely to be available
in every nation that fields Olympic teams.

   Researchers predicted athletes would likely seek genes that increase the
oxygen efficiency of blood, spur muscle growth and metabolize fat. But society
would likely be interested in a far broader palette of genes, with some
scientists present last week suggesting even their colleagues would request
injections of memory-enhancing genes.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                             1285 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      June 10, 2002 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1568 words

HEADLINE: Building a better vaccine;
Hildegund Ertl and her Philadelphia researchers pursue a new way to conquer the
AIDS virus, threats from bioterrorism and other stubborn, deadly diseases.

BYLINE: Faye Flam Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Hildegund "Gundi" Ertl strides through her laboratory, activity buzzing
around her. Scientists and students concentrate on an assortment of monitors,
test tubes and beakers, all aimed at developing a whole new approach to
vaccines.

   If Ertl - one of the top immunologists in the world - and her small army of
researchers are successful, their creations would work against the virus that
causes AIDS, another virus implicated in cervical cancer, and some bioterrorist
threats such as Ebola.

   The conventional techniques for making vaccines haven't worked against these
diseases, explains Ertl, who sports shoulder-length blond hair and stands 6 feet
tall. Born in the small German town of Euskirchen, she had already earned a
reputation as a leader in vaccine research in Australia and at Harvard before
coming to Philadelphia's Wistar Institute 15 years ago.

   Until recently, all vaccine technology has worked the same way: kill or
weaken a live virus to spark an immune-system reaction that will protect the
body if it ever encounters the real thing.

   In Ertl's lab, as in a number of others around the world, scientists are
moving beyond killed or weakened viruses, using new genetic technology. In
essence, they are creating their own viruses.

   The technology has not yet evolved to allow Ertl to make viruses from
scratch. So she is doing the next best thing: combining different parts of two
viruses to make something new that, like a cross between a lamb and a wolf,
would pose no danger but would still provoke the body's defenses.

   "The work she's doing is really on the cutting edge of technology," said Gary
Nabel, head of vaccine research at the National Institutes of Health.

   The threat of bioterrorism suddenly spurred the government to pour money into
vaccine development. Ertl's work could make a difference with germ weapons.
She's also hoping to apply the same technology to a vaccine for human papilloma
virus, a rampant sexually transmitted disease that has been linked to cervical
cancer. A vaccine against AIDS could save tens of millions of lives.

   Ertl's collaborator on this particular project is James M. Wilson, a
professor at the University of Pennsylvania Medical School, a pioneer in the
experimental field of gene therapy - and, it might seem, an odd partner for this
promising research.

   Wilson was in charge of a Penn clinical trial in which a healthy teenager
died three years ago. The resulting federal investigations dramatically slowed
the pace of gene therapy research nationwide and stopped Wilson's own studies on
human patients.

   The death appears to have been caused by a severe immune reaction to Wilson's
attempt to transport corrected genes into a patient's liver using a relatively
harmless virus that causes a common cold.

   In Ertl's lab, Wilson is again working with that same virus, known as an
adenovirus. And it is precisely the role played by adenovirus in the gene
therapy trial - it very successfully infiltrated cells and delivered foreign
genetic material - that both scientists see as a potential breakthrough in
vaccine development.

   Other researchers have seen the same promise. Merck & Co. is already using
adenovirus in an AIDS vaccine the drug company is testing on human volunteers
around the country. And Nabel is using adenovirus at the NIH to try to develop a
vaccine against Ebola, the virus responsible for the horrific deaths described
in Outbreak, the 1995 movie based on Richard Preston's book The Hot Zone.

   In the field of vaccines, as in many other fields, genetic technology is
playing an increasingly central role. Scientists elsewhere are combining various
disease-causing germs with an assortment of other, friendlier viruses. Some
researchers are looking at genetically engineered bacteria.

   Still others are working further afield, creating genetically engineered
lettuce and goats - literally living factories that they hope will produce the
huge quantities of the raw materials needed to manufacture vaccines for the
developing world.

   All vaccines, old and new, work by fooling the body into acting as though it
has been infected without actually making it sick. The alerted immune system
then cranks out "antibodies" that are custom-made to attack the specific
microbe. Once manufactured, these antibodies often circulate in the bloodstream
for years, effectively preventing future infections of that disease.

   Englishman Edward Jenner is credited with making this discovery in 1796. The
doctor was dealing with smallpox, a major killer at the time. Jenner tricked his
patients' immune systems by infecting them with a related cow disease called
cowpox. The cowpox virus was similar enough to trigger an immune response in
humans but not make them sick.

   Less than two centuries later, refinements of this technique succeeded in
wiping out smallpox, the deadliest disease in human history.

   Some disease-causing viruses have proven harder to combat.

   All viruses are essentially made from a clump of DNA surrounded by a shell of
protein. The DNA contains the microbe's genetic code, allowing it to replicate
in its host. The protein protects the DNA. It also is what triggers the body's
immune system to attack.

   To make a "killed virus" vaccine, formaldehyde or some other chemical is used
to destroy the virus' DNA, leaving just the protein. This dead virus can spark
the body's response but cannot replicate and cause disease.

   For a "live virus" vaccine, scientists destroy certain parts of the DNA, with
similar results.

   For various reasons, neither of these approaches works with HIV or the
cervical cancer-causing HPV or the terrifying Ebola virus, which the government
lists as a possible bioterror weapon stockpiled by rogue states.

   In the case of HIV, for example, a killed virus doesn't trigger enough of an
immune response and a live one poses too much risk of actually causing AIDS.

   "You can't attenuate this virus enough to use it safely," said Nabel, the
NIH's point man on vaccines.

   So Ertl is plucking a few very specific snippets of the HIV genetic code and
inserting them into the genetic code of the adenovirus. The bits of HIV genes
the adenovirus smuggles into a person's cells then create the telltale proteins
that trigger the body to fully arm itself against an actual attack.

   Ironically, the whole adenovirus vaccine project got started after Wilson
realized back in 1994 that the adenovirus caused the immune system to fire up
when he attempted gene therapy with his experimental animals. He was trying then
to use the adenovirus to deliver genes that were missing or abnormal because of
genetic diseases.

   Trying to solve that immune problem and fulfill his dream of curing people
with gene therapy, he sought out Ertl, an authority on the immune system. She
happened to work in the same stone building on the Penn campus that houses both
the Wistar Institute and Wilson's own Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   Ertl quickly realized that the adenovirus might be useful in creating new
vaccines.

   "She saw what we were struggling with and was smart enough to take advantage
of it," Wilson said.

   (Wilson said he believed he had the immune-system problem under control by
the time he began gene therapy on humans several years later, and most of the
early volunteers did not react. Wilson said 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger appears
to have died from massive inflammation brought on by an immune reaction to the
adenovirus.)

   Wilson and Ertl both draw a distinction between what happened in the gene
therapy trial and their work with vaccines. The gene therapy involved infusing
large doses of adenovirus directly into patients' livers. The vaccine
experiments deliver a dose one-hundredth as large as a shot in the arm.

   Merck's adenovirus/HIV vaccine, independently developed in labs in West
Point, Pa., and elsewhere, has not caused problems in early safety trials with
human volunteers, said Emilio Emini, head of vaccine research for Merck.

   While scientists at Merck are ahead in testing, Ertl is using a different
approach that she believes will end up being more effective.

   "With HIV the vaccine really has to stop the epidemic," she said.

   More than 30 percent of people worldwide have already gotten the type of cold
caused by the natural human adenovirus, she explained. Their immune systems are
primed to attack an adenovirus-based vaccine and would likely destroy it before
it could do its work.

   To get around that problem, she and Wilson are experimenting with a different
type of adenovirus, one that normally infects man's closest relative, the
chimpanzee.

   So far, they've spliced a rabies gene into the chimp adenovirus and used it
to successfully immunize mice against the disease. Rabies is commonly used for
such test cases, partly because it so readily infects mice. They published their
work in the Journal of Virology in March.

   They actually make the chimp virus themselves using a purified bit of viral
DNA and laboratory chemicals. That way there's little risk of contamination with
some other chimp virus - a constant worry since chimp and human diseases are
closely related.

   Their next step, probably in the coming months, will be to test vaccines made
with chimp adenovirus in rhesus monkeys. If that succeeds, they would look
toward human clinical trials.

   Contact Faye Flam at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2002


                             1286 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  June 10, 2002 Monday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS PLUS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1446 words

HEADLINE: NANOTECHNOLOGY: BIG IDEAS IN TINIEST OF PACKAGES

BYLINE: Virginia Baldwin Gilbert Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   * Researchers are using molecules to do things that engineered devices do.
Near the top of the list: Nanopills.

   Nanobots, nanochips, nanotubes -- they sound like so much science fiction.
But researchers and venture capitalists alike believe nanotechnology holds real
promise.

   The name comes from the scale -- a nanometer is one-billionth of a meter. In
other words, a nanometer is to an inch as an inch is to 400 miles.

   Nanotechnology seeks to replace the functions of ordinary things -- such as a
computer chip, a mechanical device or a pill -- with one complex molecule.

   "Single molecules, when organized into multiples, give us new structures with
new properties," said George W. Gokel, head of the division of bio-organic
chemistry at Washington University. Nanotechnology researchers are discovering
that "we can use individual molecules to do things that engineered devices used
to do."

   And near the top of the list are nanopills, molecule-sized packages of
medicine or other medical treatment. Researchers at the University of Missouri
at Columbia and at Washington University are among the scientists who are
working on chemical structures that could deliver drugs or remove unwanted
material from the body at that tiny scale.

   Each lab is collaborating with pharmaceutical companies, whose identities
must be kept confidential. And each hopes to enter animal trials soon on a
substance and process that could revolutionize the drug industry -- if it pans
out.

   The technology could hold the key to medical treatment at the cellular and
molecular level, targeting problems, such as cancer, cystic fibrosis or high
cholesterol, without side effects.

   "We have a particle that's about 2 to 4 nanometers in diameter, and it has a
drug substance inside it," said Jerry Atwood, chairman of the chemistry
department at MU. He's working on programming the particle to go to a specific
site where the drug would be needed.

   "Or take the opposite approach," said Karen Wooley, a professor of chemistry
at Washington University. "We're looking at using nano structures as containers
to pick up something," such as excess cholesterol.

   Both research labs are developing nano-sized containers, using the body's
chemistry to aid the process.

   The technology is "clearly something quite valuable, which is being looked at
very closely by both industry and the business development community," said
Michael Douglas, director of Washington University's Center for Technology
Management.

   Simple chemistry

   Atwood says his research on drug delivery is really a question of "how you
could enclose space." And that involves principles that have engaged scholars
for thousands of years.

   He combines the latest discoveries about viruses with traditional chemistry
of the last 100 years and principles of geometry that date back to Plato in 380
B.C.

   Few people think of Plato as a biologist, but "when Plato was putting
together triangles, he couldn't know that at that time, nature had already
addressed that question," Atwood said.

   Plato and Archimedes described three-dimensional objects that could be made
from equal-sided squares, triangles or pentagons. "All the things we've learned
from the structure of viruses turn out to be nature's way of using the
principles of Plato and Archimedes," Atwood said.

   His lab has concentrated on finding square- and triangular-shaped molecules
that would bind together in a hollow structure. He chose the snub cube -- made
up of six squares and 32 triangles.

   To be useful for drug delivery, the structure or capsule must act the same
way gelatin does when it encloses a pill: It must not affect the medicine
inside, it must get through the body to the point where it is needed, and then
it must break apart and release the medicine.

   Atwood's molecule is held together with chemical bonds common in organic
chemistry. It is basically six parts that come together when heated. Whatever
substance is in solution with the six parts when they join gets enclosed.

   Another task is to get the drug-containing molecule to the right site in the
body. Atwood describes the outer surface of the molecule as having "appendages"
that reach out, seeking certain matching substances to grab onto.

   "We can modify this delivery system in 24 ways," Atwood said. "We have 24
sets of hands on the outside" groping their way through a solution or the
bloodstream, looking for just the right spot.

   "Weak interactions are key," Atwood said. As the appendages feel along, one
or another may tentatively bind to something. But if all of them don't latch on,
the parts stay together and the molecule moves on.

   When all the appendages of a molecular capsule have found a point of
attachment, they let go of each other and bind to the new site. The molecule
breaks apart, and the drug inside is released, Atwood said. "It's really simple
chemistry."

   Atwood has been refining his idea since he first published the concept in
1997. He has three patents pending.

   Still to be tested is whether the capsule would be safe and effective as an
oral medication. It survives stomach acid in the lab but has not yet been tested
on animals or people.

   "We have enough of these pieces of the puzzle now that I can see this
happening," Atwood said. "There are ways that individual capsules might fail,
but I don't see where the concept can fail."

   He said he is working with a pharmaceutical company that has "a drug that's a
blockbuster."

   "The least I'd like them to do is license our technology for their drug,"
Atwood said. "But I would really like them to understand the concept and be
willing to team up and use (the technology) for a wide range of drugs."

   Atwood believes his molecular capsule -- his nanopill -- could bypass the
parts of the body where unwanted side effects occur and deliver the drug
directly to the site needing treatment, whether it's killing a cancer cell,
soothing an aching muscle or replacing a necessary enzyme or protein.

   Dumpling-shaped viruses

   Wooley's research team works on molecules about 50 times larger than Atwood's
snub cube.

   Where Atwood is developing ways to deliver small-molecule drugs, Wooley is
working on relatively larger stuff -- if you can call 100 nanometers large.

   "Our particles in many ways resemble biological macro molecules --
lipoproteins, proteins, viruses," Wooley said. "We're taking drug delivery
beyond small molecule-drugs to delivery of genes and large molecules, such as
proteins. For that, you have to have a container of similar size."

   Like Atwood, Wooley is studying the example of viruses, which assemble
themselves and roam through the body, invading cells and forcing them to make
more viruses.

   Scientists have begun using viruses for gene therapy, inserting a desirable
piece of genetic material into the virus and releasing it into a person's body
in hopes that the virus will transfer the material -- and the trait -- to the
person's genetic code.

   But the treatment is risky. Viruses don't behave predictably, and some people
have died when treatment didn't go as planned.

   One big goal of her research "is to make a synthetic version of a virus, so
we could turn it on and off," Wooley said. "We wouldn't run into the same risks
that reconstituted viruses have."

   When she first published scientific papers about the molecules she works
with, Wooley called them "knedels" (kuh-NED-els), because a member of her lab
thought they looked like Polish stuffed dumplings.

   "Maybe we call them that around the lab," said Matthew Becker, a graduate
student in Wooley's lab. "But if we publish anything, it's 'shell cross-linked
nanoparticles.'"

   Gene therapy is exerting the big push for such particles right now,
especially to treat cystic fibrosis and some forms of diabetes.

   "We're not the only people working on this," Becker said.

   And that means they don't want to talk about exactly what they're researching
or how their processes work or what collaborations are being formed.

   "We're an academic lab," Wooley said. "We're only just now beginning to
explore viable applications. So far, most of what we've been studying has been
working quite well. But a lot of it I can't talk about. We're in collaboration
with companies and throwing around the idea of starting up a company."

   The potential is immense, says Douglas, the Washington University official
working with Wooley to transfer the technology to the marketplace.

   "It's all very early stage," Douglas said. "But there's great interest among
the big players in the (pharmaceutical) industry and various people in the St.
Louis community, to maybe take that nascent technology and put a company
together around it."

NOTES:
Reporter Virginia Baldwin Gilbert:; E-mail: vgilbert@post-dispatch.com; Phone:
314-340-8345

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC; (1) Color PHOTO BY JAMIE RECTOR / Post-Dispatch - Kenya
Powell, a Washington University graduate student, pours liquid nitrogen into a
container after she used it to pull moisture from her instruments before
conducting an experiment. Powell is part of a group working on nanotechnology.;
(2) Color PHOTO - Jeff Turner makes notes on the safety panel of his workspace
in Karen Wooley's lab at Washington University. Wooley's lab is working to
advance nanotechnology.; (3) Color Graphic / Illustration - This molecule could
save your life.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2002


                             1287 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              June 9, 2002 Sunday

SECTION: SLIDELL PICAYUNE; Talk of the Town; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: Evening of Wine, Art was fab fund-raiser

BYLINE: Lisa Fitzmorris Clement

BODY:

   Wine and art were just the start of a fabulous celebration as the
Adrenoleukodystrophy Foundation held its second annual Evening of Wine and Art
May 31 at the Galerie DeBautte in Olde Towne Slidell.

   Foundation chairman and chief executive officer David Cry and gracious
Galerie owners Dennis and Cheryl DeBautte were on hand to welcome the nearly 300
guests to the benefit.

   Amid the art, ALD patrons enjoyed a delicious buffet presented by Thai
Orchid, Dunaway's Olde Towne Market and Bayou Bonfouca Banquet Room. A variety
of wines and a Grey Goose martini bar were provided by Slidell Optics and
Habanos.

   A selection of exciting auction items awaited guests. Among the treasures was
a piece by internationally renowned Slidell artist, George Dunbar, an
autographed football by Superbowl MVP Tom Brady, a "Vivid Cityscape" by Nancy
Rhodes, "Circular Floral" by Philip Hubbell, and "Precious Paige" by Boni
Johnson.

   The evening featured a special guest, Dr. Ed Horowitz, director of
Experimental Hematology and Gene Therapy at St. Jude's Medical Center in
Memphis, Tenn.

   The ALD Foundation has aligned itself with Horowitz and St. Jude's Research
Hospital and soon will begin an exciting research project on ALD. Horowitz
praised Cry's support of ALD research, and credited him with being "the catalyst
for bringing many organizations and groups together to work on finding a cure
for ALD."

   Cry said that he will meet later this month with Senator Orrin Hatch's Chief
of Staff in Washington, D.C., as he continues his efforts to secure funding for
research of this disease.

   Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a genetically determined neurodegenerative
disease that can become active at any point in a boy's life. Pediatric onset
usually occurs between 4 and 8 years old. The symptoms of this disease are
horrific and progress rapidly; death is eminent within 30 months of the onset.

   If the gene does not become active until adulthood, the disease is known as
Adrenoemyeloneuropathy (AMN). This is the disease with which Cry is afflicted.
Cry first began having symptoms of AMN in 1997. Since that time he has overcome
great obstacles to assist those people affected by these diseases.

   Of those applauding the accomplishments of the ALD Foundation, established in
2000 to assist medical professionals worldwide in developing therapies that lead
to a cure for these disorder, were Parish Councilwoman Irma Cry and her husband,
George, who also are David's parents; Parish President Kevin Davis and wife,
Maria; Andy and Sue Prude; Vince and Ann Lobello; David and Ruth Thornhill;
Scott Reine; Brenda and Rodney Hart; Linda and Kevin Young; Brice and Kathy
Jones; Lloyd and Karen Labatut; Suzanne Parsons Stymiest and husband, David;
Joan Archer; Kathy and Judge Gary Dragon; Jenifer Besh; Charlotte Champagne;
Slidell City Councilwoman Pearl Williams; Jim Cry; Nicole and Sean Burkes; Bruce
Clement; Kevin and Marie Barre; Linda Calahan, Suzette Mir Tabor; Mike and
Brenna Faulk; Sandy and Harley McPeek; June Collins; Belinda Levy; Marty Bech;
Jenna Bech; Dean and Ann Barks; Mary Speed; Ann Farmer and Troy Ingram; R.B. and
Shannon Williams; Marcia and Ray Williams; Alex and Sulley Williams; Jimbo and
Kimberly Borchert; Mimi McMichaels; Traci Blackburn; and Nancy and Gregg Jones.

   . . . . . . .

News about east St. Tammany social events can be sent to Lisa Fitzmorris Clement
by e-mail, lfitzclem@aol.com; fax, 649-0971; or by calling 643-5852. All
submissions become the property of The Times-Picayune.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS BY LISA FITZMORRIS CLEMENT Dr. Ed Horowitz, director of
Experimental Hematology and Gene Therapy Research at St. Jude's Medical Center
Mary Horowitz ALD Chief Executive Officer David Cry and Galerie DeBautte owners
Cheryl and Dennis DeBautte. Suzette Mir Tabor, Mike and Brenna Faulk, Parish
President Kevin Davis and wife, Maria. George Cry and his wife, Parish
Councilwoman Irma Cry. Mike and Carol Hoffritz, Vince and Ann Lobello, Ruth and
David Thornhill, and Kathy and Brice Jones. Shannon and R.B. Williams, Kimbery
Borchert, Scott Westbrook. Traci Blackburn, Gregg and Nancy Jones, Jim Cry.
Lloyd and Karen Labatut.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                             1288 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       June 7, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 808 words

BODY:

   Due to the embarrassing length of time it takes me to complete 18 holes, to
the embarrassing length, width and gyroscopic inconsistencies of my "swing"
(picture a drunk trying to kill a copperhead with a rake), and to the
embarrassing angina that comes with reliably four-putting from 14 feet, I no
longer play golf.

    But none of those issues were primarily why I left the game for good more
than 20 years ago. The main reason was way more embarrassing.

    I'm afraid of the carts.

    What's with the golf carts?

    What is that sound they make? And worse, what is that sound they don't make?
How can a vehicle powered by -- I don't know -- something, swoop to within eight
inches of my shin while I'm looking the other way and lurk there while I turn
slowly to face its laughing canopy?

    AHHHH!

    Every time I see one, whether it be an E-Z-GO, a Yamaha or one of the 32
base models of Club Car, I feel as though I'm in the initial foreshadowing of
some Stephen King project that will end with golf carts showing up randomly in
the garages of people who are about to be dragged into hell by sparrows.

    Or something.

    As the Mario Lemieux Whole Bunch O' Famous People Who Just Refuse To Fade
Into Domestic Anonymity Invitational gets under way in earnest today, I'm
bringing all this up because there now exists, after decades in which I thought
I'd simply lost my mind, hard evidence that there are few more foreboding
contraptions in this modern life than the standard golf cart.

    Golf carts are killers. Maimers.  Conspirators.

    I'd just hate to see Michael Jordan, for example, in town for the Lemieux
event, find out there's a golf cart out at Nevillewood with his name on it.

    Any further damage to MJ's regal musculature, we all know, could well result
in a rumored announcement over whether he might eventually announce an
announcement about his basketball future, and frankly, I can't stand one more
round of that.

    I don't need to remind you, obviously, that if for some seemingly E-Z-GOin'
reason, Jordan does not play basketball next year, there's a chance the
Washington Wizards will not make the playoffs. Of course, the whole feng shui of
the universe has been screwed up by them not making it this year, but the danger
of the whole situation cannot be overstated.

    At the 2002 Golf Medicine Symposium at Lakeview Golf Resort and Spa in
Morgantown, W.Va., a couple of weeks ago, Dr. Gary Gruen, a professor of
orthopaedic surgery who has treated patients with severe golf cart injuries,
reminded at a seminar that golf carts pose "many inherent risks similar to an
automobile."

    A 1996 study in the periodical "Orthopaedics" found that surgeons in 37
states had reported injuries from golf carts that resulted in four deaths, two
cases of paraplegia, one of quadriplegia, 59 broken legs and a lacerated liver.
A study in "Prevention" that focused on one North Carolina community reported
that 40 percent of injured patients were adults who had been drinking (no!) and
another 32 percent were children who were driving before reaching the age of 10.
The other 28 percent, obviously, children under 10 who had been drinking.

    Dr. Gruen issued some guidelines, to which I've helpfully added some of my
own.

    1. Cart operators should have a valid driver's license.

    2. Some cart operators, I've noticed, should have a valid fishing license
also. What, you didn't see that lake?

    3. Cart operators should avoid the use of alcohol.

    4. Cart operators should avoid the use of smack, crank, Crystal Meth and
crack as well, not to mention Valium.

    5. Cart operators should avoid uneven or steep terrain and should drive with
caution on wet or muddy surfaces.

    6. Cart operators should avoid golf courses.

    7. Hands and feet should be kept inside the golf cart at all times.

    8. Including when you're putting.

    9. Golf course managers should restrict minors from operating a golf cart.

    10. Since one recent accident involved someone trying to drive a golf cart
out of a mine shaft at 3 a.m., maybe golf course managers should restrict miners
from using one too. No minors. No miners.

    11. Passengers should wait until the golf cart has come to a complete stop
before getting off.

    12. Wait for the two-belch signal for safe de-carting.

    Dr. Gruen didn't stop there though.

    "I would take golf cart safety one step further and suggest that seat belts,
airbags, and even helmets be used," he said.

    Yes indeedy. I wouldn't stop until everyone at the country club had to dress
in full NASCAR regalia.

    Finally, do not under any circumstances attack a golf cart, especially by
swinging a club at one of the posts that holds up that canopy. One golfer who
did saw the golf cart snap the shaft off his pitching wedge, propelling it back
toward him and impaling him in the chest.

    They're pure evil. It's chilling.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2002


                             1289 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             June 6, 2002 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FAIRFAX EXTRA; Pg. T12

LENGTH: 1000 words

HEADLINE: FAIRFAX HEALTH WATCH

BODY:

    Health Watch is published bimonthly on the first and third Thursdays. Items
are accepted on a space available basis from public and nonprofit organizations
only and must be received at least 14 days before the publication date. Submit
information by mail to Health Watch, The Washington Post, 4020 University Dr.,
Suite 220, Fairfax, Va. 22030; by fax to 703-273-2836; or by e-mail to
fxextra@washpost.com. Include event name, dates, times, street address, cost and
publishable contact phone number.

    The following free programs will be held at Haven of Northern Virginia, 4606
Ravensworth Rd., Annandale. For more information, call 703-941-7000 or visit
www.havenofnova.org.

    * General bereavement support group, 7:30-9 p.m. the first and third
Wednesdays of each month.

    * Widow and widower support group, 7:30-9 p.m. the second and fourth
Tuesdays of each month or 2 to 3:30 p.m. the first and third Thursdays of each
month.

    * Suicide survivors bereavement support group, ongoing, for anyone grieving
the loss of a loved one to suicide, 7:30-9 p.m. the first Tuesday of each month.

    Breastfeeding Mom's group, facilitated by an experienced maternal-infant
nurse and lactation consultant, new mom topics and concerns addressed, baby
weight check, resource information, refreshments, free parking; 10:30 a.m.-noon
Thursdays, Inova Fairfax Hospital Women's Center, 7 South Dayroom, 3300 Gallows
Rd., Falls Church. For more information, call 703-204-6455.

    The American Red Cross is offering the following classes.

    * Two-day courses covering CPR and first aid, including treating sprains and
fractures, recognizing the need for and administering CPR; 6-10:30 p.m. tomorrow
and 9 a.m.-3:30 p.m. Saturday or 9 a.m.-2:30 p.m. Tuesday and 9 a.m.-3:30 p.m.
next Thursday. South Fairfax Service Center, 9716 Middleton Rd., Fort Belvoir. $
63; $ 50 with military ID. For more information, call 703-805-2057.

    * Adult, infant and child CPR and first aid, 6-10:30 p.m. June 17 and 19, $
63. Adult CPR/AED and first aid, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. June 22, $ 55. North Fairfax
Service Center, 1112 Herndon Pkwy., Herndon. For more information, call
703-876-0712.

    The Alzheimer's Association, National Capital Area, offers free information
forums for caregivers and families dealing with memory loss. For information on
times and locations, call the National Capital Area Chapter toll-free at
866-259-0042 or visit www.alz-nca.org.

    The following programs will be held at Life with Cancer Family Center, 2832
Juniper St., Merrifield. Preregistration required. For more information or to
preregister, call 703-698-2841.

    * Relaxation and imagery techniques, a series aimed at enhancing quality of
life, symptom and stress management and promoting insight. 1:30-3 p.m.
Wednesdays June 12, 19, 26, July 3 and 10.

    * Couples cancer workshop, to help couples learn strategies to strengthen
their relationship after cancer diagnosis. The workshop is open to all couples
regardless of how long it has been since the diagnosis. 10 a.m.-12:30 p.m. June
15.

    International Myeloma Foundation Patient and Family Seminar, information and
support for multiple myeloma patients, family members and health care providers,
tomorrow through Sunday, Ritz Carlton Hotel in Tysons Corner. For more
information, call 800-452-2873.

    Children's cancer support and education group, a seven-week series for ages
5-12 to learn about cancer and discuss the emotions and changes in their lives
when someone in the family has cancer, 5:15-6:15 p.m. Tuesdays June 11, 18, 25
and July 9, 16, 23, 30, Inova Fair Oaks Hospital, Medical Plaza Building,
conference room A, 3700 Joseph Seiwick Dr., Fairfax. Preregistration required.
For more information, call 703-208-5623.

    Cancer support group, discussion and support for patients and family
members, 7-8:30 p.m. Tuesday and June 25, Inova Fair Oaks Hospital, Medical
Plaza Building, 3700 Joseph Seiwick Dr., Fairfax. For more information, call
703-698-2841.

    Heads Up! an educational support group for current and former head and neck
cancer patients and their significant others, 5:30-7 p.m. Wednesday, Inova
Fairfax Women's Center, radiation oncology conference room, 3300 Gallows Rd.,
Falls Church. Use the blue parking garage. For more information, call
703-698-2841.

    The Northern Virginia Brain Injury Association support group, for brain
injury survivors and family members, 7:30-9 p.m. the first and third Thursdays
of June, Falls Church High School, 7521 Jaguar Trail, Falls Church. Free. For
more information, call 703-569-1855 or visit www.nvbia.org.

    The following support groups will be held at Life with Cancer Family Center,
2832 Juniper St., Merrifield. Preregistration required. For more information or
to preregister, call 703-698-2841.

    * Gyn cancer support group, a monthly meeting for women diagnosed with
ovarian, cervical and endometrial cancers, 5:30-7 p.m. Wednesday.

    * Leukemia group, active group members welcome new members for sharing
information and experiences, 7:15-9 p.m. next Thursday.

    * Carcinoid cancer group, a monthly meeting for carcinoid cancer patients
and their loved ones to meet others with the same diagnosis and share
experiences and information, 10 a.m.-noon June 15.

    * Multiple myeloma group, a monthly discussion group for patients and their
families to share experiences and emotions around living with multiple myeloma,
11:45-1:15 p.m. June 18.

    * Young adults with cancer, a group for ages 18- 30-something to discuss
issues of sexuality, dating, body image, work, health insurance concerns,
treatment side effects, fears of recurrence and sustaining a normal lifestyle,
7:30-9 p.m. June 18.

    * Lung cancer group, John Morris of the National Cancer Institute discusses
cutting-edge treatments, such as cancer vaccines and gene therapy, 5:30-7 p.m.
June 19.

    * Prostate cancer support group, a panel discussion of prostate cancer from
a woman's point of view. Family members welcome, 10:30 a.m.-noon Tuesday.

    -- By a Washington Post staff writer

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2002


                             1290 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      June 5, 2002 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 023

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: Hub hosting conference on gene therapy research

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   The promise of gene therapy will be on display starting today at a conference
in Boston at a time when expectations have been scaled back and fears
heightened.

   More than 2,000 researchers from around the world will gather at the Hynes
Convention Center to discuss the latest in gene therapy research on a variety of
illnesses including cancer, heart disease, infectious diseases, and brain and
respiratory tract disorders.

   "This conference is really a hallmark for measuring the progress of the
field," said Stewart Parker, chief executive of Targeted Genetics, a Seattle
company that is developing gene therapy drugs for cancer and cystic fibrosis.

   "The field is growing dramatically," she said. "There are something like 25
products from 10 companies in Phase II trials and a handful in Phase III."

   The fifth annual meeting of the American Society for Gene Therapy runs
through Sunday.

   Critics say gene therapy has been overblown and warn that dangers lurk for
those who subject themselves to clinical trials.

   "It's all hype," said Michael Grodin, medical ethicist at Boston University.
"Show me where it's been helpful or effective. And we know nothing about its
safety or efficacy. As a long-term solution to anything it's a long way off if
at all."

   The field received a huge setback three years ago when a healthy 18-year-old
boy died in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   That disaster led to congressional hearings and new precautions to protect
trial subjects.

   As the field rebounds, company officials say expectations have been scaled
back.

   "Historically, much of the academic community viewed gene therapy as the
ultimate cure for genetic disorders," said Dr. James Merritt, chief medical
officer of Introgen Therapeutics, a Texas biotech company.

   The idea was to replace faulty genes with normal ones to seek cures for
gene-based disorders such as cystic fibrosis.

   "Genetic disorders are an attractive target for gene therapy, but that's an
awesome task," he said.

   These days, much of the research is involved in using gene-based drugs as
treatments for diseases such as cancer.

   "You are using gene therapy more as a delivery vehicle," Merritt said. "The
gene acts as a drug or a vaccine."

   He said drugs now in the pipeline are closing in on FDA approval.

   "If we can use today's technology in a very carefully designed program to
prove that a useful clinical drug will result, this field is really going to
explode," he said.

   Merritt's company is working on a drug for head and neck cancers called
Advexin.

   The drug contains a human p53 tumor suppressor gene that is delivered
directly into tumors using an adeno or cold virus.

   "We've got 500 patients in Phase III trials," he said. "We inject the product
directly into cancer tissue of head and neck and it causes the tissue to stop
growing and shrink."


LOAD-DATE: June 05, 2002


                             1291 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      June 5, 2002 Wednesday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: High-tech projects in NE Ohio get funding

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Six organizations in Northeast Ohio that either help fund or create
high-technology projects will receive about half of $10.5 million in
technology-related grants that the state's Controlling Board has approved.

   The money is intended to get more ideas off the drawing board or out of the
lab and into real life.

   The Technology Action Board, which initially received and reviewed the
proposals, whittled the list from almost 150 applications to just 12, said
Robert Garrick, administrator of the Technology Action Fund grants. The winners
were approved this week.

   Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. of Cleveland won a grant of $1.09 million to
improve a gene therapy it developed to treat cystic fibrosis. The company aims
to create an aerosol, enabling the gene therapy to be inhaled - a more direct
and effective application than currently available with the liquid form, said
Mark Cooper, senior vice president for science and medical affairs at
Copernicus.

   The grant, which is the company's first from the Technology Action Fund, is
going to be partly matched by Case Western Reserve University.

   AlphaMicron Inc. in Kent will receive $1.1 million to develop eyewear whose
tint could change faster than the blink of an eye, said Bahman Taheri, the
company's chief executive officer. Currently, light-activated glass takes more
than a minute to darken or lighten in response to changes in the wearer's
environment.

   Once AlphaMicron's product is perfected, it could be used in motorcycle
helmets and car windshields, allowing the tint of that glass to change instantly
when drivers head into a tunnel, for instance. And pilots could also use eyewear
with the technology to react to capricious conditions.

   Viztec Inc. will use its $1 million to turn out light, yet tough plastic
liquid-crystal displays.

   In the next three months, said Paul Fischer, the company's new chief
executive, Viztec expects to "start to build prototypes, so we can get samples
in our customers' hands."

   The Twinsburg-based company is working with manufacturers of watches and cell
phones, he said.

   The Ohio Innovation Fund II will receive a $1.15 million grant; Imalux Corp.
will receive $542,000, and Micro Medical Devices will get $400,100. All three
are in Cleveland.

   Contact Becky Gaylord at:

   bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2002


                             1292 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 June 5, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 954 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

BODY:

   Cloning, or not

   It was disappointing to see Dr. William Danforth's support (June 3 Commentary
article) of "research cloning," also called "therapeutic cloning."

   First, he attempts to differentiate this from human cloning when they are the
same, except that with "research cloning" the embryo will be killed and not
allowed to develop into a live human. Hence, he is against allowing an embryo to
develop into a born human but not against using that embryo for research and
destroying it.

   Second, the Nuremberg Code and the Declaration of Helsinki declare that
societal benefits alone can never (emphasis added) justify deadly harm to a
human subject. The Nuremberg Code grew out of the human research the Nazis
concocted ostensibly for the benefit of other humans. And the Hi ppocratic Oath
tells physicians to "first do no harm."

   Just because someone else may do this research does not justify our doing it.
We have often told our children that age-old adage in matters of lesser
magnitude than this.

   A. F. Kertz

   Glendale

   The Senate will soon vote on a controversial issue of critical importance to
my family and I. As the wife of someone with Parkinson's Disease, I want the
American public to know the truth about therapeutic cloning, which could help
save millions living with Parkinson's and other incurable diseases and
conditions.

   Therapeutic cloning is fundamentally different from human reproductive
cloning. Therapeutic cloning produces stem cells, not babies. The cells are not
transplanted into a womb. And therapeutic cloning could allow patients to be
cured using their own DNA.

   People like my husband deserve a chance at life. My husband is faced with the
daily balancing of medicines and their side effects, fatigue, weaknesses. Unless
a cure is found, he could be totally disabled in five years. Therapeutic cloning
procedures might be that cure; we won't know without further medical research.

   A vote against therapeutic cloning is a vote against patients with incurable
diseases, a vote against hope and a vote against my husband's chance at some
future quality of life.

   Lois S. Frank

   Chesterfield

   In the May 31 Post-Dispatch, Tina Hesman reported the endorsement of "clone
and kill" legislation by former Sens. Thomas Eagleton and John Danforth. Of
course it wasn't called that -- it was called "therapeutic cloning."

   The graphics from Scientific American explaining the cloning process
illustrate that both "therapeutic" and "reproductive" cloning produce an embryo
that can "be used for either therapeutic cloning of stem cells or for
reproductive cloning to produce a child." This embryo is a living, human being
with a well-defined identity stored in its genetic code. This is the beginning
of life as defined scientifically and morally. No individual has the right to
redefine such a crucial point. Clones created for therapeutic purposes are
intentionally killed.

   The most deceitful aspect of advocating the "clone and kill" process is the
assertion that it is necessary for medical advances. No research shows that
human embryonic stem cells can be used to successfully treat even one disease.
But evidence continues to mount of therapeutic successes with (non-embryonic)
adult and cord blood stem cells.

   To take one example, a California man suffering from Parkinson's received a
transplant of his own adult neural stem cells. By the end of the first year, his
symptoms were relieved by 83 percent. (American Health Line, April 10)

   For another, a Welsh toddler has been cured of severe combined
immunodeficiency disease ("bubble boy syndrome") by transplanting his own bone
marrow cells back into his body. (S. Pincock, " 'Bubble Boy' in Britain Cured
Using Gene Therapy," Reuters, April 3)

   Pam Fichter

   Vice President

   Eastern Region

   Missouri Right to Life

   Warson Woods

   Where's my refund?

   I think there should be more coverage on the state's delay in processing 2001
tax refunds.

   As a consumer, I can't make excuses regarding payment of bills. Thirty days
is standard business practice. The state should have to follow standard business
practices, including payment of interest after 30 days and payment of a
reasonable late charge fee.

   David Bateman

   South County

   Candy smugglers

   Unless we put up with $4 boxes of popcorn and $2 candy bars, movie theater
owners claim they will go out of business (May 31 article). Come on! Where would
Hollywood show its blockbuster films if there were no screens?

   Once it were shown that the theaters were in serious trouble, everybody in
Hollywood would have to step back a couple of million dollars, that's all. Let's
hear it for the sweet-tooth smugglers!

   John J. Archibald

   Webster Groves

   Didn't know, eh?

   I don't usually read Jerry Berger's column. But the May 31 headline about the
councilman caught filling up his swimming pool from the fire hydrant caught my
attention and I just had to ask these questions:

   Is Councilman John Campisi as stupid as he sounds when he says he was unaware
that using water from the hydrant was out of bounds?

   What do you suppose would happen to anyone else who's not a member of the St.
Louis County Council if we pulled the same stunt? Could we claim ignorance, too?

   Jennifer Murrell

   Lemay

   Building bridges

   Thanks for the good coverage (June 3 article) of the event that took place at
Daar-ul-Islam, our mosque in West County, on Sunday. It was good that you
covered the event in a very objective manner and gave a true representation of
the whole event. We hope that we will have more of occasions like this to build
bridges that may help our wound to heal and put our hands together to defend our
country against all its enemies.

   Kamal Yassin

   Town & Country

GRAPHIC: Photo; Photo - Fire hydrant

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2002


                             1293 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 4, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1391 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHING YOUR OWN DISEASE MIT FRESHMAN, STRICKEN AT AGE 3, HOPES TO
FIND A CURE FOR KIDNEY TUMOR

BYLINE: By Stephen Smith, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   It is his first memory, fired in that crucible of disease and despair that is
so rarely the province of those still learning their ABCs.

   "I can remember the socks I was wearing," Kyle Rattray said as he recalled
that day when the first traces of an illness that would frame his life as a
child and as a young adult emerged. "They were gray with blue stripes."

       He can remember, too, the vision of blood sluicing in the toilet bowl,
the trips to see doctors in big hospitals in big cities, a world away for the
3-year-old from Sunnyside, Wash. Today, 16 years later, the diagnosis makes more
sense than it did back then: Wilms' tumor, cancer of the kidneys that strikes
young children.

   Rattray lived to tell his story - and to hunt for a cure for the disease that
struck him and that besets 400 to 500 children a year in the United States,
accounting for 6 percent of all pediatric cancer cases. He is a freshman at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, invited into one of the research sanctums
usually reserved for those with advanced degrees or, at least, a few years as
undergraduates.

   But there's something about the kid from Sunnyside, about his pluck and his
willingness to put voice to questions at a place where silence can be preferable
to displays of ignorance.

   "It's often a problem for MIT students: They're used to being the smartest
people in their class, and then they get here, where everybody was the smartest
person in their class. So, you don't want someone who's faking it; you want
someone who's willing to say, 'I don't understand it,' " said Julia Alberta, the
MIT biomedical researcher who agreed to allow Rattray to join her team that's
studying the genetic profile of Wilms'.

   "I'm not willing to spend a lot of time explaining things to people who are
just looking for a line to beef up their resume. Kyle cares. He has a reason to
care."

   He cares because he has the gestalt of a humanitarian, wanting to prevent
other children from enduring what he experienced. And he cares because he has
the mind of a scientist, wanting to fathom the genetic roots of the illness that
could have killed him.

   Those passions suffuse his work in the laboratory and his volunteer labors
for the American Cancer Society. This year, Rattray organized the Cambridge
Relay for Life on the MIT campus, a charity event that had about 400 people
walking and running during 18 hours on a May weekend. It was among the first
relays conducted this season in Massachusetts - others are scheduled for this
month - and raised $55,000.

   Rattray grew up in the eastern half of Washington state, where the land is
fecund, nurturing a 600-acre family farm sprouting with asparagus, apples, and
grapes.

   From the time their son was born, Rod and Cindy Rattray suspected there was
something amiss about Kyle's health. He had intestinal problems, difficulty
keeping food down. "A mom knows when her baby's not right," Cindy Rattray said.
"We kept taking him to the doctor and nobody could find anything."

   Then there was that day in 1986 when he was playing on the front porch and
tumbled off. "He came in crying," Cindy Rattray said, "and we just gave him a
big hug and a kiss."

   It was later that day that blood appeared in his urine. At first, doctors
suspected a tear in the bladder.

   His belly grew distended, traces of blood remained in his urine. A month
later, further testing in Seattle revealed a tumor the size of a cantaloupe
perched on the right kidney.

   The diagnosis: Wilms' tumor. Left untreated, the cancer migrates from the
kidney, colonizing the lungs.

   The treatment: Excision of the diseased kidney, followed by months of
chemotherapy.

   For Kyle Rattray, it was a mystery rendered under the bright lights and
sterile milieu of an urban hospital.

   "In a few weeks, I went from being a normal kid to a kid with no hair, a kid
with a scar on his stomach, a kid with a tube in his chest, a kid who couldn't
go out and play with his friends," Rattray said. "That just was not cool for
me."

   Not cool - but it worked. Surgery got rid of the tumor, and the chemo
eliminated residual vestiges of the disease.

   But it could not still his interest in what had made him so ill. As an
elementary school student, he devoured books on cancer.

   "It wasn't what you would call research," Rattray said. "It was, read it in a
book, regurgitate it, make your Mom proud."

   The serious stuff would start later, in the seventh and eighth grades, when a
dynamic teacher forged Rattray's interest in science.

   But it was a trip to MIT in the eighth grade - his best friend's sister was a
student there - that inspired him to go from a student in the back of the class
to one at the front.

   "I was afraid that come high school, he would be the kid up dancing on the
desktop with the lamp shade on his head," Cindy Rattray said.

   Kyle Rattray became determined to spend his college years at MIT. There was
the ubiquitous presence of an MIT T-shirt on his back. And then there was the
time he was mowing the grass and carved the letters M-I-T into the lawn.

   "The cancer was kind of a blessing for the kid; that's a horrible thing to
say, but look at what good's coming out of it for him," Rod Rattray said. "I
don't know what direction in life he would have taken otherwise. He's turned a
bad into a very good thing."

   During high school, he turned it into a stint at the National Cancer
Institute, successfully lobbying for a research internship typically reserved
for college students.

   Rattray arrived at MIT last fall, a brain and cognitive sciences major
determined to do more than read about science in textbooks. So, he sought a lab
willing to take on a freshman. He contacted biologist David E. Housman, whose
work centers on identifying genes implicated in human diseases.

   That is when serendipity intervened.

   "He said, 'I have one lady who needs help; she's working on Wilms' tumor,' "
Rattray said. "Obviously, I jumped on that. I said, 'Well, let me tell you . . .
' "

   Alberta, the scientist who made Rattray the first freshman she had ever
included among her coterie of researchers, sensed that Rattray understood
intuitively the often frustrating reality of bench science: There are many more
moments greeted with a chorus of "hmms" than a hosanna of "ahas."

   On this afternoon, he is clad in the uniform of college students the nation
over: T-shirt, jeans, baseball cap cocked backward. Half-moons of fatigue hang
under his eyes, and a growth of beard stubbles his face.

   He examines translucent glass slides freighted with tiny mouse kidneys, doing
the often tedious work necessary to make incremental scientific progress. That
means wielding pipettes and laboratory vacuums that help prepare the mice
kidneys for evaluation.

   The gene that is the object of researchers' attention is called the WT1
suppressor gene - the cellular building block that prevents most people from
ever getting Wilms' tumor. Those who lack the gene or those whose genes somehow
go awry - people like Rattray - are subject to developing the disease.

   The scientists are taking snapshots of what's going on in the mice kidneys at
a cellular level. The knowledge they glean will further understanding about how
kidneys work and, potentially, yield improved treatments for Wilms' tumor,
approaches that might range from gene therapy to new pharmaceuticals.

   Rattray's presence in the fifth-floor lab of the building that goes by the
inelegant moniker E-25 represents, in many respects, the face of research in
America today. It is powered by a broad cadre of scientific worker bees imbued
with the energy, the desire, and the intellectual malleability to pierce
assumptions and academic canon.

   "The great majority of breakthroughs are made by young people," said Dr.
Robert Weinberg, an MIT cancer researcher and founding member of the Whitehead
Institute. "For those like myself who have been working on a problem for 20 or
30 years, we have some fixed ideas. And then we run up against stone walls. A
young person isn't held down by all these preconceived notions."

   Sometimes, along with that, they bring a determination borne of experience.

   "When I go into a lab," Rattray said, "I'm not just testing for a tumor that
affects nameless, faceless kids. For me, it's very personal."

   Stephen Smith can be reached at stsmith@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Kyle Rattray, who was diagnosed with a Wilms' tumor at the age
of 3, is now a freshman at MIT and is studying the illness as part of a
biomedical research team. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / PAT GREENHOUSE

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2002


                             1294 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 1, 2002, Saturday ,FOURTH EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1262 words

HEADLINE: DESPITE TRAGEDY, LAB STAYS ON CUTTING EDGE

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   On the rr night before his death, Dr. Jeffrey Isner laughed deeply, as
always, criticized vigorously, as usual, and pondered ideas with typical
abandon. At 53, he was at the top of his game, running the St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center heart disease research lab he had built into a national
powerhouse.

   So Dr. Douglas Losordo, Isner's second-in-command, was stunned when he got
the page early the next morning: Isner had suffered a massive heart attack and
was at St. Elizabeth's, this time as a patient. Losordo rushed to the Brighton
hospital to tend to his close friend.

      "He essentially had died at home. I came in, but it was really too late to
do anything," said Losordo.

   At that moment seven months ago, one of the Boston area's most distinguished
research efforts lost its revered captain. For almost a decade, Isner championed
the idea that injected bits of blood vessel-growing DNA could reverse the
ravages of heart disease. It was cutting-edge work in a field - gene therapy -
that remains among the most promising and contentious in medicine.

   Isner drew a steady, growing stream of federal research money, almost
singlehandedly elevating St. Elizabeth's standing in the highly competitive
Boston medical community, where the modest-sized Catholic hospital long lived in
the shadow of the much larger Harvard teaching hospitals.

   There was controversy along the way, a federal investigation that briefly
halted some of Isner's work.  But by Oct. 30, 2001, he'd been exonerated, his
lab awarded a $10 million federal grant to establish a Center of Excellence in
Gene Therapy with potential to wield national influence over the field.

   Then suddenly Isner was gone.

   And with equal abruptness, Losordo, a 13-year veteran of Isner's staff, found
himself at the lab's helm. Could he carry on? He was an accomplished researcher
in his own right, the author of several dozen cardiology publications and a gene
therapy specialist.

   But Losordo was nervous. "There are no other Jeffs. I will certainly not
pretend to be another Jeff," he recalls thinking.

   Where Isner was brash and animated, 44-year-old Losordo is soft-spoken and
earnest. The University of Vermont medical school graduate had spent his entire
professional career at St. Elizabeth's, most of it at Isner's side. His research
interests were largely shaped by Isner.

   Yet, the gene therapy lab at St. Elizabeth's has not only survived Isner's
death, it has thrived, pushing Isner's ideas forward into ambitious clinical
trials that could eventually result in powerful new treatments for heart
patients. The story underscores the group effort behind much modern research,
even in a lab dominated by a strong personality. But it also demonstrates how
one man's guidance, ideas, and passion can persist despite the most tragic
circumstances.

   Isner launched the lab's current research effort back in 1989, inspired by a
new insight that defined his career. Heart disease patients cannot pump blood
effectively. Their body tissue starves. Cancer tumors, meanwhile, grow their own
blood supply. Isner wanted to do this for heart patients.

   His method was novel: inject a blood vessel-growing gene straight into
starving tissue. Gene therapy. There were numerous doubters, which led to
numerous shouting matches at medical conferences. But Isner found the technique
worked in animals.

   In 1994, he tested it on a patient and ailing leg tissue was soon nourished
by new blood flow. An 80-patient clinical trial was launched.

   The lab won accolades and attention. Funding flowed in. And in mid-2001,
after a testy battle with federal regulators scrutinizing his work, Isner won
the $10 million research grant to further test his ideas.

   Just months later, on Oct. 31, at about 6:30 am, Dr. Robert Schainfeld, a
vascular medicine specialist with Isner's team, got a call from the hospital.
"The worst thing in the world has happened," said the voice of a colleague.

   Isner had no known history of heart problems. But cardiac arrest had killed
him within minutes, according to his death certificate. Schainfeld decided he
wanted to gaze at his friend one last time. But the sight shocked him, and he
pulled away. "It just wasn't right," he said.

   The next day, the staff held a meeting in the St. Elizabeth's chapel. They
cried. They reminisced. Administrators expressed support. But the loss was
massive.

   Isner was clearly the star of St. Elizabeth's; one hospital executive called
him their Pedro Martinez, comparing him to the Red Sox ace. He had put the
cardiology department "on the national map for not only clinical care, but
research," said Dr. Robert M. Haddad, president of St. Elizabeth's.

   The Boston medical community flooded them with condolences, but area doctors
privately wondered whether the high-velocity research program could continue its
pace without its founder.

   Hospital administrators quickly placed a call to the National Institutes of
Health, which had just awarded Isner and St. Elizabeth's the $10 million grant.
The NIH expressed its sympathy, then assured the hospital the grant was safe.

   The adminstrators then surveyed the staff Isner had assembled around him over
a decade. What they found was a cadre of doctors, post-doctoral fellows,
technicians, and even secretaries that had absorbed Isner's knowledge - and
passion. Losorodo knew gene therapy science intimately. The doctors had
internalized Isner's long-term vision of treating damaged tissue with DNA
injections. The proposed experiments that won the $10 million and other federal
grants had already been designed. It was just a matter of testing the therapies
on patients.

   The lab, they discovered, had matured from an upstart into an established
institution, with Isner's role, at the time of his death, less dominant, more
managerial. Despite intense grief, they almost immediately returned to work.

   Marianne Kearney, supervisor of cardiovascular research, said: "Projects
continued, papers continued. We've been very fortunate. Jeff set us up to be
very fortunate."

   Schainfeld offered a simple assessment of the lab's performance: "I firmly
believe we didn't lose that much in the way of momentum."

   Over the last seven months, the lab has worked on six significant clinical
studies that could eventually change the face of cardiovascular medicine.

   Two cutting-edge experiments attempt to heal cardiac problems with adult stem
cells, which can change into different body tissues and are found in the body,
unlike the more controversial embryonic stem cells, which can only be harvested
from the destruction of week-old embryos.

   They will test the gene therapy Isner pioneered on more than 900 patients in
four clinical trials. The most anticipated trial involves injecting the damaged
hearts of 404 patients with a blood vessel-growing gene. Another will administer
gene therapy to 200 with diabetes-caused limb damage. Yet another will use the
approach to attempt prevention of persistent artery blockage on 200 patients.
And 140 with severe congestive heart failure will get gene therapy injections.

   Losordo runs the lab but Isner's presence clearly lingers: the lobby of
Losordo's office area remains plastered with press clippings, scientific papers,
and patient letters celebrating Isner's work.

   "I think about Jeff every day. When I'm grappling with a tough problem, it's
not uncommon for me to think: How would Jeff, in his bombastic style, deal with
this?" said Losordo.

   "It hasn't been hard for me to carry on," he said, then paused.

   "Professionally, that is."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Dr. Douglas Losordo (rear) working with researcher Toshinori
Murayama. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / WENDY MAEDA

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2002


                             1295 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                         May 29, 2002 Wednesday, Final

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: Cleveland to be site of MSNBC medical broadcast

BYLINE: Roger Mezger, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   America will open its mouth and say "ahhh" when MSNBC comes to Cleveland next
month to broadcast what the cable network is billing as a national summit on
health care.

   "The Summit for a Cure" will air live from 8 to 10 p.m. June 23 from the
Cleveland Play House.

   With news anchor Brian Williams moderating, a panel of medical experts will
discuss advances in fighting heart disease and cancer; the aging of America; the
promise of gene therapy; technological advances; access to medical care;
alternative medicine; and other health topics.

   "It's going to attract some really big names from all over the country to our
city," Cleveland Clinic spokeswoman Angela Calman said. The Clinic is the host
for the program.

   The show will be broadcast from the Play House's 548-seat Bolton Theatre,
just down Euclid Avenue from the Clinic.

   Cleveland is an ideal place to produce the program, said Dennis Sullivan,
MSNBC news executive editor, because of the Clinic's status as one of the
nation's leading medical institutions.

   Connections don't hurt, either. Calman performed public relations for MSNBC
before joining the Clinic last fall, Sullivan said.

   The eight-member panel is likely to include Dr. Eric Topol, the Clinic's head
of cardiovascular medicine, Sullivan said.

   Williams, whom NBC named yesterday to succeed Tom Brokaw as anchor of its
"Nightly News" after the 2004 elections, will lead the panel.

   Some "celebrity guests" who have faced serious medical problems will join the
show by satellite. And three "miracle patients" will tell their stories,
Sullivan said.

   Contact Roger Mezger at:

   rmezger@plaind.com, 216-999-4446

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2002


                             1296 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             May 29, 2002 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 786 words

HEADLINE: Report Says Drugmakers Innovate Less, Modify More

BYLINE: Marc Kaufman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Most drugs approved for use during the 1990s were not innovative new
chemicals that treat diseases in novel ways but rather were modified versions of
drugs already on the market, according to a new analysis.

    The study, by the nonprofit National Institute for Health Care Management
(NICHM), challenges a central argument of the nation's pharmaceutical drug
industry: that it needs high profits to fund its risky and highly innovative
research.

    The emphasis on incremental change was especially pronounced in the last six
years of the period studied, when the number of popular but less-innovative
drugs increased dramatically -- as did the nation's spending on prescription
drugs. The report says that while these new drugs may be beneficial to patients,
they are not the kind of breakthroughs that consumers have come to expect.

    The report concludes instead that drug industry advances are now far more
likely to involve relatively minor improvements in how existing drugs are
administered, dosed and combined with other existing active ingredients than the
discovery of entirely new types of treatments.

    "The pharmaceutical companies have migrated towards becoming more marketing
than research and development organizations," said NICHM President Nancy
Chockley. "Highly innovative drugs are rare."

    The trade organization representing the drug industry, the Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), criticized the study as
"fundamentally flawed" and biased because it was done by a group sponsored by
the health insurance industry. PhRMA Vice President Richard I. Smith said that
he had not been provided the full report but that he had learned its key points.

    "Today's NICHM report appears to be little more than a political and
financially motivated cheap shot masquerading as science in the public
interest," he said. "It comes as no surprise that its report conveniently
ignores many of the basic facts about drug research, not the least of which is
that innovation rests in the lives of its beholders."

    In particular, he said, the study relied on Food and Drug Administration
review categories that are irrelevant to assessing the usefulness of drugs and
to how much patients might benefit from them. While some might dismiss the many
anti-depression drugs on the market as "copycats," Smith said, studies have
shown that half of depression patients try two or three varieties before finding
one that works for them.

    He also criticized the report for focusing only on the past and not saying
anything about the many drugs in the pipeline, especially the products of
biotechnology and gene therapy that some believe will transform drug treatments
in the future.

    The NICHM was founded nine years ago by 11 Blue Cross/Blue Shield companies,
and the presidents of those companies constitute most of its board of directors.
The group seeks to provide impartial information and has an independent advisory
board of prominent health care experts.

    The NICHM study looked at whether drugs were accepted by the FDA for
"priority" or "standard" review, and whether they included new molecular
entities or were improvements on existing ingredients on the market. The group
judged the "priority" drugs that contained new active ingredients as the most
innovative and the "standard," "incrementally modified" drug applications as the
least innovative.

    The study found that of 1,035 drugs approved by the FDA from 1989 to 2000,
46 percent were in the least innovative category. During that period, only 15
percent, or 153 approved drugs, were medicines that both used new active
ingredients and provided significant clinical improvements, the potential level
of benefit needed to achieve a priority FDA review.

    During the first six years studied (1989 to 1994), the FDA approved 168
drugs that neither provided significant clinical improvements nor had new active
ingredients. In the second six years (from 1995 to 2000), the number in that
category increased to 304.

    The study also concluded that the doubling of prescription drug spending
from 1995 to 2000 -- from $ 64.7 billion to $ 132 billion -- was largely
attributable to new drugs in the least innovative category.

    Yesterday's report, and the response to it, are another example of the
bare-knuckles brawl that has broken out between the drug industry and the health
insurance companies that pay much of the nation's fast-rising prescription drug
bill.

    Those costs have led to health insurance premium increases and caused the
health insurance industry to step up legislative and legal efforts to reduce
drug costs, especially through the expanded use of generic drugs. PhRMA and the
drug industry have been fighting back fiercely.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2002


                             1297 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                      May 28, 2002, Tuesday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1916 words

HEADLINE: Mayo files hold trove of family gene data;
The clinic, which has generations of information about Olmsted County residents,
wants to examine DNA patterns for clues to genetic diseases and treatment.

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

BODY:

   Dan Schuster's grandparents carried a risk for cancer when they settled in
Olmsted County before farmers had cars, let alone pickups, to drive to
appointments at the Mayo Clinic. Megan Underhill's family has battled
cholesterol for three generations. Robert and Sarah Keller have a history of
tumors.

        The medical stories of millions of such families are embedded in records
that Mayo has collected while caring for patients over the years. Now the
collection is a key to Mayo's future as it redefines itself to keep pace with
genetic discovery that is revolutionizing medicine.

        Mayo plans to ask the Minnesota Legislature and private sources for $80
million to underwrite an ambitious project linking patient files to DNA analysis
in order to find genetic patterns that answer fundamental health questions: Who
is vulnerable to a disease? What can be done about it? Who would benefit from a
given drug?

        Mayo has mighty competition in a race that has become medicine's gold
rush. But if it pulls off the project, southeastern Minnesota would join Iceland
and a few other hot spots in the emerging field of population genomics, the
study of DNA patterns in large groups of people.

        The Marshfield Clinic in central Wisconsin is setting up a similar
project with $3 million in start-up funding from Congress and the state of
Wisconsin. It plans to begin collecting DNA this summer from up to 50,000
patients.

        The genes of Olmsted County would be the mother lode for Mayo's
research. For decades, Mayo has collected records from every doctor visit, lab
test, surgery and autopsy in the county. From farmers to shopkeepers, residents
also have participated in hundreds of Mayo studies, many involving DNA analysis.

        The collection is America's version of the Iceland genetic database,
said Dr. John Burnett Jr., Mayo's director for research. In that ambitious
project, a company has requested DNA from the 275,000 living Icelanders and also
computerized the country's medical records covering many generations in order to
link genetic profiles with disease lines and come up with new therapies.

        Similar projects are in progress in Newfoundland, Estonia, China, Tonga
and Italy. The sites are attracting the research because they feature isolated,
genetically homogeneous populations. Researchers expect genetic disease patterns
to stand out more clearly in a gene pool that hasn't been roiled by massive
migrations.

   River of life

        Think of human gene flow as if it were the Mississippi River. Near its
Minnesota origin, it might be easy to identify the source of a contaminant. But
at the Gulf of Mexico, it would be difficult because Old Man River picks up
water from the Missouri, the Arkansas and many other rivers that drain vast and
diverse regions.

        Olmsted County isn't a genetic headwaters. But most of its people are
genetically similar descendents of Germans and Scandinavians who settled in
southeastern Minnesota's rolling prairies and limestone bluffs a century or more
ago.

        One reason the county is ideal for studying complex clusters of
inherited diseases is that generations of family members are available for
extensive studies, said Burnett, Mayo's research director.

        "Everybody stays here," he said. "So you can follow the natural history
of the person. But you can also find their uncles, their aunts, their
grandparents, their children, the children of the children. Now you can put
together and weave the story."

        Take Megan Underhill's family. Nobody has strayed far from Rochester for
long, and "everyone goes to Mayo," said Underhill, who is a dental assistant.

        Her father's side, the Schulzes, did landscape farming. They were better
known at Mayo, though, for heart trouble. Thinking about her late grandfather,
she said, "I couldn't even count how many heart attacks he had."

        In 1980, her father had a heart attack too. He was rushed to Mayo, but
he died at age 37.

        "One day our lives were normal," she said. "The next day, it was totally
different. It was pretty rough."

        After her husband's funeral, Cheryl Schulz, Underhill's mother, asked
Mayo doctors to check the children for early signs of heart problems. At first,
she couldn't believe the results. Three of the four kids had danger-zone levels
of bad cholesterol called LDL, or low-density lipoprotein.

        It turned out that they have a relatively common genetic disorder that
hinders their bodies' abilities to process LDL cholesterol, which has been
linked to heart disease.

        Thus, at 13, Underhill started a regimen of diet, exercise and drugs.
Now 34, she goes to Mayo every three months for cholesterol checks. Until
recently, scientists haven't known precisely what happens inside the cells when
a patient inherits a disease.

        That is changing in the wake of the Human Genome Project, said Dr. David
Altshuler, director of the Medical and Population Genetics Program at the
Whitehead/MIT Center for Genome Research in Cambridge, Mass.

        Researchers are identifying genes linked to diseases by exploring the
differences in DNA spelling from one person to another.

        One major thrust of Mayo's project would be to contribute to that
research. Computers would comb DNA databases for spelling variations and also
search patient records to see whether those with a given disease share unusual
spellings. If Underhill, for example, were compared with her sister who doesn't
have a cholesterol problem, they would reveal variations in genes related to LDL
cholesterol. By studying such differences, scientists already have pinpointed
some genes underlying cholesterol problems, said Dr. Gerald Gau, Underhill's
cardiologist at Mayo.

        Mayo proposes to search for genes that could explain a broad range of
diseases.

        Another thrust would be to develop gene therapy techniques and thus
correct genetic flaws that cause problems in the first place. It is highly
likely that such therapy could be available to Underhill in six to 10 years, Gau
said. If so, she could be freed from the drugs she now takes.

        Meanwhile, a third thrust is to learn how to tailor prescriptions for
individual patients. Some drugs have worked for Underhill. Others haven't.
Knowing which drugs activate certain genes could provide a better fit for
patients across a broad range of diseases.

   Extensive records

        Altshuler said Mayo and Marshfield are well-prepared for the research
because of their extensive record collections. Leaders at Mayo say they are
better positioned than some other prestigious U.S. medical centers because they
serve Olmsted County residents as the local clinic, not just a specialty center
for serious cases.

       "You get to see both the breadth across the community plus the true
prevalence of the disease and the true incidence of complications as it occurs,"
said Dr. Hugh Smith, chairman of Mayo's board of governors.

        Another asset Mayo touts is sophisticated computerized record-keeping.
Mayo recently announced a deal with IBM Corp. to create systems for
incorporating DNA into research and health care. But the backbone of the project
will be the computerized collection that Mayo started building a decade ago.

        Initially, Mayo will focus on records for its 4 million most recent
patients. Ultimately, it could reach further back to another 2 million files,
but DNA from older cases in which the patients are deceased isn't likely to be
used, Burnett said. Even though Olmsted County is the centerpiece, patients from
other places will provide a basis for comparative studies and broader views.

        In a current phase, Mayo is taking stock of its data and options for
organizing it for the genome studies.

        "We have this giant matrix of data, and you can slice it this way, you
can slice it that way." Smith said. "It's something like a Rubik's Cube."

        Some of the oldest files describe Dan Schuster's grandfather who moved
from Wisconsin to Rochester in 1885 to open a clothing store and to develop real
estate. He died from stomach cancer. Another file is about Schuster's mother, a
concert pianist, who died from from lung cancer.

        The modern-day Schusters represent a relatively recent turn in the
culture surrounding Mayo. Dan Schuster retired in 1992 from IBM where he was a
product manager. Not surprisingly, he is comfortable with genetic and computer
technology that would have amazed his ancestors.

        Mayo has obtained consent from patients to use their records for
research, Burnett said, and the database will feature several levels of security
to protect patient identities.

        That aspect of the project will be closely scrutinized, Altshuler
predicted. While the potential benefits are stunning, there also are risks. In
some states, for example, employers could use genetic information to deny a
person a job.

         In Marshfield, community members have been invited to meetings where
they can air concerns about the project, said Dr. Michael Caldwell, director of
Marshfield Medical Research Foundation.

        Privacy is critical, and safeguards are needed at the federal level,
said Robert and Sarah Keller of Rochester who are advocates for patients in
cancer treatment. Mayo doctors have treated her for ovarian cancer and him for
prostate and lung cancer.

        "People are not going to be willing to participate without some degree
of privacy," said Robert Keller, a retired physicist.

        Still, the Kellers share the hope the research offers for others who
might have inherited a risk of cancer. Sarah Keller, a retired teacher, was 16
when she watched her mother die from cancer.

        Community collaboration is healthy, she said, and the genomic database,
she said, can be seen as a new form of community support: "Databases are going
to help people to connect."

   The money hurdle

        First, Mayo needs to clear the formidable hurdle of funding its project.

        In Iceland, deCODE genetics, the company leading the study, spent $71.8
million on research and development last year, its second year of operation, and
reported a net loss for the year of $47.8 million. Still, it had attracted
enough investment to end the year with $167.1 million in cash and equivalents.

        Mayo wouldn't be starting from scratch because of its hefty past
investments in records systems, laboratories and research staff.

        But it does need to come up with $80 million in the next four years,
Smith said. The state will be asked to pitch in, he said, because Mayo is a
valuable economic resource.

        "Our impact on the state is $3.97 billion a year, three times the size
the the Mall of America. . . . If Mayo is to continue to thrive, then Mayo must
remain at the cutting edge. To be cutting edge, we have to make an $80 million
investment in genomics."

        But the Legislature already has invested in genetic research at the
University of Minnesota. The state's budget woes make this a difficult time to
ask for money. Still, Mayo may begin lobbying late this year, Smith said,
depending on the political and economic climate.

        The project wouldn't stop if the Legislature refuses, he said. But Mayo
would turn to private funding sources outside the state, he said, meaning
potentially lucrative patent rights and commercial development would go
elsewhere.

   .

       _ Sharon Schmickle is at sschmickle@startribune.com.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2002


                             1298 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 27, 2002, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 796 words

HEADLINE: CATHY YOUNG Cathy Young is a contributing editor at Reason magazine.
Her column appears regularly in the Globe.;
THE MORALITY OF CLONING

BYLINE: BY CATHY YOUNG

BODY:

   THE DEBATE OVER THE PROMISES AND PERILS OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IS CAUSING STRANGE
POLITICAL MUTATIONS. ON THE POLITICAL RIGHT, THERE IS ACRIMONIOUS DIVISION
BETWEEN LIBERTARIANS AND CULTURAL CONSERVATIVES; MEANWHILE, RIGHT-WING
TRADITIONALISTS FIND THEMSELVES ALLIED WITH LEFT-WING ANTICAPITALIST LUDDITES.
THE LATEST FOCUS OF THIS DEBATE IS THE CONGRESSIONAL BILL, OVERWHELMINGLY PASSED
BY THE HOUSE LAST YEAR, WHICH WOULD OUTLAW NOT JUST THE CLONING OF HUMAN BABIES
BUT THE CLONING OF HUMAN CELLS AND THE USE OF ANY MEDICAL TREATMENTS DEVELOPED
THROUGH THIS TECHNIQUE IN COUNTRIES WHERE IT IS LEGAL.

   The anticloning bill is a dangerous exercise in panic-mongering that could
retard or foreclose lifesaving advances in medicine. Nevertheless, critics of
cloning and genetic engineering have valid concerns, some of them outlined in
Francis Fukuyama's book "Our Posthuman Future," that libertarian champions of
biotechnology would do well to acknowledge if they are to prevail in this
debate.

   For now, mammalian genetic engineering is at, well, an embryonic stage.
Although the human genome has been mapped, scientists are very far from exact
knowledge of which genes affect which traits, under what circumstances, and in
what combination.

      But suppose in the future science did acquire the ability to "customize" a
human baby - to produce not only the desired height or eye color but such
characteristics as sensitivity or competitiveness, artistic or mathematical
gifts. When one considers such a scenario, anxiety about the damage to our sense
of humanity is harder to dismiss.

   What happens to our notions of self-determination if people become, as the
Russian communists used to say in a very different context, "human material"?
What happens to the belief in individual freedom if individuality can be reduced
to a software program written by other people, if an "engineer of human souls"
is not just Stalin's chilling term for a writer but an actual job description?
What happens if we lose any notion of the human soul, not as a theistic concept
but as a notion of some inviolable core of self?

   One could argue that genetic engineering would not diminish freedom; human
behavior and personality would be shaped by DNA just as it ever was, only more
visibly. But it does make a difference whether these characteristics are
produced by chance or by human design - just as there is a fundamental
difference between teaching your child to be friendly and giving him extra
niceness genes.

   There are other disturbing implications. One need not be a radical
egalitarian to be troubled by the prospect of a society in which the affluent
can add genetic enhancement to their children's advantages while the have-nots
fall further behind. Americans accept inequality of outcomes because they
believe in merit and equality of opportunity. If these concepts become obsolete,
we can expect a groundswell of resentment - and a push for the government to
foot the bill for prenatal "Head Start."

   The libertarian argument is that parents should be free to choose what's best
for children. But if genetic enhancement becomes commonplace, will people face
pressures to make the "right" decisions about their children's DNA? Suppose
genetic intervention can minimize the chances of antisocial behavior, and some
parents refused to take advantage of it. If their child goes on to commit a
crime, could they be charged with negligence?

   None of this is to suggest that research on human genetic engineering ought
to be banned or restricted by law, unless it endangers research subjects. For
one, gene therapy targeting various diseases could alleviate much human
suffering. If it can make inroads against Alzheimer's, for instance, millions
will be saved from the cruelest loss of individuality and identity. This is a
potential that some biotechnology foes brush aside in a shockingly high-handed
manner. Thus, columnist George Will has mocked the "desiccated utilitarianism"
which holds that "if something reduces an individual's suffering or improves an
individual's well-being, it should be done."

   But some proponents of unfettered science, such as Rutgers mathematics
professor Norman Levitt, can sound just as cavalier when they deride a
supposedly outdated "spiritualized view" of the human soul.

   One of the paradoxes of life is that even beneficial changes often have a
downside. Opposition to government bans on morally problematic uses of
biotechnology should not foreclose a vigorous debate about moral issues, or even
a voluntary decision by scientists not to go down certain paths. The prudent
exercise of moral judgment - such as a stigma against any genetic alteration
that amounts to tampering with the self - may be the best way to forestall
intrusive laws.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2002


                             1299 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              May 27, 2002 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2550 words

HEADLINE: Researcher analyzes last frontier;
 the brain

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Mullener; Staff writer

BODY:

   One day in his seventh year, Nicholas Bazan was walking through his hometown
of Salta, Argentina, on his way to a piano lesson, accompanied by his Aunt Tita.
They were only half a block from home, surrounded by the traditional stucco row
houses painted in gentle pastel colors and by the small trees that grew through
grates in the cobblestone sidewalks.

   Suddenly the music books his aunt had been carrying went flying through the
air and she fell to the ground, her arms and legs flailing violently. It was a
terrifying moment for a young boy.

   "I didn't know what to do," Bazan says, looking bewildered even now, 52 years
later. "I didn't know what was going on. It was scary. People on the street
came."

   What Bazan had witnessed, he learned later, was a grand mal epileptic
seizure. And if he was too young to process the experience at the time, he now
recognizes that the anxious curiosity it provoked in him may well have been the
initiating event in his career.

   Today, Bazan is in the front rank of medical researchers in New Orleans,
director of the Neuroscience Center at the Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center and internationally celebrated for his basic research on
neurons. With both an M.D. degree and a Ph.D., he has spent his professional
life investigating the brain -- its functions and dysfunctions. He continues to
do research on epilepsy, but he also studies Alzheimer's disease, the effects of
stroke, blinding eye diseases and the nature of pain.

   In recent years, he has reinvented himself as an entrepreneur as well,
starting a corporation to advance a new kind of painkiller he devised in
collaboration with two chemists in Spain. It is exactly the kind of innovation
the city is looking for and could well serve as the centerpiece for the
long-hoped-for research and development corridor in New Orleans that could cash
in on the burgeoning biotechnology economy.

   But as much as he enjoys the business end of science, and the financial
rewards that come with it, Bazan says he would never leave his laboratory
behind. The future of his field, he says, is ripe for some thrilling advances.

   "The brain," he says, "is the last frontier of medicine.

   "Today you can cure so many diseases. Cancer, for example. If you make an
early diagnosis, you can cure it. But with brain diseases, no matter how early
you diagnose them, we have no cure. Alzheimer's, schizophrenia, Parkinson's,
stroke -- these are devastating. We have some treatments for some of them, but
we have no cure."

'The accidental mouse'

   "Have you heard about the accidental mouse?" asks a young woman with
excitement in her voice, her white lab coat flapping behind her as she sails
into Bazan's office.

   "I have, Mattie," Bazan says. "It is very impressive."

   The mouse, they explain, is part of a research project on sleep deprivation,
commissioned by the Army, that promises to bring in as much as $11 million in
grant money. The design of the experiment is to prevent the mice from sleeping
for 48 hours and then immediately study the effects on the hippocampus area of
the brain. The accident was that one mouse got 24 hours to recuperate before
being studied. The effects of the accident were surprising -- the mouse had not
recovered much at all -- and elucidating.

   Mattie Hardy was one of a parade of young scientists in and out of Bazan's
office on the eighth floor of an LSU Health Sciences building one recent
morning. A corner office with commanding views of downtown New Orleans, it is
crammed with plaques and awards, towering stacks of paper and a blackboard
bearing a drawing of a neuron's molecular structure, as well as a collection of
abstruse books, including "Neural Darwinism" and "Histology of the Nervous
System."

   A big and burly man, Bazan speaks with a rich Spanish accent, invoking an
extensive vocabulary and an unaffected eloquence, steering his way with
deliberate precision around big words or complicated thoughts. He lives with his
wife, Haydee -- also a neuroscientist, who works with him at LSU -- in a
handsome home near Audubon Park. Their five children are grown and gone.

   He goes to Mass every Sunday, drives a silver Mercedes and plays a game of
tennis he describes as "enthusiastic." Like many big-name scientists, Bazan
spends much of his time on the road -- at meetings, conferences and seminars all
over the world. At home, he spends much of his time entertaining visiting
scientists.

   The corner office is Bazan's command post, from which he oversees a dozen
research projects that occupy 30 scientists and three floors of a sizable
building. At the moment, he has about $36 million in grant money; in the 20
years he has been at LSU, he has brought in about $65 million.

   His proclivity for research started early, when he was a young medical
student in Tucuman, Argentina, and volunteered to work in the laboratory of a
faculty member for a summer. It was a riveting experience, and it charted the
course of his career at a time when neuroscience was just beginning to blossom.
In 1970, there was no Society of Neuroscience; today it has 27,000 members. In
1970, there were only a handful of scientific journals devoted to the brain;
today there is a plethora, including highly specialized ones such as
"Neurochemistry" and "Hippocampus." Bazan has been at the center of some of the
discipline's most exciting advances.

   One of his major discoveries was the chemical changes in the brain resulting
from epilepsy or stroke, as well as a way to inhibit those changes. Another
breakthrough was the development of a compound that switches off the cascade of
chemicals in the brain that frequently follows a head injury and kills neurons.
And a third was identifying the mechanism that leads to the death of brain cells
after a protracted brain disease or a sudden injury.

   "Let me put it this way," he says: "In the brain cells after epilepsy or
stroke or disease, there are set in motion many, many changes. We feel the
changes we are studying are the main changes. The proof is that when we block
them with the drugs we've developed, we can actually protect neurons from dying.

   "We need to do so much more research in this area."

Putting ideas to work

   "I think in the future it will be ideas that drive economies," Bazan says.
"We have service industries, we have oil, we have agriculture, and they are all
very important. But the big drivers of the future will be ideas."

   It was nearly a decade ago that Bazan had his own idea.

   It had to do with analgesics. To be sure, plenty of analgesics are on the
market, but they all have their failings. Some are narcotic; some can be toxic
to the liver; some suppress fever, which serves a valuable purpose in diagnosis;
and many have a narrow margin of safety before they bring on harmful side
effects.

   After decades of studying the brain and its diseases, Bazan had developed
some notions about viable targets for drugs within the brain. He began working
in his laboratory on a purer analgesic. It was in 1993 that he struck up a
cyber-collaboration with the two Spanish chemists, at the Universidad de Alcala.
Together, they came up with a compound for a painkiller that avoids all the
usual pitfalls. They call it SCP-1.

   The leap from pure research to a medical application was exhilarating for
Bazan.

   "What an MD scientist like me does every day -- ultimately, one would like to
see this applied," he says. "One would like to see the transfer of knowledge
from the research bench in the laboratory to the bedside of the patient. Every
scientist would like to do that."

   Since the invention of SCP-1, which could be a rival to Tylenol, Bazan has
acquired three patents for the compound and has started up a corporation, St.
Charles Pharmaceuticals, to test the drug, refine it and eventually produce it.
Along the way, he snagged $4 million in local venture capital to keep the
enterprise going.

   The new direction in Bazan's life required some professional retooling.

   "I was telling my children that doing all of that was like getting a mini-MBA
degree," he says.

   Meanwhile, St. Charles Pharmaceuticals -- with eight full-time employees, 15
consultants and offices one floor up from Bazan's -- has been charging ahead
with its mission. A few weeks ago, the Food and Drug Administration approved
SCP-1 for clinical trials in human beings. The trials, already under way in
Austin, Texas, have been encouraging, showing no toxicity and no side effects.
The next step is to test the drug for effectiveness. It could hit the market
within three years. Bazan is delighted with the progress.

   "We're on a roll," he says.

Culture of innovation

   The city of New Orleans would like to think so. A biotechnology corridor
downtown, with nearly 20,000 medical workers in its midst, has long been a dream
of those planning for the city's future. The invention and production of a
mass-market drug would be an ideal kickoff for such a venture. It has drawn the
attention, and the enthusiasm, of Gov. Foster, who has proposed a $150 million
plan to stimulate scientific research in Louisiana, a move he predicts could
spin off scores of profitable businesses and provide high-paying jobs for tens
of thousands of workers.

   Bazan agrees the potential is there.

   "I would like to see many of these companies here, startup pharmaceutical
biotech companies," Bazan says. "We could develop 100 companies. That is not
impossible.

   "I am completely convinced there are many assets in the universities and
colleges here, and to some extent in the business community. If they can be
brought together, they can help create a totally new force for our economy. The
opportunity here is to create in the New Orleans region a culture of innovation,
a culture where many people are involved: lawyers that deal with intellectual
property, accountants, finance people.

   "It works both ways. The universities provide the creative force and the
community captures that and nurtures it." Besides St. Charles Pharmaceuticals,
there are other possibilities for startup companies inherent in Bazan's
research. One is a patented molecule he has developed with a potential to treat
epilepsy. Another patent could lead to a drug to limit the damage to the brain
after a stroke. A third is for a family of chemicals that could slow down the
progress of Alzheimer's disease.

   And many other scientists in town have ideas ripe for development. Bazan
foresees New Orleans taking up a niche in the biotechnology world, probably in
the areas of neuroscience, gene therapy, cancer or ophthalmology. He even
foresees the possibility that some of the giant pharmaceutical companies might
create partnerships with local universities and possibly set up branches nearby.

   "New Orleans could become as well-known in those fields as Houston is in
cancer and cardiovascular," he says.

   "I don't want to appear to be oversimplifying this," he adds. "This is not
easy. Our assets are small compared to other cities. In San Francisco, if
somebody says, 'I have an idea'  -- boom, they will get a building, they will
get venture capital. It's all available. It's not so readily available here. But
I am very optimistic that it can be done.

   "I don't want to say anything bad about the Saints or the Hornets or the
casinos. I love the Saints. But I think we put too much emphasis."

Living in mortal danger

   When Bazan arrived in New Orleans in July 1981, it was by the skin of his
teeth.

   Argentina at the time was going through a turbulent period politically,
rocking from extreme left to extreme right in one revolution after another.

   "Out of this clash there were 30,000 missing people," Bazan says. "The
desaparecidos. The disappeared. They would be tortured, then thrown into the
sea."

   Bazan, although never politically active, was nearly one of them.

   He joined the faculty of the Universidad del Sur in Buenos Aires province in
1970, after holding research posts at Columbia University, Harvard University
and the University of Toronto. For the next 11 years, he worked under a series
of university presidents, all politically appointed. The last one didn't take
kindly to Bazan's refusal to go along with the school's harsh new strictures,
nor did he take kindly to the Jews on Bazan's faculty nor to his father's past
as a midlevel politician in Juan Peron's government. Before long, Bazan's name
appeared on a blacklist. Accused of being a terrorist, he was fired from his job
and banned from teaching and research.

   "This was at the end of 1980," Bazan says. "By then there was a worldwide
outcry against the killing of all those people. If this had happened one year
earlier, for sure I would not be able to tell you this story."

   Once fired, Bazan became a media celebrity of sorts. Coverage of his research
already had appeared in the Argentine newspapers. But at this point, crusading
journalists all over the country used his case as an example of oppression by
the military regime. They wrote hundreds of articles and editorials about him.

   "I even wrote articles myself with my signature in the newspapers about
science and freedom," he says. "I wrote about why it was so important for
Argentina, a poor country needing development, to have scientists and
educators."

   The more Bazan became a cause celebre, the more the government bore down on
him. For three months, he lived in mortal danger.

   "A lot of nasty things began happening," he says. "There were many phone
calls, many threats. They tried to intercept my car. I escaped. They tried to
kidnap me. I went into hiding. But the news people kept calling me and I would
keep talking. Then I got a phone call saying if I speak to one more reporter,
they will hurt me and my family."

   In the meantime, because of his international renown as a scientist, Bazan's
case came to the attention of three U.S. senators. It also came to the attention
of Herbert Kaufman, chairman of LSU's ophthalmology department.

   Shortly thereafter, Bazan got a phone call from the American embassy in
Buenos Aires. Suspecting that his phone was tapped, they invited him -- with a
wink in their voices that he understood -- to come talk to the ambassador about
his research. He went.

   "The ambassador told me he knew I was in trouble, and they were prepared to
take me out of the country," Bazan says. "We closed our home and left. The
cultural attache took us to the airport, with a photographer to document we were
there. We arrived in Miami without a visa."

   That night, Bazan flew into New Orleans with his wife, five children, seven
suitcases and two boxes of research results. No more. The next day, he went to
work for Kaufman and LSU.

   He has been back to Argentina, now much more settled politically, many times
since. He has been given honorary degrees and awards there; he has even been
offered his job back.

   "Of course, I didn't take it," he says, shaking his head. "America is my
country. This is where my heart is -- and my mind. My children are here, my
grandchildren are here, and all my colleagues. I love New Orleans. I love
Louisiana. I want to contribute here, to work here, to be constructive."

   . . . . . . .

Elizabeth Mullener can be reached at emullener@timespicayune.com or (504)
826-3393.

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY JENNIFER ZDON Dr. Nicholas G. Bazan is in the front rank
of medical researchers in New Orleans, director of the Neuroscience Center at
the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center and internationally
celebrated for his basic research on neurons. With both an M.D. degree and a
Ph.D., he has spent his professional life investigating the brain -- its
functions and dysfunctions. [78250] STAFF PHOTO BY JENNIFER ZDON Dr. Nicholas G.
Bazan says he would never leave his laboratory behind. The future of his field,
he says, is ripe for some thrilling advances. 'Today you can cure so many
diseases. Cancer, for example. If you make an early diagnosis, you can cure it.
But with brain diseases, no matter how early you diagnose them, we have no cure.
Alzheimer's, schizophrenia, Parkinson's, stroke -- these are devastating. We
have some treatments for some of them, but we have no cure.' [78251]

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2002


                             1300 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 2; Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2394 words

HEADLINE: Art/Architecture;
The Wonders Of Genetics Breed A New Art

BYLINE:  By STEVEN HENRY MADOFF;  Steven Henry Madoff has written art criticism
for Time, Talk and other magazines.

BODY:

   IF art in the broadest sense peers into the mysteries of life, then an art
dedicated to the structure of life itself is of momentous relevance.

        That imposing premise informs "Gene(sis): Contemporary Art Explores
Human Genomics," an exhibition that opened in April at the University of
Washington's Henry Art Gallery in Seattle. At once clever and awkward, the
show's title evokes the biblical loftiness of Divine Origin and an altogether
cooler scrutiny of the scientific, ethical and legal issues pulsing from the
very nucleus of our genetic being.

    There are 100 trillion cells and 30,000 to 40,000 genes in the human body,
perfecting and destroying each of us in the relentless arc of living and dying.
The expressions of our genes are so complex, so beautiful and monstrous, that to
marvel at the heights of nature's ingenuity is to grovel before the mountain of
our ignorance. Yet now that the initial map of the human genome is complete --
finished in June 2000 by the government's Human Genome Project and its rival,
Celera Genomics -- our whole genetic code is spilled into the light. For the
first time, this rough beast Homo sapiens is glimpsing the entire gene order
written within that makes us and keeps us and kills us.

   The genomic revolution changes everything, including our creative lives and
the larger culture. Film plots hinge on the wicked wiles of clones. Music is
plucked from DNA. Books about biotech abound. And then there are the visual
arts. The exhibition at the Henry, which travels through 2004, with stops at the
Berkeley Art Museum at the University of California and the Frederick R. Weisman
Museum at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, is only the latest of
nearly a dozen shows on the topic over the last few years. Indeed, for more than
a decade artists have stuttered, fumed and wondered at the dazzling science of
genetics and its darker questions.

   What will it mean when your government, your employer, your prospective lover
and your insurance company can know the fate at least potentially signaled by
the machinery of your genes? What decisions will you make about your unborn
child when you can tweak here and there in the magisterial sequence of DNA to
make a little Britney or Tiger or a Stephen Hawking minus the physical flaws? To
cure cancer and Alzheimer's through genetic therapies would be astonishing
triumphs. But if life can be durably prolonged, what will the planet do with a
population overrun by Methuselahs demanding food, shelter and something fun to
do to idle away a cornucopia of Sundays?

   It is only now, as the subject has moved into the hot zone of media
obsession, with images of cloned sheep giving way to the specter of cloned
neighbors, that this art has moved closer to the mainstream. "I've tried to
create an exhibition that's not about shock value, but to show the way artists
are considering these powerful issues -- and in some cases reacting with the
deepest ambivalence," said Robin Held, the curator of the Henry show. "The goal
isn't to translate scientific concepts for a lay audience but to ask where those
concepts are taking all of us, do we trust those concepts, how do artists
respond and how should we respond?"

   In the process, Ms. Held and her 26 artists explore every avenue of
art-making -- from painting, photography and sculpture to installations, video,
Internet-based art and performance. The art reflects the bliss as well as the
pangs accompanying a science so full of portent that we can't even name all its
possibilities.

   There is Shawn Brixey and Richard Rinehart's quirky "Chimera Obscura," a vast
image of a maze drawn from a thumbprint and navigated remotely by Internet
visitors, which addresses, however metaphorically, the notion of finding one's
way nearly blindly through the body. Then there is Jill Reynolds's more reverent
we-are-all-one approach in "Family Tree II," with its towering trunk suspended
from the ceiling and pierced by a network of tubes populated by yeast, whose
DNA, scientists have discovered, is surprisingly similar to our own. Daniel
Lee's digitally twisted portrait photographs are darker meditations. Crossbred
and proud, they stand before us: cat people, simian people and Lord knows what
else. Yet more intriguing still, and more troubling to some viewers, are the
artists who have gone the next step beyond traditional media and adapted the
tools of genetic science itself. Every artist dreams of breathing new life into
art. These artists, quite literally, are doing it.

   Eduardo Kac's "GFP Bunny" is an albino rabbit whose DNA was spliced with that
of a Pacific Northwest jellyfish -- convenient if you want to make sure your pet
glows in the dark. No more fumbling around at midnight with a carrot, crying:
"Here, Alba! Here, Alba!" But Mr. Kac and a team of geneticists in Paris used
green fluorescent protein to create this illuminating hare for a higher purpose:
reckoning with transgenics, with crossing species characteristics and what that
bodes when the map of the human genome and the genome of other creatures are
fully at hand.

   "It's easy to fear what we don't know, that the transgenic is monstrous" Mr.
Kac said. "But when the transgenic is sitting in your lap, looking into your
eyes, then the meaning changes. We now have a different kind of otherness to
consider that makes us realize how close we really are. Asian? African? Surface
racial traits are nothing compared with transgenic beings. With genetic therapy,
humans are given genes they didn't naturally have. And now we're approaching the
imminent emergence of human clones. You don't think it will happen? I wonder who
will watch out for their civil rights."

   In the grandest work at the Henry, "Genesis," Mr. Kac took the Old Testament
passage, "Let man have dominion over the fish of the sea," translated it first
into Morse code (an earlier example of a language of symbols invented to capture
the substance of our world and circulate it) and then into the four-letter
alphabet, A, T, C, G, which stands for the chemical base pairs along the ladder
of our DNA. In this bizarre journey from the biblical Book of Life to physical
creation, this literary DNA was then synthetically made, mixed with a sample of
Mr. Kac's own, placed in a petri dish under a microscope and projected in all
its purple, molecular majesty onto a darkened wall.

   Of course, Mr. Kac's piece does prompt the thought that perhaps some
omnipotent translator led the artist (and the rest of humankind) to this level
of handiwork; that once upon a time we were encoded with a system of marks,
which we've finally discovered and interpret as an alphabet written into our
very core. Now that we've picked up the code, we've begun our own translations.
With increasing ease in our genomic age, the script of life is revised, science
fiction becoming science fact. But what will we write?

   "When you start making rabbits as visual objects, using flamboyant genetic
methods, it raises powerful questions," said Dr. Maynard Olson, the director of
the Genome Project at the University of Washington and an adviser to the Henry
show. "Artists are using living organisms to make a point: the closer designer
organisms are to us, the more uncomfortable we're going to get."

   The look of the work in Seattle more often than not heightened that sense of
chill. True, there were humorous works, such as Bill Scanga's clownish taxonomy
of pickled frogs in different colored pants and Susan Robb's paradoxically
gorgeous photographs of imagined organisms made from highly scientific materials
like Play-Doh, lint and the artist's spit. But in the expanded field of
contemporary art, in which sociology, politics, technology and now health
science are as crucial to artistic intention as aesthetics, the "beauty hook,"
as Ms. Held put it, was apparently not the point. Lab equipment, images of lab
mice and lab refrigerators, precision machinery, vials and tubes, whiteness and
brushed metal lowered the temperature while spooking the mind. Paul Vanouse's
"Relative Velocity Inscription Device" used live DNA to meditate on his
mixed-race heredity and the prospect that genomics, with its ability to cull
genetic types and potentially deselect those not deemed "qualified," continues
the time-weary bigotry of eugenics.

   "GenTerra," a performance piece put on by the group Critical Art Ensemble,
twitted the audience with a dose of satire and a dose of dread. The artists, in
white lab coats, invited viewers to sit at computer stations beaming information
about genomics, which they were instructed to read carefully. Then participants
who signed health waivers played Russian roulette with petri dishes on a
revolving platform that released transgenic bacteria into the air -- if they
chose the right (or was it wrong?) specimen. Critical Art Ensemble's lab-brewed
bacteria was in fact harmless. Yet there was a palpable edginess amid the
playful science fair atmosphere -- and it raised a very different kind of
specter, as Ms. Held had already discovered.

   In organizing the show, she found herself dealing at length with the
university's Institutional Biosafety Committee and its sanitarian -- a wonderful
Brave New World-ish job title -- who tracks potential health issues on campus.
Not the usual judges of an art show's fitness, and the works ultimately passed
muster. But in the heightened anxiety of a post-Sept. 11 world and the
"weaponization" of anthrax, as Ms. Held said, it became obvious that it is
impossible to show art evoking and practicing genetic manipulation without it
creeping into our fears of bioterrorism, of toxic bacteria descending on us to
murderous effect.

   Yet the science at the heart of the art isn't all darkness, as the scientists
themselves are eager to note. Dr. J. Craig Venter, the path-breaking geneticist
who accelerated the decoding of the human genome and co-founded Celera Genomics,
is circumspect when he's told about this latest show. "The problem with so much
of this work is that it takes the view of genetic determinism, that we're just
the sum total of our genes," he said. "But the linear sequence of the genome,
while it's an astounding piece of knowledge, can't alone explain who we are and
what will happen to us. We are a complex business and a complex mystery."

   His rival and colleague, Dr. Francis Collins, director of the National
Institutes of Health's National Human Genome Research Institute, seems to take
off from Dr. Venter's point, though he had not heard it. "I know the artist's
role is to provoke, and I welcome a consciousness-raising art, but I wish more
of this work would convey the mystery, the elegance, the beauty of what the
genome is about," he said. "The way in which this instruction book is put
together, the dance within the cell that alters in microseconds in response to
thousands of different circumstances and makes the right decision to keep that
cell healthy. It's stunning. There are plenty of ethical issues to address, but
I wish more of that sense of awe was honored."

   Both men invoked Andrew Niccols's 1997 cult classic "Gattaca." The movie
follows Ethan Hawke as a biologically average guy in a world ruled by
genetically perfected superguys and supergals (who still smoke, drink and
murder, though they look awfully good doing it). Through an elaborate hoax,
using the "superior" body fluids and DNA of the character played by Jude Law,
Mr. Hawke's character trumps them all. Mr. Niccols's new movie, "S1m0ne," due
out in August, turns the notion of recombinant DNA into digital farce, when Al
Pacino creates a computer-generated movie star composed of the greatest
attributes of the greatest actors and singers, alive and dead.

   Mr. Niccols's films are yet another instance of the flood of works, far
beyond the visual arts, that demonstrate how DNA, genetics and the genome have
surged into our culture. From the mere title of the new Star Wars juggernaut,
"The Attack of the Clones," to "Technolust," the English actress Tilda Swinton's
new movie about a scientist and a trio of bad-girl clones, the inspiration is
clear. Music software programs, like Bio2Midi and ProteinMusic, are used to take
DNA sequences and turn them into melodies. Jonathan Tolins's play "The Twilight
of the Golds," about an unborn child with a hypothetical "gay" gene and its
parents' decision to abort or not, has toured the country. Stacks of novels and
nonfiction, even an illustrated manual for kids called "The Cartoon Guide to
Genetics," by Larry Gonick and Mark Wheelis, are part of a publishing boomlet --
with the most recent high-profile entry, Francis Fukuyama's "Our Posthuman
Future," plying the same ethical and existential issues that dominate the Henry
show.

   All of these productions, like so much contemporary art, reflect the way we
view the power of genetics -- for good or otherwise -- to create new, extended
and possibly transformed lives for us. Yet what underlies these fantasies and
fears is a simple and unsurprising fact. As Lisa Vincler, a bioethicist and
assistant attorney general in Washington State, put it bluntly, "Our culture
just doesn't have an attitude that's very accepting of death." Billions of
dollars in new genome-based drugs will be made on the principle that we are
impatient with nature's judgments. And for all its wariness, this new gene art
now finds itself pulled into the colossal force field that science and money
have made. The questions are: Is this new art more than novelty? Will it lead to
a single artwork of such eloquence that it summarizes the condition of our
being? Will it add in an essential way to the vocabulary of art -- as Giotto's
frescoes in the Scrovegni Chapel in Padua, Italy, did or Picasso's "Demoiselles
D'Avignon" or Pollock's "One: No. 31, 1950"?

   Maybe. From a genomic perspective, why shouldn't the genes and proteins that
miraculously combine to create a genius make one who likes to play with DNA? But
no artist at the Henry can yet claim that triumph. That is still the prize of
science, not art. The discovery of the DNA's double helix and the brilliance of
deciphering the genomic sequence are Everests of imagination and creativity.
They shift the world. What comes after -- whether great art or law or a social
order remade -- is only beginning to emerge. Those glimmerings are still out
there on the edge of the tidal force wrapped inside our genes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: COMBINATIONS: Eduardo Kac's "GFP Bunny" (1999), above, is a
glowing live rabbit produced by genetically splicing rabbit and jellyfish genes.
At right, three cibachrome prints of imaginary organisms made of substances like
Play-Doh and lint; they're from the "Macro-Fauxology" series (2000) by Susan
Robb. Both works are part of "Gene(sis): Contemporary Art Explores Human
Genomics," an exhibition now at the University of Washington in Seattle. (Julia
Friedman & Associates, Chicago; Susan Robb) (pg. 1); "Genesis," a transgenic
installation linked to the Internet, by Eduardo Kac. (Julia Friedman &
Associates, Chicago); "Eighteen Frogs With Pants Categorized by Color," 1994, by
Bill Scanga. The frogs, taxidermied, are on view in Seattle. (Courtesy of the
artist and Jay Grimm Gallery, New York); "Leopard King" from the "Judgment"
series, 1994, by Daniel Lee. (Courtesy of the artist and OK Harris Works of Art,
New York) (pg. 30)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2002


                             1301 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       May 24, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 771 words

BODY:

   Like bridge painting and dieting, the process of criticizing Barry Bonds is
something that is never, ever quite complete.

    The fact your Pittsburgh Pirates have not had a winning season since Barry
found his heart in San Francisco suggests an inherent bitterness to the previous
statement, but my attitude toward the great slugger predates his departure and
has always pretty much mirrored the shallow peevishness of the national media.

    No need to thank me.

    I've always been willing to give Barry the benefit of the doubt, all right,
sometimes been willing, all right, now and again. I'll grant him that he's
definitely the less annoying actor in those KFC commercials with Jason
Alexander, who definitely needs to be smacked.

    But when he says things like "the media have the freedom to say what they
want, write what they want; it's really not fair," I am reminded that Barry's
credentials as a First Amendment scholar aren't quite so stunning as his
homers-per-100-at-bats stat: 7.15. Only Babe Ruth's (8.5) and Mark McGwire's
(9.42) are better.

    But today's gripe has more to do with Barry's relentless rise into the
all-time homer ranks and imminent eclipse of Frank Robinson's career home run
total, which is 586. Hall of Famer Joe Morgan, in his column this week on
ESPN.com, makes the case that Robinson's career is somehow obstructed in the
pantheon of baseball icons and supports it by pointing that Robinson was snubbed
by the sculptors of baseball's All-Century team.

    Be that as it may, no one who ever saw Robinson play could regard him as
anything but the ultimate opposition monster, a player so complete and
accomplished and competitive that he was universally feared and admired. He is
still the only man to be the Most Valuable Player in each league.

    There is perhaps one still relevant comparison of Bonds and Robinson, and it
is so arcane that it requires a bit of storytelling from 39 years ago. God, I'm
old.

    In the first inning of the first game of the 1963 season, Robinson was
hitting for the Cincinnati Reds in Philadelphia when Phillies Manager Gene Mauch
shot out of the dugout to make perhaps an unprecedented argument. Mauch didn't
like what Robinson was wearing and told the umpiring crew chief that unless
Robinson changed his clothes, the Phillies were playing the game under protest.

    The offending garment was a type of vinyl windbreaker that Robinson wore
under his gray, sleeveless Reds blouse. Though it was a chilly night in Philly,
Mauch argued that the windbreaker gave Robinson an extra advantage against his
pitcher, Art Mahaffey. And though Robinson crowded the plate with impunity
anyway, Mauch's contention was essentially that the windbreaker gave the hitter
too much protection in the delegate psycho-phobic equation between hitter and
pitcher.

    Fast forward now merely to the next century and look at the protection Bonds
wears on his right arm when he bats, the hard plastic shield that upsets that
same equation. Barry was practically fearless as a young hitter with no such
armor, but he is nothing less than menacing since putting on that black brace
after an elbow injury.

    Your baseball people with broader perspectives are none too comfortable with
it, especially since Bonds has been emulated in this regard, most conspicuously
by Houston's Craig Biggio and the Mets' Mo Vaughn, who've decided to give
themselves the same edge.

    "They shouldn't have any; it's ridiculous," current Phillies Manager Larry
Bowa told the Philadelphia Daily News. "There were stars 20 years ago [with no
armor]." Bowa said hitters feel emboldened by it, and that tweak of the psyche
limits the effectiveness of pitchers. And he's right.

    Two weeks before this season began, Bob Watson, baseball's director of field
operations, issued a memo on the Bonds' armor.

    "It's in compliance," Watson said. "He's got a medical exemption."

    Funny, half the pitchers in the league have had arm trouble, but they don't
get to pitch off a higher mound.

    "It's the same rule as last year," Watson said, referring to a 2001 edict
that elbow pads can't be more than 10 inches in length and must be covered in
nylon. "We will make sure that the rules are complied with."

    Well, there's a bold initiative. There are 10 violations of the old pine tar
rule every game and as many violations of the back line of the batter's box.
Umpires enforce what they want to enforce.

    Barry should have to remove that elbow pad. He should have to risk taking a
Randy Johnson fastball off the skeleton just like everybody else. It's part of
the game's essential dynamic.

    Or something.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2002


                             1302 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2002 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                     May 22, 2002 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1461 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL RESEARCH BUILDING ON CANCER-BLOCKER IS SLOW

SOURCE: JOE ROJAS-BURKE - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: A year after Gleevec's rapid rise to FDA approval, efforts snag to
create comparable targeted therapies for other cancers

   In the never-ending war on cancer, the drug Gleevec presented an astonishing
glimpse of future therapies when it gained federal approval with record-breaking
speed a year ago.

   The pill, designed to block a broken molecular switch, halted a form of
leukemia in 90 percent of patients who were treated early enough -- and did so
with minimal side effects.

   When the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Gleevec last May for
treating chronic myeloid leukemia, Dr. Brian Druker, a professor of medicine at
Oregon Health & Science University, predicted that "if we can do this for one
cancer, we can do it for all cancers." Druker and scientists with Novartis
Pharmaceuticals of Switzerland developed the drug.

   A year later, efforts to develop comparable targeted therapies against more
common forms of cancer have hit unexpected snags. Disappointing results have led
drug companies to halt late-stage clinical trials of two agents that showed
early promise against colon and brain tumors. Federal regulators this year have
rejected applications for the approval of two other leading contenders.

   The vast majority of cancers have not given up the secret keys that open the
door to malignant cell growth and tumor formation.

   "Do all cancers have such an Achilles heel?" asked Dr. Moshe Talpaz, a
leukemia expert at M.D. Andersen Cancer Center at the University of Texas in
Houston. "I'm somewhat concerned that this targeted therapy is going to be a
more complex story than this single hit we were so lucky to see with chronic
myeloid leukemia."

   As it stands, researchers have developed two targeted therapies that have
proved highly effective: Gleevec for chronic myeloid leukemia, or CML, and
Herceptin, an injected drug approved for treating a subset of breast tumors. In
both cases, research had identified a solid target known to be present and
active in a large number of patients, a broken switch throttling cells into
runaway growth mode.

   "Brian (Druker) and I, we had it relatively easy. We had a stacked deck,"
said Dr. Dennis Slamon, a leader in the development of Herceptin at the
University of California at Los Angeles. "Those drugs showed us the approach we
should be taking -- that is, assuming we can develop a drug around what's
broken." Slamon is director of clinical/translation research at UCLA's Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center.

   Gleevec targets an abnormal protein that researchers nailed down as the
unique cause of CML more than a decade ago. Unlike most forms of cancer, CML
gave researchers helpful clues that led them to the abnormal protein.

   The trail began in 1960, when two physicians noted that leukemia cells in
nearly every CML patient shared a genetic quirk: a short segment from the tail
of one chromosome that swapped position to the tail of another chromosome.

   The break took two genes and combined them into one gene, which directed
cells to produce an abnormal signaling protein. It acts like a switch stuck in
the "on" position, signaling blood cells to multiply out of control.

   Gleevec works by slipping into a pocket on the protein, jamming its ability
to convey growth signals to other molecules in the cell.

   The latest clinical trials continue to raise hope of a lasting cure for many
patients. In a study Druker presented this week at a meeting of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology, about 83 percent of patients maintained a
reduction of leukemia cells after a year of treatment, compared with 20 percent
taking interferon, the standard chemotherapy drug.

   In two-thirds of patients, Gleevec reduced cancerous cells to undetectable
levels, a result achieved in less than one-tenth of the interferon patients.

   Still, Gleevec has proved effective only against one kind of leukemia, which
strikes about 5,000 Americans a year, and one other rare cancer,
gastrointestinal stromal tumors, which are less common than CML. Herceptin works
in about 25 percent of breast cancer tumors, those with a specific gene mutation
called HER-2.

   Whether other cancers will yield targets amenable to "smart bombing" by
precisely acting drugs remains a matter of opinion.

   "The answer is, probably," said Dr. Leonard Zwelling, vice president of
research administration at M.D. Anderson. "The thing to keep in mind is the
principles guiding this research are really just recently known."

   Zwelling predicts an explosion of potential targets, followed by many
attempts with potential therapies aimed at these targets -- but a much smaller
number of therapies that actually succeed. That is typical in the world of drug
development.

   Already it's clear that most forms of cancer follow a far more complicated
path than CML. Consider colon cancer, the third-leading cause of cancer death in
the United States.

   Colon cancer begins within benign growths, called polyps, in the lining of
the colon. At this stage, cells typically contain one or two gene mutations that
appear to contribute to cancer. Over time, more mutations appear, including the
loss of so-called tumor suppressor genes.

   The mutations do not necessarily occur in the same order in every patient,
and no single mutation has emerged as the key to tumor formation. Rather, the
process follows multiple intersecting signaling pathways that feed back into
each other, and it probably involves more genes than have yet been discovered.

   The fact that some of the mutations are deletions complicates matters
greatly. Fixing the problem directly would require somehow replacing the
knocked-out genes, or the protein they make -- in every affected cell. Attempts
at gene replacement, or gene therapy, are under way for a few diseases but are
probably many years away as treatments for cancer.

   "That's going to require a huge technical advance," said OHSU's Druker.

   Tested therapy fizzles

   Given the magnitude of the puzzle, it comes as no surprise to experts that
the first attempts at targeted therapy for colon cancer fell short of a home
run.

   In February, the biotechnology company Pharmacia halted the final-phase
clinical trial of a drug similar to Gleevec in that it is a chemical inhibitor
designed to block a signaling protein. Pharmacia's drug candidate, code-named
SU5416, is one of many attempts to target a receptor on the surface of cells
called the VEGF receptor, for vascular endothelial growth factor.

   Tumors hijack this signaling pathway to drive the growth of blood vessels and
other survival needs. Drugs aimed at VEGF are among the so-called angiogenesis
inhibitors that made headlines a few years ago on the basis of promising animal
studies.

   Despite the late-stage failure with SU5416, VEGF remains a viable target,
said Slamon, the UCLA researcher. "The problem was more pharmacological than a
problem with the target itself. Patients weren't getting enough of the drug on
the target to have an effect."

   The latest results with several targeted therapies are encouraging, Slamon
said.

   Some results on lung tumors

   Iressa, a pill that inhibits a growth-factor-signaling protein, shrank lung
tumors by half or more in one out of 10 patients with nonsmall-cell lung cancer,
according to research presented Sunday at the American Society of Clinical
Oncology meeting. Drug maker AstraZeneca submitted results for FDA approval in
December and expects to start selling the drug this year.

   In May, Genentech gained fast-track status from the FDA for Tarceva, a pill
targeting the same growth factor receptor as Iressa. Tarceva halted tumor growth
in a quarter of patients in one study.

   Although treatment response rates of 25 percent or 10 percent don't seem
stunning, Slamon said the results are significant when viewed in context. "If
you only have a 20 percent response rate, it doesn't mean it's not working."
Rather, he said, it means that 20 percent of patients have the relevant error in
the signaling pathway that is driving tumor growth.

   "It may mean that 100 percent of those patients are responding," Slamon said.
For those who respond, the treatment lacks the brutal side effects of
traditional chemotherapy drugs that indiscriminately poison rapidly dividing
cells.

   Druker remains optimistic about targeted therapies, although success against
some cancers might depend on gaining a much earlier diagnosis than current
screening technologies allow, he said. At early enough stages, he said, even the
most complicated tumors probably arise from one or a few molecular events.

   "The path is still clear," Druker said. "What I've never said is, it's going
to be done easily or done quickly."

   You can reach Joe Rojas-Burke at 503-412-7073 or by e-mail at
joerojas@news.oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Graphics -- Sidebar by THE OREGONIAN/TARGETED CANCER THERAPIES

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2002


                             1303 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     May 22, 2002, Wednesday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 1022 words

HEADLINE: She's 'heat-seeking missile' for MD funds;
Cheri Gunvalson took her son's muscular dystrophy fight to Washington, lobbying
for _ and winning _ federal research funds.

BYLINE: Todd Milbourn; Staff Writer

DATELINE: Washington, D.C.

BODY:

   Until they heard from Cheri Gunvalson, many members of Congress didn't know
much about the form of muscular dystrophy that afflicts her son, Jacob.

         "They just had no clue it was the number one genetic killer of children
worldwide . . . and that there's no treatment," said Gunvalson, a registered
nurse from Gonvick, Minn.

            Gunvalson says she phoned 430 congressional offices and met with
dozens of legislators face to face and, when President Bush signed a bill last
December, won a nearly two-fold increase in federal research dollars for
muscular dystrophy.

         And she's still at it.

        Gunvalson and advocates for those with Duchenne muscular dystrophy are
now pushing for $10 million for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to collect more data on the disease. Last week she was at the University of
Minnesota, meeting with scientists to discuss research progress. Under the law,
three major research centers will be established, and the university hopes to
play a part.

         At her urging, Minnesota Democrats Sen. Paul Wellstone and Rep. Collin
Peterson sponsored the legislation, which is the only comprehensive,
disease-specific bill that Bush has signed.   "It was the ultimate grassroots,"
Wellstone said. "I mean, this mother did all this with a computer and a phone in
a farmhouse in northern Minnesota, and probably in a flannel nightgown."

   Artist and jokester

         Jacob is a lot like other 10-year-olds growing up in rural Minnesota.
But Duchenne, the most common form of muscular dystrophy, is gradually weakening
his muscles. Jacob is still able to walk short distances. Many boys with the
disease _ it affects one in every 3,500 boys _ are in a wheelchair by his age.

         Its early signs include difficulty climbing stairs and a wobbly gait,
which usually appear between ages 3 and 5. The disease eventually progresses to
the heart and lungs, before killing the victim, usually before age 21.

         Jacob enjoys watching TV, playing video games and riding go-karts
around the neighborhood. He's shy around people he doesn't know, but around the
house he's the family prankster, his mom said.

         "When I open my fridge, I sometimes find a rubber mouse," she said. His
mom describes him as a gifted artist who works in several mediums.

         "I do all animals because it's boring drawing scenery and other stuff,"
Jacob said.

         Jacob has a brother, Ben, 13, and a sister, Kelsey, 7. On the two days
a week that she doesn't work, Gunvalson will drop her kids off at the bus stop,
then log on to the computer and pick up the phone. She said she tries to balance
her time working on Duchenne with the needs of her kids and her husband, John.
      "Some mothers golf, some mothers have horses _ well their mother has a
computer," she says.

         David Mesick of Eden Prairie, a board member of Parent Project Muscular
Dystrophy, said Gunvalson was the "fireplug" that helped turn the bill into law.

        Joel Wood, a top insurance industry lobbyist in Washington, whose son
James has Duchenne, calls Gunvalson, a "heat-seeking missile."

             "She works a special magic. She can connect on both a substantive
and emotional level," said Wood, who worked with Gunvalson on the bill.
Gunvalson explains her success this way: "I never give up, and I'm always
polite."

         Gunvalson and Wood, a Republican, said the Minnesota Democrats'
advocacy and ability to work across the aisle were crucial. Wood said that
Wellstone's familiarity with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and
advocacy on other health issues made him a key ally. Wellstone is a member of
the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee.

         Duchenne affects males, with rare exceptions. The disease is usually
inherited, though a third of the cases are spontaneous mutations.

         After Jacob's muscular dystrophy was diagnosed, Gunvalson said, she was
outraged to find that there was sparse federal funding for Duchenne research.
      "The way the research was going I didn't believe it would get here in time
for my son without federal involvement," she said.

   'On the verge'

         In fiscal year 2001, $14.3 million of the NIH's $17 billion budget was
devoted to muscular dystrophy, including about $9 million for Duchenne research,
Wellstone's office said. The Congressional Budget Office estimated that the law
would increase funding for muscular dystrophy research by $54 million over the
next four years.

         Although the Muscular Dystrophy Association has raised tens of millions
of dollars annually through its Labor Day telethon, hosted by Jerry Lewis, it
generally doesn't advocate for federal dollars.

             Mesick said that because of the visibility and success of the MDA
telethons, there is a perception that enough is being done for the disease.
Parent Project was established in 1994 to push for federal support to find
treatments and a cure.

         Researchers are exploring possible gene therapies and are using stem
cells to regenerate some muscles in laboratory tests. "We are on the verge of
making meaningful progress in the treatment of [Duchenne] for the first time in
history," said Dr. Lee Sweeney, a muscle biology expert at the University of
Pennsylvania.

        Said Gunvalson:       "It's not a question of whether, but when this
disease will be conquered. As soon as there's a medicine, we'll be on the first
airplane to get it. We're just keeping him as healthy as possible until that
time."

        _ Todd Milbourn is at tmilbourn@mcclatchydc.com.

   READER'S GUIDE:

   DUCHENNE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

   Web sites:

        - Muscular Dystrophy Association: Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. FAQ,
articles, research, clinical trials. http://www.mdausa.org/disease/dmd.html

        - Duchenne Parent Project. About DMD, treatment, links.
http://www.parentdmd.org

   Articles:

        - "Moonrise" by Penny Wolfson. Atlantic Monthly, December 2001. A mother
writes about the life her teenage son, who has DMD, leads, and the one he has
ahead of him.   http://www.theatlantic.com/issues/2001/12/wolfson.htm


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002


                             1304 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             May 22, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: New projects to receive little money;
More than 90% of $2.6 billion already tied up

BYLINE: By Ed Anderson; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- The state has $2.6 billion to spend on construction next year,
but less than 10 percent of it is available for new projects, Gov. Foster's
chief fiscal adviser told a House committee Tuesday.

   The rest, according to Commissioner of Administration Mark Drennen, has been
committed to specific projects and by law may not be shuffled, or must be used
to finish projects started in previous years.

   Drennen said the administration will be financing new projects with about
$155 million in surplus cash from a tax amnesty program and $22.5 million to $35
million in borrowed money. Some of the new spending the administration has
proposed includes: a $25 million fund the governor may tap for infrastructure
for businesses looking to move to the state; $30 million for "wet labs,"
research centers for biomedical start-up firms in New Orleans, Shreveport, and
Baton Rouge; and $1.8 million for a gene therapy research facilities in New
Orleans.

   The capital projects are contained in the $2.6 billion House Bill 2 by Reps.
Bryant Hammett, D-Ferriday, and Jerry Luke LeBlanc, D-Lafayette. The bill is
divided into a cash portion of $1.1 billion and a bond portion of more than $1.5
billion.

   The bond portion is divided into five priority categories, with the top
category containing $640 million for projects approved last year and not fully
financed, and the second category detailing $205.7 million to start planning and
possible construction on projects in the fiscal year starting July 1. The rest
of the bond priorities are mainly wish-list items or commitments to start
studies for future projects.

   No votes were taken and no projects were added or deleted at Tuesday's
meeting.

   The administration always has more requests than it has money. This year,
Drennen said, legislators and local officials sought about $1.8 billion for
projects for which there is only $177.5 million to $190 million available.

   Some of the items in HB 2 for the New Orleans area include:
   -- $10 million for the West Bank hurricane protection program

   -- $2.1 million for the Bayou Segnette sports complex near Westwego

   -- $2.5 million for a performing arts center on the LaSalle tract in Metairie

   -- $3.5 million to plan and build a civic center in St. Charles Parish

   -- $21 million to plan and build a business administration building at the
University of New Orleans

   -- $72 million to expand the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center in New
Orleans.

   . . . . . . .

Ed Anderson may be reached at eanderson@timespicayune.com or (225) 342-7315.

GRAPHIC: Mark Drennen Says new projects will be financed with surplus and
borrowed cash

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002


                             1305 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 21, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: LETTERS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR;
THE DANGER OF MUTANT VIRUSES

BODY:

   THE ARTICLE "SCIENTISTS MAKE BIG PUSH FOR GENE THERAPY TRIALS" (PAGE A1, MAY
13)  DOESN'T MENTION THE DANGERS OF THIS TECHNOLOGY, IN WHICH MUTANT
("GENETICALLY ENGINEERED") VIRUSES ARE COMBINED WITH HUMAN GENES.  THE PROBLEMS
_ AND THE SERIOUS QUESTIONS ABOUT THE TESTS _ ARE SIMPLE TO UNDERSTAND.

   Viruses spread throughout the body. What prevents these "genetically
engineered" viruses from having bizarre effects in other parts of the body?

   Viruses share DNA with other viruses. This is called "gene transfer." This is
the way that cold and flu viruses change so that vaccines constantly need to be
updated. What prevents these "genetically engineered" viruses from transferring
their engineered genes to other viruses?

      Viruses spread from person to person. What prevents these "genetically
engineered" viruses - or other viruses that obtained the engineered gene through
gene transfer - from spreading from the experimental subjects to the general
population? Are the experimental subjects going to be quarantined, potentially
for the rest of their lives?

   What these gene therapy scientists are asking is for people to become
possible disease carriers, threatening all of humanity, for the profit of a few
pharmaceutical companies.

   Underlying this technology is an errant use of genes and cells. It utilizes
viruses - whose biological goal it is to multiply, take over, and potentially
kill their host - to overcome the natural resistance of cells to foreign DNA.
Once these mutant viruses are in the human population, there will be no way to
stop the "experiment."

   JONATHAN CAMPBELL

   Acton

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, BARRIE MAGUIRE ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002


                             1306 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              May 20, 2002 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; Features Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1110 words

HEADLINE: A Window Into Treatments

BYLINE: JANE E. ALLEN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Regardless of your age, the earlier you treat cancers and precancerous
conditions, the better the outcome, and the greater your options for
less-invasive therapy. The following are the major types of cancers and
treatment options:

   Actinic Keratosis

   A pre-cancer growth that appears on sun-exposed areas of the face and hands
as a scaly, rough, raised, red and occasionally bleeding patch. It signals that
skin cells are undergoing changes that could lead to cancer. Up to 5% of these
scaly growths will become squamous cell carcinomas. President Bush had two such
growths removed from his face last August. Sometimes, this diagnosis reforms
even the most avid sun worshippers. Take Staci Howard, a 34-year-old Studio City
writer who never applied sunscreens in the years she nurtured a tan on beaches
and in tanning salons. Having an actinic keratosis removed from her upper lip
last year convinced her to give up tanning: "It took me a long time to kind of
grow up about this."

   Treatments: Most often, an actinic keratosis can be frozen off with liquid
nitrogen. It can be removed by surgical shaving, cutting or lasering. Chemical
peels with trichloroacetic acid or glycolic acid can be effective in treatment
and prevention. Nonsurgical options include the repeated at-home application of
5-fluorouracil, also known as 5FU or Efudex, which causes redness and
inflammation. Some doctors prescribe a less-irritating formulation, called
Carac.

   Dermatologists cite a promising topical treatment called Aldara, the brand
name for imiquimod, previously used on genital warts. Dr. David J. Leffell, a
Yale University dermatologist, says Aldara is the first in a new category of
skin-cancer drugs that work by recruiting the body's own disease-fighting
systems to attack cancer cells. The FDA has approved a topical version of an
anti-inflammatory drug, diclofenac, marketed as Solaraze, for actinic keratoses,
and clinical trials are examining whether the oral anti-inflammatory drug
Celebrex can eliminate them.

   Doctors treat small actinic keratoses with photodynamic therapy, a two-step
process that begins with the application of Levulan, which is absorbed by the
precancerous cells, followed 16 hours later by exposure to a blue light that
activates the drug and destroys the cells. One session usually does the trick,
but patients experience some burning and discomfort afterward and sometimes
encounter difficulty getting insurers to cover it.

   The anti-acne, anti-wrinkle cream Retin A, one of the class of vitamin
A-related retinoids, eliminates actinic keratoses in many patients.

   Basal Cell Carcinoma

   The most common skin malignancy, it affects about 800,000 Americans each year
and accounts for about 75% of skin cancers. It is rarely fatal. The condition is
predominantly caused by sun exposure, but doctors believe some people are
genetically predisposed to it. This slow-growing cancer often appears as a firm,
flat, pale area or as a small, pink or red shiny or waxy area. It often affects
fair-skinned people.

   Treatments: Superficial basal cell carcinomas respond well to Aldara, said
Dr. Arnold W. Klein, a Beverly Hills dermatologist. Options include freezing
with liquid nitrogen (which leaves a blister and scar), radiation (a less
attractive option in young patients), scraping with a curet and destroying
remaining cells with electric needles, or vaporizing with lasers.

   You may want to find a dermatologist with specialized training in Mohs
micrographic surgery. This technique, covered by insurance, allows the doctor to
remove the cancerous growth and do instant microscopic analysis to ensure that
all the diseased tissue has been removed, saving the patient the time and
expense of waiting for lab results and a possible repeat visit.

   Mohs surgery is preferred in delicate or difficult areas, such as the nose,
ears, around the eyes, forehead, fingers, genitals or where cancer has recurred.

   Squamous Cell Carcinoma

   This appears as lumps or sometimes rough-looking or flat reddish patches. The
Skin Cancer Foundation estimates 200,000 U.S. cases are diagnosed annually,
accounting for about 20% of skin cancer, most often on sun-exposed areas.
Because it can invade the lymph nodes and other tissues, it causes about 2,000
deaths each year.

   Treatments: It can be removed with simple excision, although that typically
requires removing more tissue than with Mohs surgery, which gets the highest
cure rates. Doctors may suggest electrodessication and curettage, freezing or
radiation. If it spreads, it may be treated with systemic chemotherapy.

   Yale's Leffell is optimistic that Dimericine, a cream containing an enzyme
that repairs damaged DNA, might be the long-sought "morning-after" cream that
could undo the solar ravages that produce squamous cell carcinoma. He cited a
study in which people with xeroderma pigmentosum, an inherited condition that
produces numerous cancerous and precancerous skin lesions, had 60% fewer new
lesions when they applied Dimericine.

   Melanoma

   Originating in melanocytes, the skin's pigment-producing cells, it can spread
to major organs and tissues. It tends to appear on men's upper backs and women's
lower legs, but can turn up anywhere. Risks include genetics, a history of many
skin moles, severe sunburns and tanning-bed use. It accounts for 4% of
skin-cancer cases and causes 79% of skin-cancer deaths. This year, the American
Cancer Society estimates 53,600 people will be diagnosed with malignant melanoma
(5,300 of them in California), and 7,400 of them will die.

   Treatments: If caught early, melanoma is more than 96% curable. Researchers
are working on better devices to map moles and detect earlier any changes
requiring a biopsy. Doctors characterize melanoma by stages based upon thickness
and involvement of lymph nodes or organs; those stages were revised this year.
In many cases, dermatologists refer patients for sentinel node biopsy, which
involves injection with a special dye that helps identify lymph nodes the tumor
drains into. There is no cure for advanced melanoma; chemotherapy and
immunotherapy typically buy extra time. Several melanoma clinical trials are
testing gene therapy to replace damaged cells, make the melanoma more sensitive
to treatment, or deliver vaccines directly into the diseased cells. With any
skin cancer, find a doctor experienced in diagnosis and treatment.
Dermatologists, trained in the biology of skin, have varied practices: Some
specialize in acne and wrinkles; others in cancer and surgery. Ask your doctor
whether surgical treatment of skin cancer is a big part of the practice, or
whether he or she typically refers patients to Mohs surgeons.

GRAPHIC:  Having a growth removed from her upper lip finally convinced Staci
Howard, 34, to give up tanning. PHOTOGRAPHER: BEATRICE de GEA / Los Angeles
Times

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2002


                             1307 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       May 20, 2002 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. D01

LENGTH: 2178 words

HEADLINE: Human guinea pigs on the frontiers of medicine

BYLINE: Marie McCullough Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Paul Gelsinger stood before an audience of thousands of doctors and
clinicians who test experimental treatments on humans to make a heartwrenching
plea:

   Don't let what happened to my son happen to others.

   Gelsinger's son, Jesse, 18, died in a gene-therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania in September 1999.

   Since then, revelations of accidents and abuses at other respected research
institutions have made it clear Jesse's tragedy was not an isolated one.

   Step-by-step testing of new treatments on humans is essential to medical
progress, and about 3 million Americans a year now sign up for 80,000 "clinical
trials." But critics say these experiments have become so numerous,
commercialized and hard to monitor that it is too easy for researchers who are
arrogant, reckless or just plain sloppy to harm people.

   Enhancing patient safety is crucial because clinical research, by its nature,
involves risk, even when scrupulous care is taken. Deaths are rare - only about
1 in 10,000 subjects die. But "serious adverse events" - those that are
life-threatening or require hospitalization - happen to 1 in 30 subjects in
studies of new drugs, according to an analysis by CenterWatch, a Boston firm
that tracks the clinical-trials industry.

   Proposals for reform have come from Congress, the drug industry, academia and
government. Still, overhauling the vast, varied clinical-trials system is
proving to be tough. The federal Office of Human Research Protections has been
reorganized and beefed up under former Harvard researcher Greg Koski. Beyond
that, critics say, there has been more debate than decisive action.

   *

   Paul Gelsinger, 49, has become an outspoken advocate of change. He was in
Toronto last month to address the Association of Clinical Research
Professionals, using his son's story to personalize an often-impersonal process.

   He described Jesse, the second of four children, as an exuberant,
good-hearted teenager, despite a rare liver-enzyme disorder, which was
controlled with diet and drugs. Jesse was also, Paul said ruefully, an unabashed
slacker. One day, while driving Jesse to work at a supermarket near their
Tucson, Ariz., home, Gelsinger sternly told him to find a job with health
insurance if he wasn't going to college.

   In a huff, Jesse jumped from the moving vehicle.

   "As I cradled him in my arms" afterward, Gelsinger recalled, "I cried, 'You
idiot! What were you thinking?' "

   Several months later, the same headstrong teenager made a thoughtful
decision, with his father's guidance, to volunteer for the study at Penn.

   Both realized Jesse wouldn't benefit and would likely suffer flulike
symptoms. But Jesse wanted to help find a cure for babies with a deadly form of
his disorder, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency.

   "Words cannot express how proud I was of this kid," Gelsinger said, recalling
the day Jesse flew to Philadelphia. "Just 18, he was going off to help the
world. I gave him a big hug and told him he was my hero."

   That was their last hug.

   Paul Gelsinger had planned to go to Philadelphia a week after the treatment
for what he figured would be the most dangerous part, a liver biopsy. Within a
day of getting the genes, Jesse was gravely ill. His father and family members
rushed to Philadelphia to find Jesse in a coma, his organs failing.

   On the third day, they held a bedside prayer service. Then life support was
shut off.

   "Jesse was bloated beyond recognition," Gelsinger said. "The only way to be
sure it was Jesse was the battle scar on his elbow" from jumping out of the van,
and a small tattoo.

   The researchers, federal investigators found, had violated their own protocol
and federal safety rules, while ignoring signs the treatment could be harmful -
breaches Gelsinger initially denied.

   "I believed that their intent was nearly as pure as Jesse's. They had
promised to tell me everything. I had bonded with these men. We shared personal
experiences, spiritual things."

   *

   In the last three years, at least two more healthy volunteers have died in
trials at other institutions. The most recent was Ellen Roche, 24, who inhaled a
toxic chemical in June as part of an asthma experiment at Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore.

   Penn, Johns Hopkins and at least five other prestigious centers, including
Duke University Medical Center and Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center
in Chicago, have had trials temporarily shut down by federal regulators
concerned that patients were being endangered. Dozens of other centers have been
faulted for lapses.

   Invariably, the wayward institutions have made swift, sweeping changes. Penn
set up a $1.5 million, 13-member Office of Human Research to train, assist and
monitor researchers.

   Still, the clinical-research industry is leery of proposals for tighter
federal control.

   "One of the reasons there hasn't been anything concrete is that no one has
come up with a really good solution that's workable," said Leonard Glantz, a
professor at Boston University School of Public Health.

   *

   Although most people don't know what clinical trials are, such studies are
crucial to evaluating the safety and effectiveness of new treatments. Before
trials became standard in the mid-20th century - using control groups, placebos
and other mechanisms to prevent distortion of outcomes - the healing arts relied
heavily on superstition, folk tradition and doctors' experiences.

   "Clinical trials are not only essential to medical progress, but in the
overwhelming majority of cases, they also offer participants the opportunity to
receive top-quality care and the best available treatments," said Narberth
oncologist Marisa Weiss, president of breastcancer.org, an Internet support
group.

   The number and complexity of trials have grown as research has shifted from
lone scientists testing patients at individual medical centers to global,
multicenter studies sponsored by the government, academic institutions and drug
firms. In 1985, a new drug approved by the FDA involved 36 trials and 3,200
patients; now, the average is 75 trials and 4,800 patients, according to
Parexel, a clinical trials-management company. Only one in five drugs ultimately
wins approval.

   Considering the system's sheer size, "you don't hear about many problems with
clinical trials. I think it's been one of the great worldwide success stories,"
said Thomas L. Adams, head of the Association of Clinical Research
Professionals.

   Indeed, about 77 percent of patients in trials say they would volunteer
again, CenterWatch surveys show.

   On the other hand, even top-notch centers have made news with ethically
questionable studies or disastrous errors:

   In 1996 at the University of Rochester, a healthy 19-year-old student had
lung cells collected in a study of smoking and air pollution. When she
complained of pain, she was mistakenly given a deadly dose of the anesthetic
lidocaine.

   In 1999 at Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, a 9-month-old baby died of a
heart arrhythmia after being given an experimental medicine for acid reflux; a
coroner blamed the arrhythmia on the drug, which had been linked to adult
deaths.

   Last year at Case Western Reserve University, a healthy retired nurse died
during tobacco industry-sponsored research. Investigators concluded that she was
given a fatal overdose of methionine, a normally harmless dietary supplement.

   Too often, critics say, patients don't understand or aren't told about risks,
despite signing a statement of informed consent. At Penn, two volunteers
preceding Jesse Gelsinger suffered from temporary liver toxicity that should
have halted the trial. They were not informed. The Gelsingers were not told,
either, even though Jesse's liver functioning was the weakest and his dose the
highest.

   Another problem is that the system is unevenly regulated.

   Drug industry-sponsored trials are regulated by the FDA, which conducts
impromptu on-site audits and requires reports of virtually all subject deaths
and adverse events.

   But government-funded studies at academic institutions are regulated by the
Office of Human Research Protections. The OHRP wants to know about
"unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects," a rule that
compliance-oversight director Michael Carome said has "ambiguity."

   Moreover, until Koski took over the OHRP, it rarely checked on institutions
unless someone complained. Now, his staff of 47 seeks to visit 70 sites each
month - although 60 of these will be "quality-improvement consultations," not
hunts for violations.

   "We must move from a culture of compliance to a culture of conscience," Koski
said.

   Outside FDA and OHRP purview are studies with no regulation, including some
infertility, dietary-supplement and stem-cell trials.

   "I could have children inhale lighter fluid, and the OHRP and FDA would have
nothing to say about it, if I'm not a drug company and I don't work at an
institution," said Glantz.

   When rules are unclear, some researchers err on the side of not reporting.
After Jesse Gelsinger's death, "the National Institutes of Health received 652
reports of previously unreported serious adverse events [from gene therapy
trials] that sparked a series of congressional hearings on patient safety
oversight," noted the CenterWatch analysis.

   Adil E. Shamoo, a University of Maryland biochemist and editor of the journal
Accountability in Research, says non-disclosure is common.

   "I'm not accusing them of conspiring not to report," Shamoo added. "I'm
saying what happens is, nobody is going to... say, 'Hey, guys, I've read the
federal regulations, and we have to report this.' "

   The system is not supposed to be so vulnerable.

   Local institutional panels are supposed to ensure that every trial has proper
oversight, an ethical design, and that each patient signs an informed-consent
document. Called Institutional Review Boards (IRBs), or ethics boards, the
panels were mandated in 1974 by federal law following revelations about abuse of
human subjects - including government-sponsored radiation experiments and the
notorious Tuskegee syphillis study, in which African American men were secretly
left untreated for the venereal disease.

   But ethics boards, which must have at least one community representative, are
not trained or paid for what is often a crushing workload. A government report
found a typical university medical center IRB had less than two minutes per
agenda item during a 21/2-hour meeting - hardly conducive to careful
deliberation.

   Under current rules, ethics boards may wind up with boxes full of
adverse-event reports from many testing sites, but no way to make sense of them.

   "We get a report, but without context... , we often cannot determine if it is
referring to one event in a population of 10 patients or 300 patients," said
Erica Heath, president of Independent Review Consulting, a for-hire ethics
board. "Was the subject assigned to the study drug or placebo?"

   Ethics boards have not been effective in dealing with another problem -
financial conflicts of interest. In the gene therapy trial, for example, both
James Wilson, Penn's lead gene-therapy researcher, and the university held stock
in Genovo, a company that Wilson founded to develop therapies. Paul Gelsinger
says he was not aware of this when Jesse volunteered, although it was disclosed
on the informed-consent form.

   A year after Jesse died, Targeted Genetics Corp., of Seattle, acquired
Genovo. Wilson got $13.5 million in Targeted stock and the university got $1.4
million in stock.

   (Wilson quit last month as head of Penn's gene-therapy institute, and the FDA
has begun a process that could bar him from human research overseen by the
agency.)

   Money influences the system in other ways, critics say. Drug companies often
pay patients to take part in studies, and pay researchers to recruit them.

   Harvard Medical School faculty member Marcia Angell, former editor of the New
England Journal of Medicine, says financial deals that could compromise
objectivity should be banned, not just disclosed. Disclosure is "neither fair
nor helpful to the patient, who may be both sick and desperate."

   A typical reaction to her unequivocal stance: Get real.

   "I think [a ban] would bring, particularly in biotechnology, a lot of
research to a complete halt," said Adams. "And I don't think that would be in
the interest of public health."

   In Toronto, a nurse from the University of Texas asked Gelsinger, "How are we
supposed to find a balance between the industry pressures... and the patients
and advocacy groups on the other side? Patients don't care about the details.
They just want the new drug now."

   Gelsinger said he sympathized. An advocacy group for patients with Jesse's
disorder had pushed for the Penn trial.

   "People pour so much hope in that they become blind," he said. "But that's
why we need independent oversight. Somebody needs to be stepping back, and being
careful and unbiased."

   Contact Marie McCullough at 215-854-2720 or mmccullough@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2002


                             1308 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              May 20, 2002 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: GenVec Says Treatment Shrinks Tumors

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    GenVec Inc. of Gaithersburg reported yesterday that its experimental cancer
treatment, combined with radiation therapy, appeared to shrink tumors in an
early-stage patient trial.

    GenVec officials said 15 of the 21 cancer patients, or 72 percent,
experienced a 25 percent to 100 percent reduction in their tumors. The trial
also suggested that the gene-based treatment was safe, causing no serious side
effects.

    "A 72 percent response rate is quite remarkable," said Nader N. Hanna,
assistant professor of surgical oncology at the University of Kentucky Medical
Center, who is the study's principal investigator. "It's a very early study, but
the impressive part was the amount of response we saw."

    Despite the positive results, the treatment is at least several years from
reaching the market, and its success is far from guaranteed. It must undergo
more extensive patient studies before the company can apply for regulatory
approval to market the product.

    The trial, conducted over about six weeks, was designed to evaluate the gene
therapy's safety and did not involve patients receiving a placebo. Results were
presented yesterday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology in Orlando. In November, the company reported positive results from
seven patients who took part in the study.

    The study involved patients with a variety of cancers, including lung,
breast, pancreas, head and neck, rectum and skin, that did not respond to other
treatments.

    "It cuts across many different tumor types," said Paul H. Fischer, GenVec's
president and chief executive. "You're not only affecting the tumors themselves,
but the blood vessels that feed them."

    The treatment, known as TNFerade, delivers a gene that triggers the
production of a cancer-fighting protein called tumor necrosis factor, or TNF. It
is injected directly into the site of a tumor and becomes activated by
radiation. More than 700,000 cancer patients receive radiation therapy in the
United States each year, GenVec officials said.

    Based on these results, GenVec plans to launch larger studies of TNFerade in
patients with pancreatic and esophageal cancers later this year. The company has
expanded its staff to 100 employees, from 85 workers at the time of its initial
public offering in December 2000, to prepare for the new trials, Fischer said.

    TNFerade is one of several gene therapies the company is developing. It is
conducting second-stage clinical trials of a product called BioBypass in
patients with heart and artery disease and plans to soon start human testing for
another treatment for blindness.

    More stories on BIOTECH online at Washtech.com

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2002


                             1309 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     May 18, 2002, Saturday ,FOURTH EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: WRONGFUL-DEATH SUIT ASSERTS GENE THERAPY FACTS WITHHELD

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The widow of a man who died while participating in a nationally debated gene
therapy experiment at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Brighton has filed a
wrongful death suit against the hospital, three of its doctors, and the
companies that funded the experiment.

   The Suffolk Superior Court suit, apparently the first against the hospital
arising from its gene therapy experiments, alleges that study leader Dr. Jeffrey
Isner used Roger Darke of Peabody as "a guinea pig to amass great wealth for
himself."

      Isner died of a heart attack seven months ago just as the hospital was
preparing to expand its gene therapy experiments.

   Darke was 59 and suffering from severe heart disease when he agreed to
participate in Isner's study. He died in May 1999 only hours after a gene was
injected into his heart to promote growth of new blood vessels.

   In the suit, Susan Darke says that her husband would never have agreed to the
surgery had he known that another participant had died a few months earlier and
that Isner and the hospital had a financial stake in the study's outcome. The
suit argues that Roger Darke, an electrical engineer, could instead have been
treated with a repeat of the bypass surgery he'd had in 1993.

   "As lay people we assume doctors in research are doing this for the
betterment of mankind," said Susan Darke. "But in this case there were billions
of dollars that could have been made. That was something I felt we had a right
to know."

   Isner, chief of cardiovascular research, had joined with the hospital and two
companies to form Vascular Genetics in 1997 to support his gene therapy
research. The suit says Isner or his heirs own 20 percent of the company, the
hospital owns another 20 percent, Cato Holdings Co. of Durham, N.C., owns 40
percent, and Human Genome Sciences Inc. of Rockville, Md., owns 20 percent.
Previously, hospital officials said their share was actually less than 10
percent and Isner's was well below 20 percent. The suit names Vascular Genetics,
Cato Holdings, and a related company, Cato Research, as defendants.

   Officials at Vascular Genetics and Cato Holdings did not respond to requests
for comment. Sonya Hagopian, a spokeswoman for St. Elizabeth's, said, "The
medical center is confident that all appropriate procedures were followed with
respect to Mr. Darke."

   Previously, Isner and officials of the hospital and Vascular Genetics had
insisted that gene therapy did not cause the death of Darke or of the other
patient, Mary E. Lucier of Milford. Isner said the stress of surgery might have
contributed to their deaths, but that the patients' underlying illnesses were
the root cause.

   Although the Food and Drug Administration shut down Isner's studies in
February 2000, saying he failed to report Lucier's death to the hospital's
safety committee and endangered others by improperly enrolling them in the
study, neither the FDA nor other regulators faulted him for the patients'
deaths. Other patients have credited Isner with saving or enriching their lives.

   Isner and the hospital have also maintained that their financial interest did
not bias their research, but they eventually agreed to disclose that interest to
study participants. Last year, they got permission to resume gene therapy
experiments and a $10 million federal grant to help fund them.

   Darke said she doesn't oppose all gene therapy research, but wants to send
researchers the message that it's not right to withhold important information
from research participants. "We all want cures, we all want people to get well,
but I don't want any other family to go through what we did."

   In the suit, she also alleges that Isner and two of his colleagues "traded
upon the Darkes' anxiety about Mr. Darke's illness and the all too human desire
for a miracle cure" in getting them to agree to the study.  After her husband's
death, she says, the doctors tried to "spin the evidence to create the
impression that the death was caused by chronic heart failure."

   She also alleges that the gene injected, a vascular endothelial growth
factor, was defective or "unreasonably dangerous."

   While the suit asks for unspecified financial damages, a cover sheet filed at
the court lists $10 million.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Susan Darke (left) lost her husband, Roger, during a gene
therapy experiment and is filing a wrongful death suit. 2. Dr. Jeffrey Isner
(right) was leader of the experiment at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Brighton.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2002


                             1310 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 18, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. E-6

LENGTH: 544 words

HEADLINE: Fox uses celebrity status to push for cure

BYLINE: Mary Duenwald; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 Two years ago, after giving up his television series "Spin City," Michael J.
Fox created a medical research foundation that already is renowned for its
fast-paced disbursements to scientists.  Since April of last year, the Michael
J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research has given out nearly $17 million to
help finance 57 studies.

   The foundation supports studies covering everything from gene therapy to the
effects of caffeine on Parkinson's disease.  It has recently dedicated $4.4
million to developing stem-cell lines -- some derived from embryonic or fetal
tissue, some from adult tissue -- that could be implanted in the brains of
Parkinson's patients to replace the dopamine-producing cells they have lost.

   It is about to underwrite strategies for reducing dyskinesia, the involuntary
movements that are side effects of taking L-dopa, the drug used most often to
quell the tremors and rigidity of Parkinson's disease.

   Fox's memoir, "Lucky Man," written to raise money for the cause, moved
quickly to the top of best-seller lists.  Though Fox says he is relieved to be
ending the book's publicity tour and is eager to "turtle for a while," he is
willing to talk a little longer, in his office in New York, about his plans and
hopes for the Fox Foundation.

   (Simon & Schuster has recorded an abridgment (6 hours; $26 on cassette),
which Fox himself reads.)

   The L-dopa he took earlier in the morning, a somewhat larger dose than he
might have taken without an interview ahead, had set his body in motion -- the
arrhythmic dance of dyskinesia.  But as he spoke, with clarity and excitement
about the accelerating progress of Parkinson's science, Fox demonstrated the
paradox that is an underlying theme of his new book: His body is moving, but his
mind is perfectly calm.

   "I couldn't be still," he said, "until I could, literally, no longer keep
still."

   Q. In your book, you acknowledge that it is your celebrity that gets people
to listen when you talk about Parkinson's disease, and you question whether
that's fair.  Why would that bother you?

   A. I had this for seven years before I told anybody.  So that kind of
relieves a little bit of any feeling I might have of, oh, I get this problem and
immediately I take it to people.  I didn't do that.  I spent seven years kind of
going crazy with it, and figuring it out, and looking at it, and running away
from it, and finally coming back to it and embracing it, and trying to
understand it, before anybody ever heard about it.

   But I certainly didn't want to be in a position of going out to people and
saying, 'Help me.' I didn't want any of that.  And in fact a lot of times in
this work and in the things that we do, I forget that I have this.  I really do.
It's not personal.  It means a great deal to me personally, and I'm passionate
about it.  But it's not personal.

   There is a kind of a ubiquity to being on television; you're in all these
homes.  When people say I grew up with you, they really did, and there is a
connection that's very strong.  What I'm trying to get people to recognize is
the scope of this, and the reach of it.  What I'm trying to say to people is,
this is really important.  It's also an inevitability, so let's take a moon-shot
approach to it.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Andrea Mohin / The New York Times; Michael J. Fox acknowledges
in his book, "Lucky Man," that his celebrity gets people to listen when he talks
about Parkinson's disease.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2002


                             1311 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       May 17, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 734 words

BODY:

   You will note that among the ever-accumulating pressures on the Major League
Players Association's rank and vile, I mean aside from somehow managing an
average salary of $2.4 million (plus meal money), is this business of having to
set a strike date every couple of years.

    You've got to set a strike date because, obviously, management is a
pernicious cadre of financial geniuses who are bent on holding down salaries.
They're so ruthless and accomplished at it that player salaries have merely
doubled since 1994, and in the 30 years before that, salaries managed to creep
up only by something like eight bajillion percent.

    In the ' 60s, baseball cards had little cartoons on the back that were
accompanied by fun facts like, "Johnny sells insurance in the off-season."
Because Johnny had to. Today, the same format might read, "Johnny buys insurance
companies in the off-season through his management group, converts them into
dubious offshore tax shelters, and still walks into the White Sox offices in
February and tells them he couldn't possibly go 8-8 with a 5.48 ERA again for
less than $5.15 million plus incentives."

    Not to be critical.

    On the contrary, I'm only here to help, as usual. Picking a strike date is
never easy. There's plenty to think about. Just a few suggestions.

    May 17 -- No day like today, as the song goes. Today is the 32nd anniversary
of Hank Aaron's 3,000th hit. What better way to commemorate a career of
virtually unmatched dignity and skill than by illustrating the players
association's deep concern that Texas Rangers shortstop Alex Rodriguez might one
day no longer be able to take home $63 for every $1 we pay the president of the
United States?

    God, I wish I were making that up.

    Aug. 11 -- The union has already restated an affinity for strike dates
toward the Ides of August. There are several worthy spots on the calendar, but
none could be more symbolic perhaps than the 11th, which would be the second
anniversary of the contract signed by New York Yankees ace Roger Clemens. On
Aug. 11, 2000, Clemens got a three-year, $30.9 million extension on a contract
that was paying him only $6.35 million a year. With his salary bumped to a more
respectful $10.3 million, the Yankees were essentially saying they wouldn't mind
paying him roughly $312,000 per start through 2003.

    There might be no better symbol of management ruthlessness than Clemens, who
in a 17-year career has been paid barely $85 million for performing one or two
days a week. Vacation: 3-4 months.

    Aug. 12 -- This date works well because it's the eighth anniversary of the
start of the 1994 strike, which essentially came down to this: The union and
management could not agree on a method of dividing $2 billion, and, as a result,
you were denied a World Series for the first time since 1904.

    Not to be bitter.

    Aug. 13 -- The seventh anniversary of Mickey Mantle's death. For winning the
American League triple crown in 1956, when he hit .353 with 52 homers and 130
RBI, Mantle got paid $30,000. That's the kind of atrocity the players
association ultimately endeavored to fix. Adjusting Mantle's 1956 for inflation
even to $300,000 means that Mantle earned $1 for every $12.50 currently being
"earned" by Pat Meares. So, you know, I think they've fixed it.

    Aug. 16 -- The 54th anniversary of the death of Babe Ruth and the 82nd
anniversary of Carl Mays drilling Ray Chapman in the temple with a pitch.
Chapman died the next day. Is it me, or does death just seem to have a
synergistic karma with the whole notion of a players strike?

    OK, it's me.

    Aug. 17 -- Second anniversary of the Chipper Jones contract, in which the
Atlanta Braves agreed to pay the erstwhile third baseman $90 million over the
next six years, or even $120 million over the next eight if they choose to. In
other words, through at least 2006, Jones will be paid $41,095.89 per day for
every day, in season, off-season, duck season, good season, bad season, awake or
asleep, in sickness and in health. Hey, he hit 40 homers once.

    Aug. 19 -- The 35th anniversary of the New York Giants board of directors
voting 9-1 to move the club to San Francisco, one part of the famous two-step
(with the move of the Brooklyn Dodgers to Los Angeles) that began the unmaking
of the national pastime.

    As ever, no need to thank me.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2002


                             1312 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     May 16, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 511 words

HEADLINE: FTC PROBING GENZYME PURCHASE ACQUISITION OF NOVAZYME RAISES ANTITRUST
CONCERNS

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The Federal Trade Commission yesterday confirmed that it is investigating
Genzyme Corp.'s acquisition of Novazyme Pharmaceuticals Inc. for possible
violations of federal antitrust laws.

   Cambridge-based Genzyme said it is cooperating with the FTC but does not
believe it broke any laws when it bought Novazyme last year for $137.5 million.
Genzyme was notified last week of the investigation.

      The company said the investigation is at the level of a staff review. Once
the review is complete, the staff will make a recommendation to the director of
the FTC's bureau of competition to take action against the company or close the
investigation.

   "We're supplying the FTC with any information they need," said Genzyme
spokesman Bo Piela. "We're involved in an ongoing conversation, helping them
understand the work we do and the kind of markets in which we operate."

   Neither the FTC nor Genzyme would provide details about the nature of the
investigation. Analysts believe, however, that the FTC is concerned that the
acquisition will give the company too dominant a position in treating a group of
rare diseases, known as lysosomal storage disorders.

   In August, when Genzyme announced its plan to buy Novazyme, it said the move
would strengthen its foothold in treating rare inherited diseases caused by the
absence of certain enzymes. The acquisition may give Genzyme a competitive edge,
but analysts said they do not believe it will hamper competition.

   Genzyme gained a new - and potentially more effective - method to make
enzyme-replacement therapies to treat these diseases, but it did not gain any
marketed products or any products in human clinical testing, said Caroline
Copithorne, an analyst with Morgan Stanley Dean Witter.

   Meanwhile, she said, rival companies, including Cambridge's Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. and UK-based Oxford Glyco Sciences, already have products
approved or in late stages of clinical testing to treat this group of rare
genetic diseases, signaling that the market will remain competitive.

   "Certainly, no one I talked to seemed very worried about it," Copithorne
said.

   Genzyme, the first company to prove that treating rare diseases could be a
lucrative endeavor, built its business largely on profits from Cerezyme, its
drug to treat Gaucher disease, and its predecessor, Ceredase. The therapies, and
others being developed by Genzyme to treat Fabry, Pompe, and Hurler diseases,
are based on replacing enzymes missing in these patients.

   With the purchase of Novazyme, a privately held New Jersey firm with fewer
than 100 employees, Genzyme also gained a drug (not yet in clinical trials) to
treat Pompe disease as well as earlier-stage programs in Fabry, Gaucher, and
Hurler diseases, filling its pipeline with second- and third-generation products
for the disorders.

   The acquisition was not subject to a pre-merger review by the FTC because the
value of Novazyme's assets fell below the criteria set by the Hart Scott Rodino
Antitrust Improvements Act.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2002


                             1313 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                     May 16, 2002 Thursday, 7 SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: CONNECTICUT; Pg. B8

LENGTH: 498 words

HEADLINE: MOVED TO FIGHT CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: INDRANEEL SUR; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: ENFIELD --

BODY:

   When Gary Raffia cuts the ribbon to start the walk for cystic fibrosis
Saturday at the John F. Kennedy Middle School, it will be another in a long
series of actions tying him to the plight of ailing children.

   Back when Raffia's repair shop on Raffia Road was a gasoline station, he took
a tour of the Newington Children's Hospital, now the Connecticut Children's
Medical Center in Hartford, and was moved by the work of the doctors there.
Raffia also had a friend who collected cans and bottles and donated the
recycling refunds to the hospital, where a son of the friend was a patient.

   Raffia transformed his gas station into an auto shop, but his commitment to
the hospital, which treats children who are suffering from a wide range of
injuries and illnesses, including cystic fibrosis, didn't waver. The "Cans for
Kids" collection he started in 1990 has raised large sums for the hospital, and
he said he will donate $25,000 from the 2001 proceeds next month. It is "a
really good cause," Raffia said.

   Jay M. Wright, a local volunteer with the state's Wethersfield-based Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation, said Raffia's consistent efforts on behalf of the hospital,
which treats many local children with the disease, led to his invitation to be
the honorary walk marshal at Saturday's event.

   In patients with cystic fibrosis, a genetic problem causes chloride ions to
build up in cells. As a result, water remains inside the cells, and mucus in
some glands thickens, blocking ducts and forming cysts. Patients also lose salt
through their sweat glands. They can expect to live to between the ages of 25
and 30. There is no known cure, but genetic therapy may be an option in the
future.

   Saturday's 10 kilometer (6.2-mile) walk begins with registration at 9 a.m.
Walkers will make donations to the state organization, which raises money to
research treatments for the disease. National Honor Society members from Enrico
Fermi and Enfield high schools will be among the participating volunteers.

   Raffia said the foundation "approached me about being the ribbon cutter. I
was honored to do that. I think anything that helps children is a good,
worthwhile thing, obviously."

   Meanwhile, he plans to expand his bottle and can collection to raise more
cash for the hospital. Raffia said he is working to organize his volunteer-run
operation as a nonprofit that would be eligible to receive federal income
tax-deductible contributions. That, he said, should help him draw corporate
donors to help him build a redemption center on Raffia Road and eventually
redeem recyclables directly for charitable use. Today, the bottle and can
collection is limited by the need to have an outside company pick up the
materials.

   People interested in joining the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation walk may register
the day of the event, or sign up in advance by calling 1-800-841-2828.
Volunteers seeking to help Raffia with the bottle collection effort at 105
Raffia Road can call him at 860-749-3546.


LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2002


                             1314 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        May 15, 2002, Wednesday , METRO

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Health, Mind & Body ; Pg. 5J

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: Research Roundup


BODY: Immune restoration

    Bone marrow transplants are a potential life-saver for patients with blood
diseases such as leukemia or aplastic anemia.

    But as many as 20 percent of bone-marrow transplant patients die of
infections that their immune systems are unable to fight because of damage
caused by the transplant and accompanying chemotherapy.

    Dr. Erhan Gokmen, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of
Texas Health Science Center, is studying how to make the immune system recover
more quickly. He has a $240,000 grant to study how to help the recovery B cells,
a part of the body's immune system that provides high-level protection against
infections.

    "We are trying to determine how the B cells regenerate during immune
recovery so we can determine ways to make that recovery occur faster," he said.



    Gokmen hopes his research will lead to a vaccination or some other such
treatment given before a transplant.

    Virtual jawbone

    Computer science students at Trinity University are developing a "virtual
reality" program to help dentists and oral surgeons learn how to administer
anesthesia shots without hurting the bony areas of the jaw.

    Gerald Pitts, chairman of computer science at Trinity, said the program can
help dental students distinguish between soft tissue and bone areas.

    Using virtual reality and a wired glove called the Cyber Grasp, dental
students will be able to experiment with picking up a syringe and injecting a
patient's mouth.

    "Under the virtual reality concept, it's not real but it looks real, and it
provides a tremendous training opportunity," Pitts said.

    A good cold virus?

    A University of Texas at Austin researcher is studying possible beneficial
uses for the common cold.

    Maria Croyle, an assistant professor of phamaceutics, is investigating
whether the DNA from cold viruses can be used in gene therapy.

    Croyle picked the cold virus because its DNA structure is well known and
easily manipulated. "And as we know, this virus is good at infecting cells," she
said. "If we can't cure the common cold virus right now, let's at least use it
to our advantage."

    In her research, Croyle removes the part of the virus DNA that gives a
person a cold and replaces it with a therapeutic gene that is intended to
replace a defective gene in a patient.

    - Cindy Tumiel Turning the spotlight on specific health problems

    May



    National Allergy/Asthma Awareness Month, www.aafa.org



    National Arthritis Month, www.arthritis.org



    National Fibromyalgia Education & Awareness Month, www.afsafund.org



    National Hepatitis Awareness Month, www.hepfi.org



    Melanoma/Skin Cancer Detection & Prevention Month, www.aad.org



    National Stroke Awareness Month, www.stroke.org



    June



    National Scleroderma Awareness Month, www.scleroderma.org



    National Headache Awareness Week, June 6-8, www.headaches.org



    National Men's Health Week, June 10-16, www.menshealthweek.org

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2002


                             1315 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            May 15, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: Applied Materials orders beat expectations

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 Applied Materials Inc., the No. 1 maker of tools used to produce microchips,
yesterday reported a second-quarter profit and said renewed demand for consumer
electronics helped push orders up 51 percent, topping Wall Street expectations.

   The Santa Clara-based company also predicted a 10 percent to 15 percent rise
in orders for the third quarter.

   Shares of Applied Materials rose to $27.95 in after-hours trade on Instinet,
after rising 4.1 percent to $26.64 in regular trade.

   New orders, the most-watched leading indicator for chip equipment makers,
rose to $1.69 billion from $1.12 billion for the quarter ended April 28, topping
Wall Street expectations, which peaked at around $1.5 billion.

   Applied Materials said it earned $52 million, or 3 cents a share, in the
quarter, compared with a year-ago profit of $318 million, or 19 cents a share.

   Local earnings

   ImageWare Systems reported a $1.5 million net loss, or 27 cents a share, for
its first quarter, compared with a $900,000 net loss, or 21 cents a share, a
year earlier.  The San Diego digital imaging company said revenue increased to
$3.7 million form $2.8 million.

   The company said its backlog of product orders was $1.6 million at the end of
the quarter.

   Dot Hill Systems Corp. lost $6.2 million, or 25 cents per share, for the
first quarter ended March 31, the Carlsbad-based data storage provider company
said.

   It blamed the loss on higher engineering costs and new product development
linked to supporting the new original equipment manufacturer business.
Otherwise, the company chalked up some successes, including sales increases to
telecom and e-commerce companies and a contract with the Atlanta-Journal
Constitution newspaper to store its databases.

   The net loss this recent quarter is lower than the $28 million that the
company lost during the first quarter of 2001.

   Sales rose to $10.9 million from $10.5 million.

   Onsite Energy Corp. of Carlsbad earned $194,000, or 1 cent per share, for its
third quarter ended March 31. That's down slightly from the $266,000 the company
made during the quarter last year.

   Onsite, an energy services company focused on reducing electricity and fuel
costs, reported sales of $3.3 million, up from $3.1 million the prior year.

   ITLA Capital Corp., parent company of Imperial Capital Bank, earned $4.7
million during the first quarter, the same as it earned during the first quarter
of 2001. Because the company has been buying back its shares, diluted net income
per share rose from 67 cents in 2001 to 74 cents this year.

   GenStar Therapeutics reported a $2.7 million loss in the first quarter ended
March 31, compared with a $2.6 million loss in the same period a year ago.
Revenue was $268,000, compared with $32,000 in the same period last year.

   The San Diego biotechnology company, which is developing gene therapy
products, had $13.1 million in cash and cash equivalents at the end of March.


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2002


                             1316 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 15, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 483 words

HEADLINE: Applied Materials orders beat expectations

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Applied Materials Inc., the No. 1 maker of tools used to produce microchips,
yesterday reported a second-quarter profit and said renewed demand for consumer
electronics helped push orders up 51 percent, topping Wall Street expectations.
The Santa Clara-based company also predicted a 10 percent to 15 percent rise in
orders for the third quarter. Shares of Applied Materials rose to $27.95 in
after-hours trade on Instinet, after rising 4.1 percent to $26.64 in regular
trade. New orders, the most-watched leading indicator for chip equipment makers,
rose to $1.69 billion from $1.12 billion for the quarter ended April 28, topping
Wall Street expectations, which peaked at around $1.5 billion. Applied Materials
said it earned $52 million, or 3 cents a share, in the quarter, compared with a
year-ago profit of $318 million, or 19 cents a share. Local earnings ImageWare
Systems reported a $1.5 million net loss, or 27 cents a share, for its first
quarter, compared with a $900,000 net loss, or 21 cents a share, a year earlier.

   The San Diego digital imaging company said revenue increased to $3.7 million
form $2.8 million. The company said its backlog of product orders was $1.6
million at the end of the quarter. Dot Hill Systems Corp. lost $6.2 million, or
25 cents per share, for the first quarter ended March 31, the Carlsbad-based
data storage provider company said. It blamed the loss on higher engineering
costs and new product development linked to supporting the new original
equipment manufacturer business. Otherwise, the company chalked up some
successes, including sales increases to telecom and e-commerce companies and a
contract with the Atlanta-Journal Constitution newspaper to store its databases.
The net loss this recent quarter is lower than the $28 million that the company
lost during the first quarter of 2001. Sales rose to $10.9 million from $10.5
million. Onsite Energy Corp. of Carlsbad earned $194,000, or 1 cent per share,
for its third quarter ended March 31. That's down slightly from the $266,000 the
company made during the quarter last year. Onsite, an energy services company
focused on reducing electricity and fuel costs, reported sales of $3.3 million,
up from $3.1 million the prior year. ITLA Capital Corp., parent company of
Imperial Capital Bank, earned $4.7 million during the first quarter, the same as
it earned during the first quarter of 2001. Because the company has been buying
back its shares, diluted net income per share rose from 67 cents in 2001 to 74
cents this year. GenStar Therapeutics reported a $2.7 million loss in the first
quarter ended March 31, compared with a $2.6 million loss in the same period a
year ago.

   Revenue was $268,000, compared with $32,000 in the same period last year. The
San Diego biotechnology company, which is developing gene therapy products, had
$13.1 million in cash and cash equivalents at the end of March.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1317 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Health & Fitness; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1563 words

HEADLINE: A CONVERSATION WITH -- Michael J. Fox;
A 'Lucky Man' Puts His Celebrity to Work

BYLINE:  By MARY DUENWALD

BODY:

   Two years ago, after giving up his television series "Spin City," Michael J.
Fox created a medical research foundation that is already renowned for its
fast-paced disbursements to scientists. Since April of last year, the Michael J.
Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research has given out nearly $17 million to help
finance 57 studies.

        The foundation supports studies covering everything from gene therapy to
the effects of caffeine on Parkinson's disease. It has recently dedicated $4.4
million to developing stem cell lines -- some derived from embyonic or fetal
tissue, some from adult tissue -- that could be implanted in the brains of
Parkinson's patients to replace the dopamine-producing cells they have lost.

    It is about to underwrite strategies for reducing dyskinesia, the
involuntary movements that are side effects of taking L-dopa, the drug used most
often to quell the tremors and rigidity of Parkinson's disease.

   Mr. Fox's memoir, "Lucky Man," written to raise money for the cause, moved
quickly to the top of the best-seller lists. Though Mr. Fox says he is relieved
to be ending the book's publicity tour and is eager to "turtle for a while," he
is willing to talk a little longer, in his office in New York, about his plans
and hopes for the Fox Foundation.

   The L-dopa he took earlier in the morning, a somewhat larger dose than he
might have taken without an interview ahead, had set his body in motion -- the
arrhythmic dance of dyskinesia. But as he spoke, with clarity and excitement
about the accelerating progress of Parkinson's science, Mr. Fox demonstrated the
paradox that is an underlying theme of his new book: his body is moving, but his
mind is perfectly calm.

   "I couldn't be still," he said, "until I could, literally, no longer keep
still."

Q. Your foundation seems to have hit the ground running. How did you make that
happen?

A. In 1998, after I made my disclosure about Parkinson's, I went down and spoke
to a Senate subcommittee, and I started to meet people in the scientific
community. Naturally, my question was, Well, we're asking for money, what would
we spend it on?

   And they said, Oh, there's no end. This is the quintessential case of the
science being way ahead of the money. And so in talking to Joan Samuelson
director of the Parkinson's Action Network , we just kind of came of this idea
of this guerrilla organization that was bound by no convention. It was bound by
no existing alliances. It only had one goal -- which was to take this
declaration that I heard from a few scientists: that a cure was possible within
a decade -- and make that our mantra. Let's say our deal is to be out of
business within 10 years.

   We recognize the sense of urgency in this community. The clock is ticking for
these folks. This is not theoretical. We're trying not to do this for posterity.
What we're trying to do is affect the lives of the people that we see every day.


Q. Your foundation has spent $4.4 million on stem cell research, and you've
advocated the research before a Senate subcommittee. Why is it so important?

A. It is the gateway. And it's pretty established that it's the gateway to
curing and treating a lot of diseases, but especially Parkinson's because it's
so specific a problem. If you fix that one thing -- if you get the brain to
produce dopamine and have the neuroreceptors accept it in the appropriate
measure -- you've cured the problem. It holds out the promise of perhaps being
able to do an end run around the question of causation. The accepted rule is, if
you don't know the cause you can't find a cure. Well, we might be able to get
around that.

Q. What was your reaction to President Bush's decision last summer to restrict
federally financed stem cell research to the existing cell lines?

A. I was disappointed, certainly, but you have to remember, we were on the verge
of this being cut off. I mean it was a really frightening thing. So the fact
that he would go ahead at all was a huge relief. He could've hit a home run. He
bunted. But the ball's in play.

   The foundation is not political; it's a scientific concern. But obviously
politics touches everything. It's not like we're this one man band going up and
down and saying stem cells, stem cells, stem cells. We're saying, Just let us
look for answers, wherever the answers might lie.

Q. An argument is going on in the Senate now over cloning between those who
support Senator Sam Brownback's bill, which would be a total ban, and those who
support Senator Dianne Feinstein's bill, which would ban cloning for
reproduction but allow scientists to use it to create embryonic stem cells for
research. Will you lobby on this issue?

A. No, we're not dealing with that specifically. But again, with cloning, there
is the question, What do you stay up at night worrying about? An army of Hitlers
coming down Madison Avenue? No. This is not going to happen, folks. And whatever
the science is, government involvement on a financial level is the greatest
assurance you can have of proper oversight, and proper guidelines being set.
Because it's going to happen anyway. And it's going to happen in Sweden or Italy
or Canada or Britain or wherever.

   Some scientists say it's like so many breakthroughs throughout the history of
time. They go through three stages: People think it's crazy. The church comes
out against it. It changes our world.

   On cloning and stem cells, we're kind of between two and three.

Q. What other areas of Parkinson's research are you particularly interested in?

A. Well, to put it in context, I have the conversations with my kids on summer
vacations about why does the lizard's tail grow back. I mean, I don't profess to
be much beyond that, scientifically, other than to have an innate curiosity.

   Certainly, I love the idea of cell replacement. I'm also fascinated by the
idea of biomarkers, genes that might predispose to P.D. There's also a lot of
work that's being done surgically. A pet project I would love to do is get an
accurate census, which I don't think exists. Especially with young-onset
Parkinson's, you're looking at a disease that's been misdiagnosed for years. And
I'm sure we're underrepresented now in terms of numbers. The official figure is
between one and a half and two million people, but we think it's much, much
bigger than that.

Q. You saw yourself how the disease can be missed in young-onset patients,
right?

A. Yeah, but I am careful about calling that a misdiagnosis. This 29-year-old
kid comes in with a hangover and twitchy finger and they don't go, oh, it's
Parkinson's. They say you whacked your elbow or something. It was a completely
understandable diagnosis.

Q. In your book, you acknowledge that it is your celebrity that gets people to
listen when you talk about Parkinson's disease, and you question whether that's
fair. Why would that bother you?

A. I had this for seven years before I told anybody. So that kind of relieves a
little bit of any feeling I might have of, oh, I get this problem and
immediately I take it to people. I didn't do that. I spent seven years kind of
going crazy with it, and figuring it out, and looking at it, and running away
from it, and finally coming back to it and embracing it, and trying to
understand it, before anybody ever heard about it.

   But I certainly didn't want to be in a position of going out to people and
saying, Help me. I didn't want any of that. And in fact a lot of times in this
work and in the things that we do, I forget that I have this. I really do. It's
not personal. It means a great deal to me personally, and I'm passionate about
it. But it's not personal.

   There is a kind of a ubiquity to being on television; you're in all these
homes. When people say I grew up with you, they really did, and there is a
connection that's very strong. What I'm trying to get people to recognize is the
scope of this, and the reach of it. What I'm trying to say to people is, this is
really important. It's also an inevitability, so let's take a moon-shot approach
to it.

Q. Your public familiarity also means people look to your illness as the typical
case of Parkinson's.

A. But I'm not a test case. This dyskinesia you're seeing, it comes from too
much L-dopa. It's tough to get the exact amount you need. So it's kind of a
trade-off between being able to sit and talk to you in a fluid way or being kind
of halted and rigid.

   In my day-to-day life, my kids are used to me saying things twice, or kind of
haltingly, so I don't feel the same impetus. But people with P.D. will see me on
television and then come up to me on the street and say, You're taking too much
medication. And I'll say, Well, if you had to sit in front of Larry King for 45
minutes, you'd take too much medication too. The disease is idiosyncratic,
idiopathic, and my life is so idiopathic and idiosyncratic, and the combination
of the two means I'm not a test case for anybody.

Q. You've said you believe Parkinson's can be cured within 10 years. What makes
you so optimistic?

A. It's the certainty and the unanimity of the scientists' assertion that a cure
is possible in 10 years. There's very little qualifying.

Q. What is a cure?

A. A cure is you don't feel this way anymore. You don't have the problem. So
whether you really don't have that problem or you've just created an amazing
illusion that you don't have that problem -- an illusion you can sustain for 100
years. Good. You know, fine. Take it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael J. Fox says of his research foundation: "We're trying
not to do this for posterity. What we're trying to do is affect the lives of the
people we see every day." (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2002


                             1318 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 13, 2002, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1229 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS MAKE BIG PUSH FOR GENE THERAPY TRIALS

BYLINE: By Michael Kranish, Globe Staff

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The recruiting video promises nothing less than life itself. A
man's voice boasts of a new, natural technique to treat heart problems without
the risk of surgery. To the tune of an Andean flute, a couple frolic on the
beach, presumably having stared death in the face, avoided heart surgery, and
thrived.

   The video is part of a comeback strategy for one of the most controversial
forms of medicine: gene therapy.

      Two and a half years after 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died in a widely
criticized case of gene experimentation - which in turn exposed how many doctors
were not reporting serious problems with their trials - patients around the
world are being recruited to participate in new forms of the therapy that are
risky and hugely promising.

   Schering A. G., the German pharmaceutical giant, produced the video to
recruit patients to what would be the largest gene-therapy trial in history, a
1,000-person experiment in treating heart disease that would draw half its
participants from the United States, including some in Vermont.

   Major gene therapy efforts are also underway at Genzyme Corp. in Cambridge
and at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston, all part of a race toward what
some still believe is a potential financial bonanza in a field that may be best
known for its failures.

   "We are flying a little below the radar screen now, but most of us in the
field believe this is working," said Richard Gregory, the executive in charge of
gene therapy at Genzyme, which has 130 employees working on gene therapy and 100
patients in trials largely focused on heart disease.

   The St. Elizabeth's trials could reach 550 patients in experiments of
treatments for heart disease and diabetes.

   The early hype about gene therapy was that it would be relatively easy and
would cure countless diseases by fixing or replacing a gene. After Gelsinger
died at the University of Pennsylvania, the government reminded researchers that
they were supposed to report "adverse events" in their experiments. Within
weeks, 700 reports were submitted by the researchers.

   In Boston, the work of a pioneering researcher, the late Dr. Jeffrey Isner of
St. Elizabeth's, was temporarily suspended amid questions about patient safety
that were eventually resolved. Nationwide, some gene therapy experiments were
shelved, others were put on hold, and the field's future was in doubt. Not a
single therapeutic product has been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration.

   Interviews with gene therapy specialists around the country show that most of
the trials are vastly different than the original efforts.

   Although the original idea of curing a disease by replacing a single gene has
not been dropped entirely, the biggest push uses a different method, inserting
genes via a short-lived common cold virus, so that the new genes exist only for
couple of weeks. Genzyme and Schering are using that approach to try to
stimulate the growth of blood vessels in the heart.

   One of the patients in Schering's preliminary trials was Jim Cross, a
65-year-old automobile service manager from Winooski, Vt. Four years ago, Cross
had heart troubles because of his small arteries and could barely walk across
the dealership's parking lot.

   Then he signed up for Schering's gene therapy trial at the University of
Vermont in Burlington.

   In the procedure, Dr. Matthew Watkins, a University of Vermont cardiologist,
inserted a catheter through an artery in Cross' leg. The goal was to insert a
copy of a human gene into Cross's heart to stimulate the development of new
blood vessels. To get the gene into the heart, Watkins used a carrier called
adenovirus, which had been genetically re-engineered to prevent it from harming
Cross.

   The prodedure is best suited to patients who have chest pain in spite of
standard treatments such as angioplasty and bypass or, as in Cross's case, who
have extensive blockages of their heart vessels.

   "I couldn't walk 50 feet without sitting down," Cross said. "Now I walk
wherever I want. I don't use the golf cart. I feel it [gene therapy] worked for
me."

   Another patient in the trial reported a similar result. "I couldn't walk
across the room," said Tony Barber, 68, of Malone, N.Y. "Within three months,
the difference was unbelievable."

   With these successes from the first stage of the trial, Schering began
recruiting patients this year for the 1,000-person study, a two-year effort that
Schering hopes will persuade the government to approve the procedure for
commercial use. For comparison, roughly 4,000 people participated in the gene
therapy trials conducted during the 1990s, NIH officials said, underscoring the
significance of the Schering effort.

   Still, any procedure that inserts a cloned gene into the human body raises
serious concerns. In the University of Pennsylvania case, scientists used a
virus to put a different gene into Gelsinger's liver, and the procedure wound up
killing the 18-year-old. His father, Paul Gelsinger, said prospective patients
should only consider gene therapy "if there is no other alternative" and they
understand the financial motivations of researchers. "Don't believe everything
they tell you," Gelsinger said. "This still has a long way to go."

   But Dale Stringfellow, the chief executive of the Schering subsidiary that is
overseeing the study, said there is no comparison between the Gelsinger case and
the heart procedure. Schering uses a virus concentration that is 3,500 times
weaker than the one used in that trial, Stringfellow said.

   "The likelihood of getting that kind of reaction is remote," Stringfellow
said when asked about the risk of death.

   Still, reports of adverse events in gene therapy arrive regularly at the NIH.
Between November 2001 and February 2002, the NIH received 11 reports of
"serious, possibly associated and unexpected adverse events" in trials. In a
trial sponsored by Cell Genesys of California, a 48-year-old man died the day
after receiving a gene-modified vaccine. The report to the NIH said the man's
death was "possibly associated" with the vaccine.

   Dr. Dale Ando, vice president of clinical research at Cell Genesys, said a
new report would be submitted because he has since concluded that the death was
not associated with the vaccine.

   With the uptick in gene therapy trials, the government continues to impose
tighter regulations.  Dr. Douglas Losordo of Boston's St. Elizabeth's Medical
Center has taken over the work of Isner, the gene therapy pioneer who died last
fall. Isner had learned just before his death that the Food and Drug
Administration had lifted the hold on his work and that the NIH had awarded him
a $10 million grant to continue his project.

   Now Losordo expects to begin recruiting 550 heart and diabetes patients to
participate in new trials, some of which are in conjunction with a Cleveland
hospital. Losordo said he is concerned that the FDA's latest rules, which would
require 15 years of monitoring any gene therapy patient, could make it more
difficult to recruit volunteers.

   But the renewed focus on the therapy, Losordo said, is vindication "after all
those years of torture." SIDEBAR: EXPERIMENTAL TREATMENT RESEARCHERS HAVE
SCHEDULED A TRIAL OF A PROMISING FORM OF GENE THERAPY ON 1,000 PATIENTS WITH
BLOCKAGE OF AN ARTERY SERVING THE HEART. PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART
DATA.

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2002


                             1319 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 13, 2002, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 1348 words

HEADLINE: Money alters scientific formula

BYLINE: Dan Vergano

BODY:
Along with the cells and test tubes standard to most modern researchers,
neuroscientist David Smith has the very latest in labware: venture capital.

   "It takes a lot of money to develop a new surgery," says Smith, of the
University of California-San Diego. With a senior colleague, he formed Ceregene
to bring a federally funded gene-therapy surgery through clinical trials and
into the medical market. "There was no other way we saw to raise the money we
needed on our own."

   His experience isn't unusual. Over the past two decades, the biotechnology
boom and government policies have wed finance and science in an attempt to get
innovations out of the laboratory.


   The linchpin of government efforts to encourage this marriage is the 1980
Bayh-Dole Act, which gives universities and firms the right to exclusively
license inventions made with federal funding and keep the profits. Previously,
the government retained the title to such inventions, giving them away for free.
As a result, universities and researchers had no incentive to commercialize the
inventions, say supporters of the law.

   In 2000, universities -- most of the large ones now equipped with technology
licensing offices -- collected $ 1.26 billion on licensed inventions made with
federal money.

   But now the Bayh-Dole Act is facing new questions. Critics say the federal
government gives away taxpayer rights to inventions, assuming the trade-off
helps the economy, but without any proof because firms widely ignore their
obligation to report their origins in government-funded research. And there are
continuing questions about the integrity of scientific research when profit
motives enter the laboratory.

   On June 12, a panel of the White House President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology (PCAST) will present an interim reassessment of more than
20 years of Bayh-Dole, which has passionate advocates and critics.

   "The whole thing is a huge fraud," says law professor Michael Davis of
Cleveland State University. He decries allowing firms to patent and acquire
monopoly rights to advances made on the public's dime, as now permitted by the
act.

   But biomedical engineer Cori Lathan says grants from the National Science
Foundation and elsewhere allow her firm, AnthroTronix of College Park, Md., to
test a robot that provides education and physical therapy for children with
disabilities. "I think there is good synergy between academic research and the
marketplace," she says.

   In 2000, the nation spent almost $ 48 billion on basic research, with the
federal government footing 58% of the bill. The largest source of that federal
funding is the National Institutes of Health. If only 10% of yearly increases in
life span arise from federally funded medical advances, taxpayers experienced a
15-fold return on their investment in the NIH, estimates the U.S. Congressional
Joint Economic Committee. The JEC values that return at $ 240 billion.

   Says who? ask Davis and others. Biological science and computer technology
underwent a renaissance over the past two decades, which might mean Bayh-Dole is
a giveaway of taxpayer rights to inventions that would have hit the market
anyway.

   Nobody knows the exact effects of the act, in part because nobody has kept
track of Bayh-Dole licenses. A 1999 General Accounting Office report looked at
2,000 patents of federally sponsored inventions and found only 6% were fully
reported to the government, as required by the law.

   Until this year, NIH didn't even ask which patented inventions were
transformed into products. Last year, a look by the NIH at the 47 current
"blockbuster" drugs with sales of more than $ 500 million found only four that
are clearly linked to its funding, despite its broad role in sponsoring basic
biomedical research. (The four, Taxol, Procrit, Neupogen and Epogen, had
combined yearly sales near $ 10 billion last year.)

   Bayh-Dole includes language saying that products developed under the law
should be available to the public on "reasonable terms." And it gives the
government a "royalty-free, paid-up license" to the innovation, giving it rights
to products for free, an option that has never been used, according to the GAO.

   Davis and others say the government should use those provisions to demand
lower drug prices for Medicare and Medicaid patients and, eventually, everyone.
The Association of American Universities, representing the nation's largest
research schools, called this a mischaracterization of Bayh-Dole's purpose --
getting research out of the lab.

   Still, such concerns, in Congress and elsewhere, have drawn the attention of
the Inspector General's Office of the Department of Health and Human Services,
which intends to investigate the commercialization of NIH-funded inventions
later this year.

   From a larger perspective, other critics see dangers in a widespread culture
of scientific entrepreneurialism (one focused on royalty payments) in labs. "Who
minds the interests of the scientifically untutored public when science is
crisscrossed with private deals and sugarplum visions of gargantuan wealth?"
asks Daniel Greenberg in his recent book, Science, Money and Politics.

   Researchers seem of two minds. According to the Science Advisory Board, an
online discussion group organized by consulting firm BioInformatics LLC, an
April survey of 3,995 scientists found 47% "believe that the profit-making
emphasis of technology licensing offices is endangering the traditional role of
the university as a research and educational center." But 40% said technology
transfer efforts help education and research.

   Financial complexity is just part of the picture in research today, says
Albert Teich of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Huge
international projects that involve diverse researchers with widely varying
backgrounds have now become commonplace, for example. "The saving grace may be
that people are aware of the issues," Teich says. "The whole environment of
science has become more complicated."



   Academia, industry entwined

   Bayh-Dole supporters, such as technology policy expert Arvids Ziedonis of the
University of Pennsylvania, say universities benefit from patents obtained off
their research, but society benefits as well.

   * Stanford University and the University of California system earned patents
for work on recombinant DNA technology that serves as the basis for the entire
genetics industry.

   * The University of Texas licenses rights to Citracal calcium supplements
that fight osteoporosis.

   * Columbia University owns rights to techniques used to insert DNA into
animal cells, widely used in genetic engineering efforts.

   In all, from 1982 to 1998, yearly academic patents jumped from 464 to 3,151,
a 579% increase.

   Of course, schools have long sought rights to their inventions, at least
since 1925 when the University of Wisconsin created a foundation to license
vitamin-D patents to cereal manufacturers who wanted to add the supplement as a
cure for rickets. But over the past 20 years, a number of factors have made
forging links between academia and industry exceptionally attractive to
policymakers:

   * Basic research findings, in areas such as genetic and fiber optics, seem to
turn into such real-world products as drugs and broadband communications
devices, much more rapidly than in earlier decades.

   * As science expands, demanding more funds with each discovery, industry
looks increasingly attractive as a source of funds over state and federal
agencies.

   * Royalties from successful collaborations between schools and firms provide
long-term funding for cash-strapped universities.

   * Rising competition from Japan and Europe during the 1970s made getting
innovations off academic shelves seem vital.

   "Entrepreneurial behavior is not new in academia. What is new is that it has
invaded biology with a vengeance," says Albert Teich of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY (ILLUSTRATION); GRAPHIC, B/W,
Adrienne Lewis, USA TODAY, Source: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, National
Science Foundation (BAR GRAPH)

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2002


                             1320 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                          May 11, 2002 Saturday, Final

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1291 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH;
DANGER Clinical trial deaths rock medical community

BYLINE: Karen R. Long, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   ETHICS

   Ellen Roche, 24, volunteered to inhale a chemical for researchers at Johns
Hopkins University studying the causes of asthma. In two days she had a cough;
within a month, she was dead. Roche worked as a technician for Johns Hopkins.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, volunteered to take an experimental gene therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania in which both the university and the lead researcher
held financial interest that stood to earn them millions. Two hours later, his
organs began failing. He died three days later in intensive care.

   Elaine Holden-Able, 70, drank a mixture of dietary supplement and orange
juice last year as a healthy volunteer for a study on Alzheimer's disease at
University Hospitals of Cleveland.

   The retired nurse went into respiratory failure the same day with a
supplement level in her body 144 times higher than normal. She never left the
hospital, dy- ing 32 days after her collapse. The federal Office for Human
Research Protections cleared University Hospitals of wrongdoing in December, but
Holden-Able's family sued the hospital last month.

   These deaths, and the suspension of all federally funded clinical studies at
Johns Hopkins and other prestigious institutions, have rocked the research
world, said George J. Agich, chairman of clinical bioethics at the Cleveland
Clinic Foundation. He compared the situation to witnessing a police officer
writing a traffic ticket that slows everybody down.

   "There have been three basic reactions," he said. "First, that the
institutions that were closed were arrogant, so maybe they deserved it. Second,
if they can close those prestigious places, none of us is safe. And third, maybe
there are some operational difficulties that we have, too."

   Agich, looking to capitalize on this third response, organized a conference
called "Promoting Integrity in Clinical Research." For two days last week,
nurses, doctors, ethicists and academics gathered in Cleveland to review
research horror stories and flaws in the system designed to prevent them.

   "We might all be there but for the grace of God," said Mary Faith Marshall, a
University of Kansas ethicist and chair of the National Human Research
Protections Advisory Committee. "We are each one sloppy investigator, one
arrogant surgeon" away from catastrophe.

   Most research proceeds uneventfully. An estimated 20 million Americans
volunteered as research subjects last year, a threefold increase from a decade
ago. The majority carried very little risk. Nevertheless, thousands of patients
agree to high-stakes experimental treatments that could cheat death or hasten
it.

   "We are clearly interested in using patients as they say we are, as human
guinea pigs," said Dr. Maurie Markman, chairman of the Cleveland Clinic's
Taussig Cancer Center. "We have to. There is no other way."

   That is because clinical trials are the workshops of research medicine, the
gold standards that allow scientists to document the effectiveness of new
treatments. In the wake of the highly publicized deaths of healthy volunteers,
public confidence has been shaken.

   "Lots of research shows our consent forms minimize risk and overestimate
benefits because we want people to enroll in research," said Jeffrey Kahn, a
University of Minnesota bioethicist. "Add financial conflict of interest to it
and it just exacerbates the problem."

   Patient protection

   The twin pillars protecting research subjects - informed consent and
Institutional Review Boards - are listing. Conference participants told
anecdotes and cited studies that made them worry about the way patients are
enrolled in medical research. Others focused on the overworked, underfunded
nature of the boards meant to guarantee that research conduct stays aboveboard.

   "When I came here, one of my conditions was that I wouldn't sit on the IRB,"
Agich said. "They are so overworked they can barely read the protocols, let
alone get out and monitor these protocols."

   The Cleveland Clinic institutional review board examines about 25 study
proposals each week, or about 1,200 each year, said Andrew Trew, a John Carroll
University bioethicist who serves on the board.

   So does Dr. Michael Lauer, head of clinical research for the Clinic's
cardiovascular medicine department. He told this story:

   An innovative, exciting research paper came into the Journal of the American
Medical Association, for which Lauer serves as a contributing editor. The staff
was keen to publish it, but noticed the study had no mention of formal, written
informed consent from the patients involved.

   There was none.

   "What happened was very, very disturbing," Lauer said. "The investigators
went back to the IRB and it said this was exempt research. I've been on an IRB
eight and one-half years and I started to shake."

   When the journal editors convened, the managing editor said, "As neat as this
study is, we are an accomplice to an immoral and, in fact, illegal process if we
publish it," Lauer said. The editors rejected the paper.

   Chris B. Pascal, a government lawyer who heads the U.S. Office of Research
Integrity, stood up and asked Lauer if the journal editors had considered
reporting the breach to his office. Citing the usual practice of confidentiality
between authors and journals, Lauer said no.

   Not everyone at the conference sounded the alarm. Dr. James B. Young, a
Cleveland Clinic cardiologist and surgeon, began his presentation by putting up
pictures from the Apollo 11 moon launch and pointing out that none of that risk,
and success, underwent scrutiny from an institutional review board. And nobody
signed an informed consent form, either.

   Experimentation in surgery falls under the rubric of "innovative practice."
The line between practice and research is blurry. "Surgery is difficult to
study," Young said. "And clinical trials can't study the art of medicine or
address all its questions."

   In the arena of informed consent, said Dr. Greg Koski, much is askew. "You
hear it over and over in the clinical setting, 'I'm going to go consent the
patient.' Excuse me, consenting a patient is not the investigator's role. It's
the patient's role to decide whether or not to participate. Too often we see
informed consent degenerate into something unrecognizable."

   Children vulnerable

   Koski, a Westerville, Ohio, native who directs the U.S. Office for Human
Research Protections, is also disturbed that the more vulnerable people in
society bear a disproportionate burden as research subjects. More than 70
percent of children with cancer are enrolled in research; fewer than 1 percent
of people over 50 with cancer are, said Eric Kodish, director of the Rainbow
Center for Pediatric Ethics at University Hospitals.

   "There are people who rely on medical trials to get any medical care at all,
for themselves and their children," Koski said. "These are powerful
inducements."

   Markman, an ovarian cancer specialist, said, "So many things are wrong with
the system. The informed-consent document - just the document - gets longer and
longer and harder and harder to understand at a time when patients in my area,
cancer, are enormously stressed. I certainly don't think we're going in the
right direction at all."

   Potential solutions include assigning a third-party advocate to patients
considering enrolling. This person would accompany the patient along the process
of learning about the research and theoretically be easier to say no to than the
patient's physician.

   "I think greed and money are driving a lot of research," said Dr. Alan
Lichtin, who leads the Clinic institutional review board. "When you sense that
at your IRB, you should put up the red flag and alert the front office."

   Contact Karen R. Long at:

   klong@plaind.com, 216-999-5012

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2002


                             1321 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       May 10, 2002 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: Pg. B01

LENGTH: 661 words

HEADLINE: Monica Yant Kinney: Freed from prison, yet still they pay

BYLINE: Monica Yant Kinney Inquirer Columnist

BODY:

   There were plenty of empty seats in the room this week when City Council held
a hearing on Holmesburg Prison's House of Horrors. The sparse attendance by
non-media types was hardly unexpected.

   You'd have to be a bit morbid to want to listen to angry, aging men describe
how as young, desperate prisoners, they rented their bodies to science without
knowing what was spread on their skin or injected into their bloodstreams.

   "They told me that there would be no side effects, damage or harm," said
Alfonso Skorski, who choked up during testimony about a grotesque athlete's-foot
test he blames for permanent nerve damage in his leg.

   It was the early 1970s, and, like hundreds who sold their skin, Skorski was
lured by cash for the commissary.

   For $40, he allowed doctors to sprinkle a mystery powder on his right foot
and cover the leg with a plastic bag. The bag was then secured with duct tape,
to trap in heat and moisture.

   A week later, Skorski gagged from the stench at the unwrapping.

   A week after that, he collapsed getting out of bed. He had lost all feeling
in his right foot.

   After 30 years, during which time he underwent physical therapy and wore a
metal brace, Skorski's foot is still prone to going limp, causing him to trip.

   He's too ashamed of the ugly scars to wear shorts or swim at the beach. When
prodded, he lifted up his pant leg to let Council members see what he won't show
his own children.

   Saying sorry

   For an event with freak-show potential, the morning was surprisingly somber,
even philosophical. Councilman David Cohen called it "the most important hearing
I have ever been involved in." And he's been in plenty during 27 years at City
Hall.

   Cohen sees the Holmesburg legacy as a test for government responsibility.
When he asks who City Hall should ultimately answer to and protect - poor,
illiterate men, powerful universities or big business - it's pretty clear which
way he's leaning.

   Cohen wants the city to fess up to having treated humans like animals: "If we
were wrong, let's admit it."

   Council members Angel Ortiz and Jannie Blackwell shared Cohen's outrage and
compassion, nodding and cringing throughout the hearing.

   "We permitted these atrocities to happen," Ortiz declared. "At a minimum, we
should apologize."

   Though Cohen and Ortiz are both lawyers, it was Michael Nutter - a former
investment manager - who piped up that an apology alone won't appease the former
inmates.

   In the 1980s, two of them settled for small sums. That leaves hundreds more
waiting, hands outstretched, to be paid for their pain.

   Who should pay?

   We live in a litigious land, so it's no shocker that saying "sorry" could
force the speaker into writing a check. Maybe that's why the parties named in a
lawsuit about the tests are so cagey when asked if they'd ever apologize.

   A spokesman for dioxin-test sponsor Dow Chemical spent 10 minutes telling me
that the corporation is still trying to "ascertain what happened" in the prison
all those years ago.

   A spokesman for Johnson & Johnson said the tests it sponsored involved
"cosmetic and skin-care products." Translation: We didn't do the bad stuff, so
no need to feel bad.

   Mayor Street's slick new $595,000 media team took three days to say nothing
about any obligations for the city supporting the tests.

   It was Albert Kligman, a famed University of Pennsylvania dermatologist, who
ran the tests. Today, Penn says it apologizes to those who "feel" harmed by the
medical experiments.

   "It is our belief there was no long-term harm," a spokeswoman said.

   Long-term harm, apparently, is better defined by Jesse Gelsinger, the Arizona
teenager who died in 1999 after undergoing experimental gene therapy. When his
family sued, the university quickly settled for an undisclosed (read: huge)
amount.

   What has Penn offered the Holmesburg survivors?

   A free physical exam.

   Contact Monica Yant Kinney at 215-854-4670 or myant@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2002


                             1322 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       May 10, 2002 Friday PENNA EDITION

SECTION: Pg. B01

LENGTH: 661 words

HEADLINE: Freed from prison, yet still they pay

BODY:

   There were plenty of empty seats in the room this week when City Council held
a hearing on Holmesburg Prison's House of Horrors. The sparse attendance by
non-media types was hardly unexpected.

   You'd have to be a bit morbid to want to listen to angry, aging men describe
how as young, desperate prisoners, they rented their bodies to science without
knowing what was spread on their skin or injected into their bloodstreams.

   "They told me that there would be no side effects, damage or harm," said
Alfonso Skorski, who choked up during testimony about a grotesque athlete's-foot
test he blames for permanent nerve damage in his leg.

   It was the early 1970s, and, like hundreds who sold their skin, Skorski was
lured by cash for the commissary.

   For $40, he allowed doctors to sprinkle a mystery powder on his right foot
and cover the leg with a plastic bag. The bag was then secured with duct tape,
to trap in heat and moisture.

   A week later, Skorski gagged from the stench at the unwrapping.

   A week after that, he collapsed getting out of bed. He had lost all feeling
in his right foot.

   After 30 years, during which time he underwent physical therapy and wore a
metal brace, Skorski's foot is still prone to going limp, causing him to trip.

   He's too ashamed of the ugly scars to wear shorts or swim at the beach. When
prodded, he lifted up his pant leg to let Council members see what he won't show
his own children.

   Saying sorry

   For an event with freak-show potential, the morning was surprisingly somber,
even philosophical. Councilman David Cohen called it "the most important hearing
I have ever been involved in." And he's been in plenty during 27 years at City
Hall.

   Cohen sees the Holmesburg legacy as a test for government responsibility.
When he asks who City Hall should ultimately answer to and protect - poor,
illiterate men, powerful universities or big business - it's pretty clear which
way he's leaning.

   Cohen wants the city to fess up to having treated humans like animals: "If we
were wrong, let's admit it."

   Council members Angel Ortiz and Jannie Blackwell shared Cohen's outrage and
compassion, nodding and cringing throughout the hearing.

   "We permitted these atrocities to happen," Ortiz declared. "At a minimum, we
should apologize."

   Though Cohen and Ortiz are both lawyers, it was Michael Nutter - a former
investment manager - who piped up that an apology alone won't appease the former
inmates.

   In the 1980s, two of them settled for small sums. That leaves hundreds more
waiting, hands outstretched, to be paid for their pain.

   Who should pay?

   We live in a litigious land, so it's no shocker that saying "sorry" could
force the speaker into writing a check. Maybe that's why the parties named in a
lawsuit about the tests are so cagey when asked if they'd ever apologize.

   A spokesman for dioxin-test sponsor Dow Chemical spent 10 minutes telling me
that the corporation is still trying to "ascertain what happened" in the prison
all those years ago.

   A spokesman for Johnson & Johnson said the tests it sponsored involved
"cosmetic and skin-care products." Translation: We didn't do the bad stuff, so
no need to feel bad.

   Mayor Street's slick new $595,000 media team took three days to say nothing
about any obligations for the city supporting the tests.

   It was Albert Kligman, a famed University of Pennsylvania dermatologist, who
ran the tests. Today, Penn says it apologizes to those who "feel" harmed by the
medical experiments.

   "It is our belief there was no long-term harm," a spokeswoman said.

   Long-term harm, apparently, is better defined by Jesse Gelsinger, the Arizona
teenager who died in 1999 after undergoing experimental gene therapy. When his
family sued, the university quickly settled for an undisclosed (read: huge)
amount.

   What has Penn offered the Holmesburg survivors?

   A free physical exam.

   Contact Monica Yant Kinney at 215-854-4670 or myant@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2002


                             1323 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              May 9, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: MANDEVILLE PICAYUNE; Mandeville Moments; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: Fund-raiser resonates with local woman;
Nephew stricken with disease

BYLINE: Kadee Krieger

BODY:

   For the first time in 11 years, Our Lady of the Lake parishioner Jeri Ferrara
attended the Taste of Tammany auction extravaganza as a bidder, eater and dancer
instead of a volunteer.

   Ferrara, who helped organize the event since its inception, had more reason
this year to patrol the tables during the silent auction and hold up her paddle
during the verbal auction. This time, the event was personal.

   Taste of Tammany, which included food from area restaurants and music by Four
Unplugged, donated $2,000 to dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa or EB, a rare
disease that has stricken Ferrara's 9-year-old nephew, Cole Connelly.

   The event also donated $3,000 to juvenile diabetes.

   It also raised more than $40,000 for the church, most of which will go toward
paying for the $2 million expansion project that was completed last year, said
Our Lady of the Lake business manager Jean Barousse.

   Ferrara said Cole is a miracle, who wasn't given much chance to survive when
he was born.

   EB, which usually affects children from birth, attacks the skin and mucous
membranes of its victims.

   The skin can be so fragile that a mother's gentle touch, cool water or the
soft fur of a pet can cause open sores, blisters and incredible pain.

   Even the mildest form of the disease makes walking and light chores painful
and difficult. Blistering leads to scarring that can cause disfigurement and
loss of fingers, toes, legs and arms; sores in the mouth, throat and stomach
often lead to infection.

   The Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of America, or
DebRA is searching for a cure.

   Founded 17 years ago, it is now one of the leading gene therapy research
organizations in the country. The organization helped to discover more than 150
variations of EB and has expanded treatment to include delivering genes into the
skin using a gene gun.

   Cole receives treatments, such as skin creams, when he has an outbreak of
blisters or infections, said his father, Peter.

   He has difficulty with sores on his left leg, and abrasions and irritations
are worse in the heat of summer.

   Connelly said Cole's teeth don't develop enamel, so he has trouble with his
mouth and gums; and his fingernails and toenails don't develop properly.

   Yet, Connelly said he still has hope for his son to heal, and that Cole is a
constant inspiration and reason to have hope.

   "I feel very fortunate. Cole is really doing OK physically and is amazing
emotionally and spiritually," he said. "What amazes me is his tolerance for
people and of the pain. I look at him and wonder how he does it. Of course, our
prayer for him is that he will be healed completely."

   He said events such as Taste of Tammany do much to spread the word about the
disease.

   "Most people don't know what it is unless they know somebody who has it.
People say, 'EB? What in the world are you talking about?' "

   But the event also showed how generous and caring a community can be,
Connelly said.

   "Taste of Tammany meant a great deal to us because it showed people care.
Participants displayed their spirit of giving and showed they weren't there just
for what they could get, but to do something positive and good."

    . . . . . . .

To make a donation to the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association,
visit the DebRA Web site at www.debra.org.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2002


                             1324 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              May 9, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: SLIDELL PICAYUNE; Mandeville Moments; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: Taste of Tammany takes on special meaning

BYLINE: Kadee Krieger

BODY:

   For the first time in 11 years, Our Lady of the Lake parishioner Jeri Ferrara
attended the Taste of Tammany auction extravaganza as a bidder, eater and dancer
instead of a volunteer.

   Ferrara, who helped organize the event since its inception, had more reason
this year to patrol the tables during the silent auction and hold up her paddle
during the verbal auction. This time, the event was personal.

   Taste of Tammany, which included food from area restaurants and music by Four
Unplugged, donated $2,000 to dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa or EB, a rare
disease that has stricken Ferrara's 9-year-old nephew, Cole Connelly.

   The event also donated $3,000 to juvenile diabetes.

   It also raised more than $40,000 for the church, most of which will go toward
paying for the $2 million expansion project that was completed last year, said
Our Lady of the Lake business manager Jean Barousse.

   Ferrara said Cole is a miracle, who wasn't given much chance to survive when
he was born.

   EB, which usually affects children from birth, attacks the skin and mucous
membranes of its victims.

   The skin can be so fragile that a mother's gentle touch, cool water or the
soft fur of a pet can cause open sores, blisters and incredible pain.

   Even the mildest form of the disease makes walking and light chores painful
and difficult. Blistering leads to scarring that can cause disfigurement and
loss of fingers, toes, legs and arms; sores in the mouth, throat and stomach
often lead to infection.

   The Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of America, or
DebRA is searching for a cure.

   Founded 17 years ago, it is now one of the leading gene therapy research
organizations in the country. The organization helped to discover more than 150
variations of EB and has expanded treatment to include delivering genes into the
skin using a gene gun.

   Cole receives treatments, such as skin creams, when he has an outbreak of
blisters or infections, said his father, Peter.

   He has difficulty with sores on his left leg, and abrasions and irritations
are worse in the heat of summer.

   Connelly said Cole's teeth don't develop enamel, so he has trouble with his
mouth and gums; and his fingernails and toenails don't develop properly.

   Yet, Connelly said he still has hope for his son to heal, and that Cole is a
constant inspiration and reason to have hope.

   "I feel very fortunate. Cole is really doing OK physically and is amazing
emotionally and spiritually," he said. "What amazes me is his tolerance for
people and of the pain. I look at him and wonder how he does it. Of course, our
prayer for him is that he will be healed completely."

   He said events such as Taste of Tammany do much to spread the word about the
disease.

   And the event also showed how generous and caring a community can be,
Connelly said.

    . . . . . . .

To make a donation to the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association,
visit the DebRA Web site at www.debra.org.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2002


                             1325 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              May 9, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: COVINGTON PICAYUNE; Mandeville Moments; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: Fund-raiser resonates with local woman

BYLINE: Kadee Krieger

BODY:

   For the first time in 11 years, Our Lady of the Lake parishioner Jeri Ferrara
attended the Taste of Tammany auction extravaganza as a bidder, eater and dancer
instead of a volunteer.

   Ferrara, who helped organize the event since its inception, had more reason
this year to patrol the tables during the silent auction and hold up her paddle
during the verbal auction. This time, the event was personal.

   Taste of Tammany, which included food from area restaurants and music by Four
Unplugged, donated $2,000 to dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa or EB, a rare
disease that has stricken Ferrara's 9-year-old nephew, Cole Connelly.

   The event also donated $3,000 to juvenile diabetes.

   It also raised more than $40,000 for the church, most of which will go toward
paying for the $2 million expansion project that was completed last year, said
Our Lady of the Lake business manager Jean Barousse.

   Ferrara said Cole is a miracle, who wasn't given much chance to survive when
he was born.

   EB, which usually affects children from birth, attacks the skin and mucous
membranes of its victims.

   The skin can be so fragile that a mother's gentle touch, cool water or the
soft fur of a pet can cause open sores, blisters and incredible pain.

   Even the mildest form of the disease makes walking and light chores painful
and difficult. Blistering leads to scarring that can cause disfigurement and
loss of fingers, toes, legs and arms; sores in the mouth, throat and stomach
often lead to infection.

   The Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of America, or
DebRA is searching for a cure.

   Founded 17 years ago, it is now one of the leading gene therapy research
organizations in the country. The organization helped to discover more than 150
variations of EB and has expanded treatment to include delivering genes into the
skin using a gene gun.

   Cole receives treatments, such as skin creams, when he has an outbreak of
blisters or infections, said his father, Peter.

   He has difficulty with sores on his left leg, and abrasions and irritations
are worse in the heat of summer.

   Connelly said Cole's teeth don't develop enamel, so he has trouble with his
mouth and gums; and his fingernails and toenails don't develop properly.

   Yet, Connelly said he still has hope for his son to heal, and that Cole is a
constant inspiration and reason to have hope.

   "I feel very fortunate. Cole is really doing OK physically and is amazing
emotionally and spiritually," he said. "What amazes me is his tolerance for
people and of the pain. I look at him and wonder how he does it. Of course, our
prayer for him is that he will be healed completely."

   He said events such as Taste of Tammany do much to spread the word about the
disease.

   "Most people don't know what it is unless they know somebody who has it.
People say, 'EB? What in the world are you talking about?' "

   But the event also showed how generous and caring a community can be,
Connelly said.

   "Taste of Tammany meant a great deal to us because it showed people care.
Participants displayed their spirit of giving and showed they weren't there just
for what they could get, but to do something positive and good."

    . . . . . . .

To make a donation to the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association,
visit the DebRA Web site at www.debra.org.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2002


                             1326 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     May 08, 2002, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 25 metfront

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: Stem cell injections aid heart ;
Houston doctors hope to start testing procedure here after initial success in a
hospital in Brazil

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   In one of the largest cardiovascular studies of its kind, Texas Heart
Institute doctors are treating end-stage heart patients in Brazil with stem
cells taken from their own bone marrow .

   Ten patients - four in December and six more two weeks ago - have received
the treatment, which involves injecting cells to replace damaged heart muscle
and stimulate blood vessel growth in areas that lack sufficient oxygen flow. It
is being carried out at Pro-Cardiaco Hospital in Rio de Janeiro.

   "It's still very early in the process, but we're encouraged by the results,"
said Dr. James Willerson, medical director and director of cardiology research
at the Texas Heart Institute. "We've seen some improvement."

   Willerson, also president of the University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, said he hopes doctors are able to start using the therapy on heart
patients in the Texas Medical Center before the end of the year.

   He said this study should prompt the Food and Drug Administration to quickly
approve a trial in the United States.

   Data will be submitted to the American Heart Association in a few weeks for
presentation at its November meeting, Willerson said. He would not reveal any of
the data.

   Similar stem cell treatment has already been done in Australia, Japan and the
Washington Hospital Center, where a study involves 15 patients, but with a
different kind of stem cell treatment.

   Coronary heart disease - insufficient blood flow to the heart - affects more
than 12 million Americans and is the nation's leading cause of death. The Texas
Heart Institute stem cell therapy, if successful, could offer hope for patients
in the end stages of the disease as well as those who undergo angioplasty and
bypass surgery for cases that can't be treated with medicine.

   The therapy is based on Texas Heart Institute animal research involving
embryonic canine stem cells that develop into cardiovascular stem cells. In the
animal model, the first two weeks of treatment led to a 30 percent reduction in
the scar tissue that occurs when muscle dies following a heart attack.

   In the human therapy, doctors harvest stem cells from the patient's bone
marrow, select out the population of stem cells expected to best develop into
desired physiological structures, process them for about three hours and then
inject them into the heart. Although only a tiny quantity is injected, it
contains millions of stem cells, which appear to differentiate into the needed
cell type in the heart.

   The cells are injected with a catheter, inserted through a tiny incision near
the groin and threaded into the left ventricle. The catheter not only delivers
the cells, but can be used later to measure electrical and motion capabilities
of the heart and pinpoint damaged or weakened areas. Such mapping is done at the
four-month point.

   "The process is somewhat like a video game," said Dr. Emerson Perin, director
of New Interventional Cardiovascular Technology at the Texas Heart Institute and
the doctor performing the procedures in Brazil. "(It) gives us a real-time,
three-dimensional, color-coded image so we can target the treatment sites within
a millimeter of precision."

   Willerson and Perin praised the treatment because it is cheap - stem cells
are obtained and delivered at minimal cost - simple and involves no rejection
issues. Willerson said he hopes it eventually can be developed to deliver new
genes - gene therapy - that assist in the healing of the heart.

   The research team has conducted a battery of tests on the patients every
month and compared them with five patients not receiving the treatment. All are
patients who have had at least one heart attack and are considered in the final
stage of heart disease. Perin would not say if any of the control group have
died. All of those treated with stem cell injections are still alive.

   Willerson said another 10 patients probably will be added to the study and
receive injections around August. All patients are receiving just the initial
batch of injections, but Willerson said the team could decide to do follow-up
injections.

   The procedures add to a small but growing body of research suggesting adult
stem cells have therapeutic promise previously thought to belong only to
embryonic stem cells, which are considered a controversial source because of
ethical concerns.

   "I hope if this therapy is successful, others are willing to consider it,"
said Willerson. "It might just be that adult stem cells are enough."

GRAPHIC: Map: 2910 Grants Lake Blvd. (color); Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2003


                             1327 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             May 8, 2002 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA METRO; Part 2; Metro Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 833 words

HEADLINE: Geffen Gift to Aid People, Programs, UCLA Says;
Philanthropy: Medical school officials vow to go slowly in spending $200-million
donation.

BYLINE: STUART SILVERSTEIN and CHARLES ORNSTEIN, TIMES STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Fresh from announcing a record $200-million pledge for their medical school,
UCLA officials Tuesday were understandably giddy.

   But when it comes to spending the new cash from entertainment mogul David
Geffen, the school's administrators promise to take a sober, go-slow approach.

   The $200 million is a landmark gift, but it won't come in a lump sum and, in
the costly world of medical education and research, it won't be enough to
finance a spending spree.

   Although UCLA officials declined to give specifics, one knowledgeable source
said the payments from Geffen would stretch over about a decade.

   UCLA's plan is to spread the money over time on a variety of purposes, such
as student financial aid, scientists' training and research.

   The money will be put in the school's endowment fund, and once it reaches the
full $200 million, it will generate around $10 million a year in income. That's
no piddling sum, but just a fraction of the school's $693-million annual
operating budget.

   "It's sizable, but it's not so huge that it dominates all of their activities
by any stretch. It's not like you get to spend the $200 million all in one year,
much less every year," said Michael Morrisey, a health-care economist at the
University of Alabama at Birmingham.

   On the other hand, UCLA emphasized that the Geffen money is unrestricted,
unlike the vast majority of the medical school's endowment, which totaled $587
million as of the middle of last year. As such, UCLA officials said, the
university will have a free hand to put the money to the best possible use.

   Though plans are in flux, "We do not want to use this money for bricks and
mortar," said Dr. Gerald S. Levey, dean of UCLA's medical school. "This is a
gift for programs, for faculty and for students."

   Whether they put their money to work quickly or over the long term, other
medical schools that have received large donations say they were left forever
changed--either physically or in their long-term aspirations.

   Cornell University launched an aggressive hiring and renovation program after
receiving $100million from financier Sanford I. Weill and his wife, Joan, in
1998, along with another $100 million from the same couple this year. The school
was renamed for them.

   Dr. Antonio M. Gotto Jr., the school's dean, said the first $100million
helped launch a campaign to build its basic sciences program. The school has
recruited 20 new faculty members and renovated 25% of its research space. It
also has created a new gene therapy lab and an imaging center.

   The Weills' second $100-million gift began a drive to raise $750 million for
clinical programs.

   "There were some complaints initially from some of the alumni for changing
the name" of the school, Gotto said. "But when they saw what a transforming
effect a gift of this magnitude could have, most of them quickly became
supporters."

   But Gotto, who served as a resident with UCLA's Levey at Massachusetts
General Hospital decades ago, said that the money has been coming in over
several years and that it has taken time to make changes. "It took about a year
before one could really see the effects of it," he said.

   UCLA is more likely to follow the example of USC, where changes have come far
more slowly. USC's medical school received a $110-million gift from the W.M.
Keck Foundation in 1999--the largest to a medical school until Geffen's this
week. Because the Keck money went into the medical school's endowment, it is
being put to use over the long term rather than being used at once for new
programs or buildings.

   USC used the Keck gift as leverage to begin construction on a $60-million
neurogenetic institute that will open later this year. The school subsequently
conducted a fund-raising campaign to recoup the cost of the building and return
the Keck funds to the endowment.

   But the Keck gift has had even more significant intangible benefits, said Dr.
Stephen J. Ryan, dean of the renamed Keck School of Medicine.

   "We have a telephone book of plans that would not have been conceivable if it
were not for the Keck gift," Ryan said. Now, "we have timelines on all of these
things taking us to 2009."

   Ryan added that the Geffen gift to UCLA "benefits academic medicine overall
because it raises the bar" for donations.

   The size of Geffen's gift inspired top medical school deans. Harvard Medical
School said such grants help universities support researchers whose disciplines
are too new to generate funding from the National Institutes of Health.

   "Were we to be the recipient of a grant like that, it would certainly put our
dean in the position to make a leap into absolutely new ground, to fund research
that is too new to be funded through the peer-reviewed process," said Eric
Buehrens, executive dean for administration at the school, which has an
endowment of $1.9 billion.

   But would the medical school's name be changed if it got a $200- million
gift? "I can't conceive of a circumstance under which the Harvard Medical School
would be renamed," Buehrens said.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2002


                             1328 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2002 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                     May 8, 2002 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: GENE LINKED TO ALCOHOL WITHDRAWAL

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Portland researchers have found a gene in mice, which humans have,
they think governs the severity of shakes and tremors

   Portland researchers have found a single gene that may help dictate how
strongly drinkers experience alcohol withdrawal, particularly tremors and
shaking.

   Scientists have long thought that alcoholism and other drug addictions have a
genetic component. But Portland researcher Kari Buck said she thinks this is the
first study identifying a specific gene that seems directly linked to drug
withdrawal.

   The discovery could someday help form a genetic test indicating how likely a
person is to become an alcoholic.

   More research is needed to confirm that the suspect gene, called Mpdz,
actually does affect the body's reactions to stopping drinking, Buck said. "In
the meantime, this is closer than anyone has come in this field in coming up
with a gene that looks like a promising candidate."

   The gene seems to affect mice's levels of convulsions and anxiety after they
stop drinking alcohol. It also seems to affect withdrawal from a barbiturate
drug, she said.

   Buck and four other Portland Alcohol Research Center scientists published the
results of their work last week in the Journal of Neuroscience. The alcohol
center is at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Oregon Health & Science
University.

   The new study builds on a 1997 discovery by Buck and colleagues of three
areas on different chromosomes that seemed to affect how mice react to alcohol.
Each of the areas was relatively large, though, with enough DNA to code for
about 1,000 genes.

   The Portland researchers winnowed those areas by working with generations of
specially bred mice. They created mice that were nearly genetically identical
but had small variations in their genetic makeup around the region that
influences alcohol withdrawal. By comparing which adult mice suffered more or
less severe withdrawal symptoms, then comparing where their genomes are
different, the researchers progressively homed in on the crucial area.

   The study reports that the Portland team narrowed its focus to an area of
mouse chromosome four that contains 15 known or suspected genes. Only one of
those genes, Mpdz, is known to have multiple forms that create different
proteins or are turned on in different ways -- which is needed to create
differences among the adult mice.

   Mpdz is "very widely expressed in the brain," Buck said, and carries the code
for a big protein that can have several structural variations.

   "It's one of the ones that has a big effect on alcohol withdrawal," said
Chris Cunningham, an alcohol research center scientist who is not involved in
Buck's study.

   Humans, like mice, have the Mpdz gene, which suggests that it might affect
how strongly people who drink will react to stopping. But one gene won't show
whether someone will be an alcoholic, which is affected by many genes and by
factors in people's upbringing and environment, Buck said.

   Withdrawal symptoms do seem to be more genetically governed than some other
alcohol-related factors, which is why Buck and her colleagues focused on
withdrawal.

   Buck said her work is unlikely to lead to gene therapy but could someday
point to targets for drugs that ease withdrawal symptoms. Other Portland
researchers are focusing on different aspects of drinking. Cunningham said
several center researchers are closing in on genes that influence mice to want
to start drinking.

   When several such alcoholism-linked genes are found, scientists might be able
to create a genetic test indicating whether someone is prone to addiction.
Cunningham said that is far off.

   But it is something many people want, Buck said. "I can't tell you how often
I get letters saying, 'Alcoholism is in my family. I'm scared to death. I'm
scared to death for my kids. What can you tell me about my risk?' " You can
reach Andy Dworkin at 503-221-8239 or by e-mail at
andydworkin@news.oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Graphic -- Diagram and text by DERRIK QUENZER - The Oregonian -- MOUSE
HUNT - In 1997, scientists at Portland Alcohol Research Center found a chunk of
DNA that helped control how strongly mice react to alcohol withdrawl...

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2002


                             1329 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      May 07, 2002, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 30 medicine

LENGTH: 628 words

HEADLINE: High-tech medical insight ;
UTMB educates consumers with free online health-care 'schools'

SOURCE: Special to the Chronicle

BYLINE: DEBORAH MANN LAKE

BODY:

   Wannabe doctors are now just a mouse click away from learning valuable
insights into the workings of the human body thanks to a new Web site posted by
the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston.

   For the past three years, UTMB has sponsored free Mini Medical Schools in
Houston in classroom settings. To make the school more accessible to those with
busy schedules, school administrators put the program on the Internet,
www.utmb.edu/minimed, in February.

   "With the advent of the Internet, we had another way we could reach out to
even more people in the community," said Nathalie Mangold, UTMB's community
relations coordinator. "UTMB is dedicated to the health of Texas, and we feel
like the Mini Medical School is one way to improve life for Texans. Lay people
are able to get firsthand knowledge from experts that empowers them to be better
health-care consumers."

   The Mini Medical School concept was developed by the National Institutes of
Health in the 1970s and has spread throughout U.S. academic medical schools.
It's designed to familiarize participants with medical technology, knowledge of
medicine and insight into medical research.

   Subjects on the UTMB Web site are as diverse as the body is complex, covering
subjects such as aging and genetics.

   For example, on the topic "Your Body and How it Moves," online students
tackle a 42-page course that begins with the basics of the musculoskeletal
system and includes an interactive game of fitting bones into a skeleton and a
test on brain know-how.

   The course, one of seven, also covers the importance of diet and exercise for
staying healthy and goes into specifics such as how staying fit can help in
fighting diseases such as Type II diabetes.

   All doctors are, or were, on UTMB's staff.

   UTMB designed the series, sponsored through an education grant from Pfizer,
with Barrios Technology, a Clear Lake company that designs interactive astronaut
training for NASA. It is the only one of its kind to Mangold's knowledge. She
said Pfizer is using it as a national model.

   The seven subjects now online were presented in the first live school in
1999. Additional series covering new topics will be added to the online school
as early as this summer.

   Mangold said UTMB has successfully offered smaller live Mini Medical Schools
with four classes in Clear Lake and Austin, and the university hopes to present
something similar during the next Texas Legislature.

   Along with "Your Body and How it Moves," courses available online include:

    "Aging and the End of Life," on the epidemiology of aging and the changes
that should be made when caring for the elderly.

    "The Beat Goes On," on state-of-the-art approaches to the diagnosis,
treatment and prevention of coronary heart disease, the No. 1 killer of
Americans.

    "The Facts About Gastrointestinal Health," on the clinical conditions and
diagnostic tools used for evaluating and treating gastrointestinal disorders
including reflux disease, hepatitis, diarrhea and colon cancer.

    "The Genomics Revolution," on the structure and function of genes, including
theories on gene therapy and molecular diagnosis, as well as ethical and
economical questions.

    "His and Her Health," on the specific health concerns of men and women,
including the role of hormones and sex steroids in the reproductive system.

    "Understanding and Overcoming Depression," on the diagnosis and treatment of
an illness that can affect the ability of a person to function in all aspects of
life.

   Some programs may require additional computer plug-ins such as Macromedia
Flash or RealNetworks RealPlayer.

   After completion of all seven courses, participants will receive a Mini
Medical School "diploma."

   For information, contact Mangold at 409-747-8192.


LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2002


                             1330 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                       MAY 6, 2002, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E12

LENGTH: 3186 words

HEADLINE: THE CHRONICLE 200;

Profiles, A-F

BODY:
3Com Corp.

    Computer networking systems

    5400 Bayfront Plaza

    Santa Clara , CA 95052

    (408) 326-5000

    Ticker: COMS

    www.3com.com

    CEO: Bruce Claflin

    Employees 8,165

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 77

    _______________________________________________

    Abgenix Inc.

    Biotechnology

    6701 Kaiser Drive

    Fremont , CA 94555

    (510) 608-6500

    Ticker: ABGX

    www.abgenix.com

    CEO: Raymond Withy

    Employees 324

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 92

    _______________________________________________

    ABM Industries Inc.

    Building maintenance

    160 Pacific Ave., Suite 222

    San Francisco , CA 94111

    (415) 733-4000

    Ticker: ABM

    www.abm.com

    CEO: Henri K. Slipsager

    Employees 60,000

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 120

    _______________________________________________

    Actel Corp.

    Semiconductors

    955 E. Arques Ave.

    Sunnyvale , CA 94086

    (408) 739-1010

    Ticker: ACTL

    www.actel.com

    CEO: John East

    Employees 521

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 184

    _______________________________________________

    Adaptec Inc.

    Networking products

    691 S. Milpitas Blvd.

    Milpitas , CA 95035

    (408) 945-8600

    Ticker: ADPT

    www.adaptec.com

    CEO: Bob Stephens

    Employees 2,237

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 97

    _______________________________________________

    Adobe Systems Inc.

    Computer software

    345 Park Ave.

    San Jose , CA 95110

    (408) 536-6000

    Ticker: ADBE

    www.adobe.com

    CEO: Bruce Chizen

    Employees 3,029

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 26

    _______________________________________________

    Advanced Fibre Comm. Inc.

    Telecommunications

    1465 N. McDowell Blvd.

    Petaluma , CA 94954

    (707) 794-7700

    Ticker: AFCI

    www.afc.com

    CEO: John Schofield

    Employees 843

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 86

    _______________________________________________

    Advanced Micro Devices Inc.

    Semiconductors

    1 AMD Place

    Sunnyvale , CA 94086

    (408) 732-2400

    Ticker: AMD

    www.amd.com

    CEO: Hector Ruiz

    Employees 14,415

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 50

    _______________________________________________

    Advent Software Inc.

    Investment management software

    301 Brannan St.

    San Francisco , CA 94107

    (415) 543-7696

    Ticker: ADVS

    www.advent.com

    CEO: Peter Caswell

    Employees 837

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 78

    _______________________________________________

    Affymetrix Inc.

    Biotechnology

    3380 Central Expressway

    Santa Clara , CA 95051

    (408) 731-5000

    Ticker: AFFX

    www.affymetrix.com

    CEO: Stephen Fodor

    Employees 905

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 94

    _______________________________________________

    Agile Software Corp.

    Management software

    1 Almaden Blvd.

    San Jose , CA 95113

    (408) 975-3900

    Ticker: AGIL

    www.agilesoft.com

    CEO: Bryan Stolle

    Employees 460

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 187

    _______________________________________________

    Agilent Technologies Inc.

    Testing and measurement equipment

    395 Page Mill Road

    Palo Alto , CA 94306

    (650) 752-5000

    Ticker: A

    www.agilent-tech.com

    CEO: Edward Barnholt

    Employees 41,000

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 13

    _______________________________________________

    Alliance Semiconductor Corp.

    Imbedded memory products

    2575 Augustine Drive

    Santa Clara , CA 95054

    (408) 855-4900

    Ticker: ALSC

    www.alsc.com

    CEO: N. Damodar Reddy

    Employees 203

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 191

    _______________________________________________

    Altera Corp.

    Programmable integrated circuits

    101 Innovation Drive

    San Jose , CA 95134

    (408) 544-7000

    Ticker: ALTR

    www.altera.com

    CEO: John Danne

    Employees 1,987

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 29

    _______________________________________________

    AMB Property Corp.

    Real estate investment trust

    Pier 1 Bay 1

    San Francisco , CA 94111

    (415) 394-9000

    Ticker: AMB

    www.amb.com

    CEO: Hamid Moghadam

    Employees 174

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 71

    _______________________________________________

    Apple Computer Inc.

    Computer hardware

    1 Infinite Loop

    Cupertino , CA 95014

    (408) 996-1010

    Ticker: AAPL

    www.apple.com

    CEO: Steve Jobs

    Employees 9,603

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 28

    _______________________________________________

    Applied Materials Inc.

    Semiconductor equipment

    3050 Bowers Ave.

    Santa Clara , CA 95054

    (408) 727-5555

    Ticker: AMAT

    www.appliedmaterials.com

    CEO: James Morgan

    Employees 16,263

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 6

    _______________________________________________

    Ariba Inc.

    Internet infrastructure

    807 11th Ave.

    Sunnyvale , CA 94089

    (650) 390-1000

    Ticker: ARBA

    www.ariba.com

    CEO: Robert Calderoni

    Employees 1,124

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 106

    _______________________________________________

    Asyst Technologies Inc.

    Semiconductor equipment

    48761 Kato Road

    Fremont , CA 94538

    (510) 661-5000

    Ticker: ASYT

    www.asyst.com

    CEO: Mihir Parikh

    Employees 1,543

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 168

    _______________________________________________

    Atmel Corp.

    Semiconductor equipment

    2325 Orchard Parkway

    San Jose , CA 95131

    (408) 441-0311

    Ticker: ATML

    www.atmel.com

    CEO: George Perlegos

    Employees 8,190

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 53

    _______________________________________________

    Autodesk Inc.

    Computer software

    111 McInnis Parkway

    San Rafael , CA 94903

    (415) 507-5000

    Ticker: ADSK

    www.autodesk.com

    CEO: Carol Bartz

    Employees 3,539

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 70

    _______________________________________________

    Avant Corp.

    Computer software

    46871 Bayside Parkway

    Fremont , CA 94538

    (510) 413-8000

    Ticker: AVNT

    www.avanticorp.com

    CEO: Gerald Hsu

    Employees 1,500

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 156

    _______________________________________________

    Barra Inc.

    Risk management software

    2100 Milvia St.

    Berkeley , CA 94704

    (510) 548-5442

    Ticker: BARZ

    www.barra.com

    CEO: Kamal Duggirala

    Employees 688

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 102

    _______________________________________________

    Bay View Capital Corp.

    Commercial banking

    1840 Gateway Drive

    San Mateo , CA 94404

    (650) 312-7200

    Ticker: BVC

    www.bvcc.com

    CEO: Robert Goldstein

    Employees 895

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 197

    _______________________________________________

    BEA Systems Inc.

    Computer software

    2315 N. First St.

    San Jose , CA 95131

    (408) 570-8000

    Ticker: BEAS

    www.beasys.com

    CEO: Alfred Chuang

    Employees 3,000

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 49

    _______________________________________________

    Bebe Stores Inc.

    Women's apparel/accessories

    380 Valley Drive

    Brisbane , CA 94005

    (415) 715-3900

    Ticker: BEBE

    www.bebe.com

    CEO: Manny Mashouf

    Employees 2,300

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 171

    _______________________________________________

    Bedford Property Investors Inc.

    Real estate investment trust

    270 Lafayette Circle

    Lafayette , CA 94549

    (925) 283-8910

    Ticker: BED

    www.bedfordproperty.com

    CEO: Peter Bedford

    Employees 33

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 196

    _______________________________________________

    Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.

    Biotech supplies, tests

    1000 Alfred Nobel Drive

    Hercules , CA 94547

    (510) 724-7000

    Ticker: BIO

    www.bio-rad.com

    CEO: David Schwartz

    Employees 4,300

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 116

    _______________________________________________

    BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.

    Biotechnology-based drugs

    371 Bel Marin Keys Blvd., Suite 210

    Novato , CA 94949

    (415) 884-6700

    Ticker: BMRN

    www.biomarinpharm.com

    CEO: Fredric Price

    Employees 216

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 194

    _______________________________________________

    Borland Software Corp.

    Software and services 100 Enterprise Way

    Scotts Valley , CA 95066

    (831) 431-1000

    Ticker: BORL

    www.borland.com

    CEO: Dale Fuller

    Employees 1,158

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 138

    _______________________________________________

    BRE Properties Inc.

    Real estate investment trust

    44 Montgomery St., 36th Floor

    San Francisco , CA 94104

    (415) 445-6530

    Ticker: BRE

    www.breproperties.com

    CEO: Frank McDowell

    Employees 750

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 87

    _______________________________________________

    Brocade Comm. Systems Inc.

    Computer networks

    1745 Technology Drive

    San Jose , CA 95110

    (408) 487-8000

    Ticker: BRCD

    www.brocade.com

    CEO: Gregory Reyes

    Employees 1,066

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 39

    _______________________________________________

    Cadence Design Systems Inc.

    Software and services

    2655 Seely Road, Building 5

    San Jose , CA 95134

    (408) 943-1234

    Ticker: CDN

    www.cadence.com

    CEO: Ray Bingham

    Employees 5,600

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 47

    _______________________________________________

    Calpine Corp.

    Power generator

    50 W. San Fernando St.

    San Jose , CA 95113

    (408) 995-5115

    Ticker: CPN

    www.calpine.com

    CEO: Peter Cartwright

    Employees 3,719

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 55

    _______________________________________________

    Catellus Development Corp.

    Real estate development

    201 Mission St.

    San Francisco , CA 94105

    (415) 974-4500

    Ticker: CDX

    www.catellus.com

    CEO: Nelson Rising

    Employees 330

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 80

    _______________________________________________

    Cell Genesys Inc.

    Gene therapy

    342 Lakeside Drive

    Foster City , CA 94404

    (650) 425-4400

    Ticker: CEGE

    www.cellgenesys.com

    CEO: Stephen Sherwin

    Employees 262

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 173

    _______________________________________________

    Centillium Comm. Inc.

    Telecom equipment

    47211 Lakeview Blvd.

    Fremont , CA 94538

    (510) 771-3700

    Ticker: CTLM

    www.centillium.com

    CEO: Faraj Aalaej

    Employees 336

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 192

    _______________________________________________

    Cerus Corp.

    Biotechnology/medical products

    2411 Stanwell Drive

    Concord , CA 94520

    (925) 288-6000

    Ticker: CERS

    www.ceruscorp.com

    CEO: Stephen Isaacs

    Employees 169

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 122

    _______________________________________________

    Charles Schwab Corp.

    Brokerage services

    120 Kearny St.

    San Francisco , CA 94108

    (415) 627-7000

    Ticker: SCH

    www.schwab.com

    CEO: Charles Schwab, David Pottruck

    Employees 19,600

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 12

    _______________________________________________

    ChevronTexaco Corp.

    Oil and gas

    575 Market St.

    San Francisco , CA 94105

    (415) 894-7700

    Ticker: CVX

    www.chevrontexaco.com

    CEO: David O'Reilly

    Employees 55,763

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 3

    _______________________________________________

    ChipPac Inc.

    Semiconductor packaging

    47400 Kato Road

    Fremont , CA 94538

    (510) 979-8000

    Ticker: CHPC

    www.chippac.com

    CEO: Dennis P. McKenna

    Employees 5,445

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 149

    _______________________________________________

    Chiron Corp.

    Biotechnology

    4560 Horton St.

    Emeryville , CA 94608

    (510) 655-8730

    Ticker: CHIR

    www.chiron.com

    CEO: Sean Lance

    Employees 3,736

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 30

    _______________________________________________

    Cisco Systems Inc.

    Networking products

    170 W. Tasman Drive

    San Jose , CA 95134

    (408) 526-4000

    Ticker: CSCO

    www.cisco.com

    CEO: John Chambers

    Employees 38,000

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 2

    _______________________________________________

    Clorox Co.

    Consumer goods

    1221 Broadway

    Oakland , CA 94612

    (510) 271-7000

    Ticker: CLX

    www.clorox.com

    CEO: G. Craig Sullivan

    Employees 11,000

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 23

    _______________________________________________

    Cnet Networks Inc.

    Internet content provider

    235 Second St.

    San Francisco , CA 94108

    (415) 344-2000

    Ticker: CNET

    www.cnet.com

    CEO: Shelby Bonnie

    Employees 2,000

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 145

    _______________________________________________

    CNF Inc.

    Supply chain management

    3240 Hillview Ave.

    Palo Alto , CA 94304

    (650) 494-2900

    Ticker: CNF

    www.cnf.com

    CEO: Gregory Quesnel

    Employees 26,100

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 85

    _______________________________________________

    Coherent Inc.

    Laser instruments

    5100 Patrick Henry Drive

    Santa Clara , CA 95054

    (408) 764-4000

    Ticker: COHR

    www.cohr.com

    CEO: Bernard Couillaud

    Employees 2,372

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 117

    _______________________________________________

    Cooper Cos.

    Health products and services

    6140 Stoneridge Mall Road, Suite 590

    Pleasanton , CA 94588

    (925) 460-3600

    Ticker: COO

    www.coopercos.com

    CEO: A. Thomas Bender

    Employees 2,400

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 140

    _______________________________________________

    Copart Inc.

    Salvage

    5500 E. Second St.

    Benicia , CA 94510

    (707) 748-5000

    Ticker: CPRT

    www.copart.com

    CEO: Willis Johnson

    Employees 2,078

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 82

    _______________________________________________

    Cost Plus Inc.

    Home furnishings/gifts retailer

    200 Fourth St.

    Oakland , CA 94607

    (510) 893-7300

    Ticker: CPWM

    www.costplusworldmarket.com

    CEO: Murray Dashe

    Employees 1,668

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 167

    _______________________________________________

    Covad Communications Group Inc.

    Telecom services provider

    3420 Central Expressway

    Santa Clara , CA 95051

    (408) 616-6500

    Ticker: COVD

    www.covad.com

    CEO: Charles Hoffman

    Employees 1,400

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 185

    _______________________________________________

    Credence Systems Corp.

    Automated testing equipment

    215 Fourier Ave.

    Fremont , CA 94539

    (510) 657-7400

    Ticker: CMOS

    www.credence.com

    CEO: Graham Siddall

    Employees 1,310

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 98

    _______________________________________________

    CV Therapeutics Inc.

    Biopharmaceuticals

    3172 Porter Drive

    Palo Alto , CA 94304

    (650) 384-8500

    Ticker: CVTX

    www.cvt.com

    CEO: Louis Lange

    Employees 222

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 126

    _______________________________________________

    Cypress Semiconductor Corp.

    Integrated circuits

    3901 N. First St.

    San Jose , CA 95134

    (408) 943-2600

    Ticker: CY

    www.cypress.com

    CEO: T.J. Rodgers

    Employees 4,160

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 65

    _______________________________________________

    Del Monte Foods Co.

    Food processor, distributor

    One Market @ The Landmark

    San Francisco , CA 94105

    (415) 247-3000

    Ticker: DLM

    www.delmonte.com

    CEO: Richard Wolford

    Employees 2,700

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 179

    _______________________________________________

    Dionex Corp.

    Chemical analytical instruments

    1228 Titan Way, P.O. Box 3603

    Sunnyvale , CA 94086

    (408) 737-0700

    Ticker: DNEX

    www.dionex.com

    CEO: A. Blaine Bowman

    Employees 912

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 180

    _______________________________________________

    Documentum Inc.

    Contact management software

    6801 Koll Center Parkway

    Pleasanton , CA 94566

    (925) 600-6800

    Ticker: DCTM

    www.documentum.com

    CEO: David DeWalt

    Employees 947

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 133

    _______________________________________________

    Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Inc.

    Ice cream, frozen desserts

    5929 College Ave.

    Oakland , CA 94618

    (510) 652-8187

    Ticker: DRYR

    www.dreyers.com

    CEO: T. Gary Rogers

    Employees 4,700

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 88

    _______________________________________________

    DSP Group Inc.

    Telephony products

    3120 Scott Blvd.

    Santa Clara , CA 95054

    (408) 986-4300

    Ticker: DSPG

    www.dspg.com

    CEO: Eliyahu Ayalon

    Employees 212

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 178

    _______________________________________________

    E-Trade Group Inc.

    Online investing services

    4500 Bohannon Drive

    Menlo Park , CA 94025

    (650) 331-6000

    Ticker: ET

    www.etrade.com

    CEO: Christos Cotsakos

    Employees 3,495

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 60

    _______________________________________________

    EBay Inc.

    Internet auction

    2145 Hamilton Ave.

    San Jose , CA 95125

    (408) 376-7400

    Ticker: EBAY

    www.ebay.com

    CEO: Margaret Whitman

    Employees 2,560

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 14

    _______________________________________________

    Echelon Corp.

    Computer communications

    550 Meridian Ave.

    San Jose , CA 95126

    (408) 938-5200

    Ticker: ELON

    www.echelon.com

    CEO: M. Kenneth Oshman

    Employees 250

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 143

    _______________________________________________

    Elantec Semiconductor Inc.

    Semiconductors

    675 Trade Zone Blvd.

    Milpitas , CA 95035

    (408) 945-1323

    Ticker: ELNT

    www.elantec.com

    CEO: Richard Beyer

    Employees 311

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 111

    _______________________________________________

    Electronic Arts Inc.

    Entertainment software

    209 Redwood Shores Parkway

    Redwood City , CA 94065

    (650) 628-1500

    Ticker: ERTS

    www.ea.com

    CEO: Lawrence Probst III

    Employees 3,500

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 32

    _______________________________________________

    Electronics for Imaging Inc.

    Printing products

    303 Velocity Way

    Foster City , CA 94404

    (650) 357-3500

    Ticker: EFII

    www.efi.com

    CEO: Guy Gecht

    Employees 917

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 114

    _______________________________________________

    Epiphany Inc.

    Software and programming

    1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite 310

    San Mateo , CA 94403

    (650) 356-3800

    Ticker: EPNY

    www.epiphany.com

    CEO: Roger Siboni

    Employees 696

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 195

    _______________________________________________

    ESS Technology Inc.

    Semiconductors

    48401 Fremont Blvd.

    Fremont , CA 94538

    (510) 492-1088

    Ticker: ESST

    www.esstech.com

    CEO: Robert Blair

    Employees 440

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 129

    _______________________________________________

    Essex Property Trust Inc.

    Real estate investment trust

    925 E. Meadow Drive

    Palo Alto , CA 94303

    (650) 494-3700

    Ticker: ESS

    www.essexproperties.com

    CEO: Keith Guericke

    Employees 754

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 115

    _______________________________________________

    Exar Corp.

    Semiconductors

    48720 Kato Road

    Fremont , CA 94538

    (510) 668-7000

    Ticker: EXAR

    www.exar.com

    CEO: Donald Ciffone

    Employees 288

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 137

    _______________________________________________

    Exelixis Inc.

    Biotechnology

    170 Harbor Way, P.O. Box 511

    South San Francisco , CA 94083

    (650) 837-7000

    Ticker: EXEL

    www.exelixis.com

    CEO: George Scangos

    Employees 571

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 154

    _______________________________________________

    Extreme Networks Inc.

    Computer peripherals

    3585 Monroe St.

    Santa Clara , CA 95051

    (408) 579-2800

    Ticker: EXTR

    www.extremenetworks.com

    CEO: Gordon Stitt

    Employees 970

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 104

    _______________________________________________

    Fair, Isaac and Co. Inc.

    Customer analytics and decision technology

    200 Smith Ranch Road

    San Rafael , CA 94903

    (415) 472-2211

    Ticker: FIC

    www.fairisaac.com

    CEO: Thomas Grudnowski

    Employees 1,470

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 90

    _______________________________________________

    Finisar Corp.

    Fiber-optic systems

    1308 Moffett Park Drive

    Sunnyvale , CA 94089

    (408) 548-1000

    Ticker: FNSR

    www.finisar.com

    CEO: Jerry Rawls

    Employees 760

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 99

    _______________________________________________

    Foundry Networks Inc.

    Communications technology

    2100 Gold St., P.O. Box 649100

    San Jose , CA 95164

    (408) 586-1700

    Ticker: FDRY

    www.foundrynet.com

    CEO: Bobby Johnson

    Employees 595

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 134

    _______________________________________________

    Franklin Resources Inc.

    Investment services

    1 Franklin Parkway

    San Mateo , CA 94404

    (650) 312-2000

    Ticker: BEN

    www.frk.com

    CEO: Charles Johnson

    Employees 6,800

    Chronicle 200 Rank: 21


LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2002


                             1331 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2002 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                       May 6, 2002, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PASCO, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 445 words

HEADLINE: Cardiac Conference Hosts Health Chief

BYLINE: TISH OSBORNE, Media General News Service

BODY:

   DOCTOR TO DISCUSS HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE

   PALM HARBOR - The chief cardiac expert of the National Institutes of Health
will speak at the 10th annual Cardiovascular Conference for medical
professionals Saturday and Sunday at the Westin Innisbrook Resort off U.S. 19.

   The Heart Institute at Regional Medical Center Bayonet Point is presenting
the conference.

   Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, a
unit of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., will open the
conference with a talk on the future of cardiovascular medicine.

   He arrives on the heels of his unit's national conference, "Cardiovascular
Health for All - Meeting the Challenge of Healthy People 2010" in Washington,
D.C.

   Lenfant, who has been at the unit's helm for nearly 20 years, said that
meeting focused on the "crucial link between the knowledge we have gained about
the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease and actually putting that
knowledge into practice in communities."

   As director, Lenfant makes the announcements of the latest discoveries in the
"do's and don'ts" concerning heart health. His most recent news release bore the
bad news that middle-aged Americans face a 90 percent chance of developing high
blood pressure at some time during the rest of their lives.

   The heart and lung institute's study also determined, however, that improved
treatments had reduced the risk of developing severe degrees of high blood
pressure.

   "Americans have to better understand their risk of developing high blood
pressure," Lenfant said in April. "They cannot adopt a wait-and-see approach. If
they do, chances are they will find themselves with high blood pressure, and
that puts them at increased risk for heart disease and stroke.

   "Fortunately, high blood pressure is easily diagnosed and can be prevented by
adopting certain lifestyle measures: Don't smoke, follow a healthy eating plan
that includes foods lower in salt and sodium, maintain a healthy weight, be
physically active and if you drink alcoholic beverages, do so in moderation."

   For those who already have high blood pressure, it's important that they
properly control it with those lifestyle measures and with medication, Lenfant
added.

   Also at this weekend's conference, Elizabeth G. Nabel will speak on human
gene therapy and vascular biology. She is the scientific director of clinical
research programs at the heart and lung institute.

   Last year, more than 1,200 Suncoast physicians and nurses attended the
conference. Medical professionals receive continuing education credits by
attending.

   For registration information, call (727) 869-5477.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2002


                             1332 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                               May 5, 2002 Sunday

SECTION: SLIDELL PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: An Evening of Wine and Art to aid ALD Foundation

BYLINE: By Carol Wolfram; St. Tammany bureau

BODY:

   An Evening of Wine and Art benefiting the Adrenoleukodystrophy Foundation
will continue the fight for a cure waged daily by David Cry.

   The 34-year-old Slidellian is familiar to local residents. The son of George
and Irma Cry, a parish councilwoman and former executive director of the Slidell
Chamber of Commerce, Cry has long been active in the Slidell community
supporting a variety of community service projects. From raising money for the
St. Tammany Association for Retarded Citizens by running a tongue-in-cheek
political race to serve as Slidell's Honorary Mayor, to researching the need for
a local teen center as part of the Leadership Slidell personal and professional
project, Cry tackles tasks with gusto and a trademark grin.

   Cry is now becoming increasingly familiar in national medical and political
circles as he promotes the development and evaluation of therapies for
adrenoleukodystrophy in the state Legislature and through medical facilities
ranging from the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore to St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn.

   It is a personal mission for Cry, who was diagnosed two years ago with
adrenomyeloneuropathy, three years after symptoms of the disease first became
evident.

   An Evening of Wine and Art is the second local fund-raiser held to benefit
the ALD Foundation, which in addition to promoting coordinated research efforts
to treat and ultimately cure the disease also works to increase awareness and
provide support for adrenoleukodystrophy and adrenomyeloneuropathy patients. Cry
established the foundation after meeting several children with ALD, the classic
childhood form of the disease with which he is afflicted.

   Though Cry was 29 before he began having symptoms of adrenomyeloneuropathy, a
rare genetic disorder characterized by the breakdown or loss of the myelin
sheath surrounding nerve cells in the brain and the progressive dysfunction of
the adrenal gland, children with the classic childhood form of the disease, ALD,
are usually between the ages of 4 and 10. There are treatments that can help
with some of the symptoms, which range from seizures to blindness, but there is
no cure for the disease.

   Cry describes child after child with ALD. This one, falling blind and deaf
just two months after being diagnosed. That one, paralyzed with no hope that the
condition can be reversed.

   "The kids that go through this, they are what keep me going," Cry said.

   The visible evidence that Cry has the disease is a falter in his gait and a
cane he is now forced to lean upon. Other symptoms include spastic paralysis,
failed or irregular muscle coordination and a non-visible yet pervasive drop in
his energy level.

   Though Cry's step has slowed, his determination remains unchecked.

   "Life isn't what happens to you; life is about how you handle things," said
Cry, explaining that dealing with and overcoming the disability has added a new
purpose and direction to his life. "I'm truly blessed. I know exactly who I am
and I know exactly what I am here to do. I wish that wisdom for everyone."

   In addition to lobbying for research support, Cry is in the process of
writing a book, "A Reason for Everything," and has been approached about
becoming a motivational speaker.

   He also is hard at working assisting in the coordination of fund-raisers such
as An Evening of Wine and Art, which will be held May 31 from 7 to 9 p.m. at the
Gallerie De Bautte in Slidell. Food for the event will be provided by the
Bonfouca Banquet Room, Dunaway's Olde Towne Market and the Thai Orchid.

   Tickets are $50 per couple; $30, for individuals. Sponsorships also are
available at the following levels: Champagne, $1,000, eight couple tickets;
Merlot, $500, five couple tickets; Chardonnay, $250, three couple tickets; and
Zinfandel, $100, one couple ticket. For tickets, call 645-9559 or send checks
payable to the ALD Foundation to 946 Fremaux Ave., Slidell, LA 70458.

   Cry said it is an honor to be able to announce that Dr. Edwin Horwitz,
director of Experimental Hematology and Gene Therapy Research at St. Jude's
Children's Research Hospital, is among the guests confirmed for the benefit.

   "We are moving in a good direction. There is a view of hope on the horizon,"
Cry said. "We're continuing on the path we've been traveling and, hopefully,
we're making inroads."

   . . . . . . .

For more information on the ALD Foundation and its fund-raising efforts, contact
Cry at 946 Fremaux Ave., Slidell, LA 70458; by calling (985) 645-9559; or visit
the organization's Web site, www.aldfoundation.org.

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY SCOTT THRELKELD Slidell resident David Cry, who has
adrenomyeloneuropathy and has established the Adrenoleukodystrophy Foundation,
will have a fund-raiser for the foundation May 31 at Gallerie De Bautte on Front
Street.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2002


                             1333 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                               May 5, 2002 Sunday

SECTION: SLIDELL PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: An Evening of Wine and Art to aid ALD Foundation

BYLINE: By Carol Wolfram; St. Tammany bureau

BODY:

   An Evening of Wine and Art benefiting the Adrenoleukodystrophy Foundation
will continue the fight for a cure waged daily by David Cry.

   The 34-year-old Slidellian is familiar to local residents. The son of George
and Irma Cry, a parish councilwoman and former executive director of the Slidell
Chamber of Commerce, Cry has long been active in the Slidell community
supporting a variety of community service projects. From raising money for the
St. Tammany Association for Retarded Citizens by running a tongue-in-cheek
political race to serve as Slidell's Honorary Mayor, to researching the need for
a local teen center as part of the Leadership Slidell personal and professional
project, Cry tackles tasks with gusto and a trademark grin.

   Cry is now becoming increasingly familiar in national medical and political
circles as he promotes the development and evaluation of therapies for
adrenoleukodystrophy in the state Legislature and through medical facilities
ranging from the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore to St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn.

   It is a personal mission for Cry, who was diagnosed two years ago with
adrenomyeloneuropathy, three years after symptoms of the disease first became
evident.

   An Evening of Wine and Art is the second local fund-raiser held to benefit
the ALD Foundation, which in addition to promoting coordinated research efforts
to treat and ultimately cure the disease also works to increase awareness and
provide support for adrenoleukodystrophy and adrenomyeloneuropathy patients. Cry
established the foundation after meeting several children with ALD, the classic
childhood form of the disease with which he is afflicted.

   Though Cry was 29 before he began having symptoms of adrenomyeloneuropathy, a
rare genetic disorder characterized by the breakdown or loss of the myelin
sheath surrounding nerve cells in the brain and the progressive dysfunction of
the adrenal gland, children with the classic childhood form of the disease, ALD,
are usually between the ages of 4 and 10. There are treatments that can help
with some of the symptoms, which range from seizures to blindness, but there is
no cure for the disease.

   Cry describes child after child with ALD. This one, falling blind and deaf
just two months after being diagnosed. That one, paralyzed with no hope that the
condition can be reversed.

   "The kids that go through this, they are what keep me going," Cry said.

   The visible evidence that Cry has the disease is a falter in his gait and a
cane he is now forced to lean upon. Other symptoms include spastic paralysis,
failed or irregular muscle coordination and a non-visible yet pervasive drop in
his energy level.

   Though Cry's step has slowed, his determination remains unchecked.

   "Life isn't what happens to you; life is about how you handle things," said
Cry, explaining that dealing with and overcoming the disability has added a new
purpose and direction to his life. "I'm truly blessed. I know exactly who I am
and I know exactly what I am here to do. I wish that wisdom for everyone."

   In addition to lobbying for research support, Cry is in the process of
writing a book, "A Reason for Everything," and has been approached about
becoming a motivational speaker.

   He also is hard at working assisting in the coordination of fund-raisers such
as An Evening of Wine and Art, which will be held May 31 from 7 to 9 p.m. at the
Gallerie De Bautte in Slidell. Food for the event will be provided by the
Bonfouca Banquet Room, Dunaway's Olde Towne Market and the Thai Orchid.

   Tickets are $50 per couple; $30, for individuals. Sponsorships also are
available at the following levels: Champagne, $1,000, eight couple tickets;
Merlot, $500, five couple tickets; Chardonnay, $250, three couple tickets; and
Zinfandel, $100, one couple ticket. For tickets, call 645-9559 or send checks
payable to the ALD Foundation to 946 Fremaux Ave., Slidell, LA 70458.

   Cry said it is an honor to be able to announce that Dr. Edwin Horwitz,
director of Experimental Hematology and Gene Therapy Research at St. Jude's
Children's Research Hospital, is among the guests confirmed for the benefit.

   "We are moving in a good direction. There is a view of hope on the horizon,"
Cry said. "We're continuing on the path we've been traveling and, hopefully,
we're making inroads."

   . . . . . . .

For more information on the ALD Foundation and its fund-raising efforts, contact
Cry at 946 Fremaux Ave., Slidell, LA 70458; by calling (985) 645-9559; or visit
the organization's Web site, www.aldfoundation.org.

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY SCOTT THRELKELD Slidell resident David Cry, who has
adrenomyeloneuropathy and has established the Adrenoleukodystrophy Foundation,
will have a fund-raiser for the foundation May 31 at Gallerie De Bautte on Front
Street.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2002


                             1334 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       May 3, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 NAMES & GAMES

LENGTH: 696 words

BODY:

   We were standing by his pool, Tank Black and I, and he was on his cell phone
with the guy who regularly did the detailing on his Mercedes, the big black one
that set him back $144,000. There was a smaller one out front in the driveway
and a massive gold Range Rover in the garage.

    His wife wasn't home at the moment, but I don't imagine she was driving a '
92 Bonneville.

    "Damn Tank," I remember saying, "you've got close to a half million dollars'
worth of vehicles here."

    "Yeah," Tank said, smiling as he hung up, "I guess I do."

    Earlier that day in his office at Professional Management Incorporated, he'd
showed me a glossy brochure for a corporate jet he was thinking about buying. It
would cost, well, he wasn't sure, but seven figures.

    I felt good for him in a perverse way. He'd been born into blistering
poverty in Johnson City, Tenn., one of nine children who'd been raised by his
grandmother in a house not much bigger than the big black Mercedes.

    I was hanging out at his house in South Carolina, doing a story on what the
NFL draft is like for a wildly successful superagent in the afterglow of the
Jerry Maguire craze, and how this wildly successful superagent impacted the
lives of young people born into the same kind of rural poverty he'd come from.

    One of them was superb Jacksonville Jaguars running back Fred Taylor, who
quit school in 9th grade but was coaxed back to play football. In his
grandmother's back yard the day he was the ninth player selected in the 1998
draft, Fred held his infant daughter and said this about Tank:

    "I know I've got a great agent in Tank Black. He's as good as I could have
found. I can spot a person who is down to earth, a person I can build a
relationship with. He's right for me."

    The remainder of the thousands of words I wrote about Tank that April was
marked by similar testimony

    Johnny Davis, who coached football and sold used cars in Belle Glade, Fla.,
who thought he could spot a con man from across three football fields, visited
Tank on behalf of Tadpole Blackman, a Belle Glade kid who'd also be drafted that
day.

    "I was very impressed," Johnny was telling me in his showroom. "He offers a
lot of services. Life and disability insurance. He has legal services. But what
I really like about him is that I can tell the money will be wisely invested.
He's not somebody who's just in this to get a signing bonus and get himself a
signing bonus. I told Tank I'm looking for more than an agent. I'm lookin' for a
relationship for the kid."

    Maybe you've noted that a lot of Tank's relationships have taken a beating
since that promising spring. Next week in a federal court in Florida, Tank finds
out how big a chunk of the remainder of his natural life he'll spend in prison.

    Of all the things I've been spectacularly wrong about -- and this includes
pronouncements like "there will never be casino gambling in Atlantic City"
(1975) and "professional teams with ridiculous nicknames like 'Penguins' and
'Blue Jays' will never win a championship" (1990) -- nothing's had quite the
scalding embarrassing backlash as the story of William "Tank" Black.

    For swindling up to $14 million dollars from Fred and about a dozen other
NFL players, for defrauding the federal government, for conspiracy to commit
mail fraud, for conspiracy to commit wire fraud and for obstruction of justice,
Tank faces up to 25 years of hard time. He's already serving time on money
laundering charges and for helping convicted drug traffickers move cash from
Detroit to South Carolina and the Bahamas, then back into the United States via
a complex series of phony corporations and off shore accounts.

    Man, no wonder he had such a cool TV.

    Fred cried on the witness stand in January when he described how Tank had
swindled him out of a $5 million signing bonus. "I agreed with everything he
said," Fred said. "I trusted him with my life, with my daughter's life."

    Funny, but when I finally settled on Tank Black as the subject for that
story, I was mildly disappointed because I didn't think Black was sleazy enough.
Turned out the only inadequate element in the whole narrative was me.

NOTES:
GENE THERAPY

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                             1335 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       May 2, 2002 Thursday ALL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: CUE; Pg. 01E

LENGTH: 1478 words

HEADLINE: Building a winner

BYLINE: WHITNEY GOULD of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   The Milwaukee Art Museum's path-breaking Calatrava-design addition, along
with a stunning, copper-clad church and a modest little winery, topped the list
of awards this year from AIA Wisconsin, a 1,400-member professional society
affiliated with the American Institute of Architects.

   The awards, designed to honor the best work by Wisconsin architects, were
among those given Wednesday at the AIA chapter's 71st annual convention and
expo, held this year at the Monona Terrace Community and Convention Center in
Madison.

   While there is no discernible common thread among the winners, jurors singled
out buildings that were sensitive to their settings, used materials honestly and
took advantage of natural light. They also seemed to like projects that took
innovative turns on tight budgets.

   There were two categories of awards: Honor awards, the highest and most
prestigious, which recognize overall excellence in design; and Merit awards, for
excellence in a particular aspect of architectural design. (See page 4E for
Merit award winners).

   Jurors for the competition were architects Randy Brown of Omaha, Michael
Underhill of Phoenix and Benjamin Weese of Chicago.

   Milwaukee Art Museum expansion Milwaukee

   Architects: Santiago Calatrava of Calatrava Valls, Zurich; Kahler Slater,
Milwaukee

   Contractor: C.G. Schmidt, Milwaukee

   Comments: No surprise here. Calatrava's 140,000-square-foot addition has
captured international attention for its dramatic, skeletal form, its innovative
use of glass and concrete and a winged, movable sunshade, or brise soleil. The
vaulted galleries on either side of an enclosed exhibit space are low enough to
preserve views of Lake Michigan; the 90-foot-tall glass reception hall also
mirrors the lake beyond. A cabled pedestrian bridge links the building to the
downtown. "An unbelievable tour de force," said one juror. "A lot of people will
come to Milwaukee just to see this building. It's a huge gesture that represents
wonderful civic, artistic exuberance."

   St. Boniface Episcopal Church Mequon

   Architects: Hammel, Green & Abrahamson, Milwaukee

   Contractor: Berghammer Construction Corp., Butler

   Comments: With its gleaming copper skin and steeply gabled roof, this new
church on Mequon Road has already become a civic icon. The architects used a
slender, soaring spire to tie the new worship space together with an existing
low-slung classroom building. The interior, with its exposed Douglas fir
timbers, steel-tensile trusses and cedar pews, is light-filled and warm. "This
is a handsome building," one juror said. "The structural system and the sense of
place and light inside are strong."

   Gemelli Vineyards Whitewater

   Architect: Vetter Denk Architects, Milwaukee

   Contractor: Duval Construction, Whitewater

   Comments: For a small, family-owned hobby vineyard in Whitewater, the
architects were asked to create an unpretentious, cost-effective building that
would reflect the handmade quality of the wines produced here. The result was a
simple slatted box of wood and steel, with polycarbonate glazing that lets
daylight in. Set into a sloping site overlooking the vineyards, the building
cost only $70,000. "It's an absolutely beautiful, simple, serene building that
integrates nicely with the landscape," a juror said.

   Waisman Center Madison

   Architect: BWZ Architects, Madison

   Contractor: J.H. Findorff & Son, Madison

   Comments: To add five new floors of laboratory space to this 1972 center for
research on human gene therapy on the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus,
the architects created a curving, canopied entry, a glazed connecting bridge and
semi-circular stair tower. The addition pays homage to its plain masonry
predecessor but in a contemporary way, with glass curtain walls and pearlescent
metal trim.

   "There is a skillful weaving of the new building to the existing facility in
a way that appears effortless," a juror said. "There are a lot of intervals with
nice transitions from one material to another."

   Madison Investment Advisors Madison

   Architect: KEE Architecture Inc., Madison

   Contractor: J.H. Findorff & Son Inc., Madison

   Comments: Nestled into a sloping, wooded site, this new home office for an
investment firm is a complex series of interlocking boxes. The architects
maximized natural light, used trees for shading and incorporated a mix of
natural and industrial materials, including slate, concrete, cypress, walnut and
steel.

   "The building responds to the site. It has a rich structural control," a
juror said.

   Pharmacia Building Q Skokie, Ill.

   Architect: Flad & Associates, Madison

   Contractor: Turner Construction, Chicago

   Comments: Designed as the centerpiece for a research campus in the heart of a
Chicago suburb, this facility for chemistry research is on a tight, challenging
site. The V-shaped building uses two soaring atriums to bring natural light into
labs and interior spaces. By maximizing resource-conscious materials, the
project is expected to save $800,000 a year in energy costs when compared with a
conventional building.

   "This project is thoughtfully organized," a juror said. "The way light comes
down into the building was carefully considered."

   University of Connecticut Visitors Center Storrs, Conn.

   Architect: Flad & Associates, Madison

   Contractor: Bartlett Brainard Eacott Inc., Bloomfield, Conn.

   Comments: As the university's gateway for visitors, with space for offices
and meeting rooms, this project uses traditional motifs -- pillars, arches,
hipped roof with cupola that is actually a skylight -- in a contemporary way.
The materials, including red brick, slate and copper, create an enduring image.

   "The architecture is very unified." a juror said. "The use of natural and
artificial light is well done. It displays quality and craft."

   The Courthouse Pub Manitowoc

   Architect: Bamco Architects Inc., Manitowoc

   Contractor: Wall-Rich Construction Co., Manitowoc

   Comments: It looks mostly old, and that was the idea. But this pub, upscale
restaurant and microbrewery complex actually is a replica. The original Greek
Revival building, built in the 1860s, was considered too far gone to save, so
the architects replaced it with a virtually identical building, joined by a
modern entrance to antoher new but old-looking, corbeled brick building. With
the help of old photographs, period details were re-created.

   "This project restores the building's position in the urban fabric," a juror
commented. "It has balance and addresses the 'Main Street' vernacular. The
public facade was lovingly done."

   Schauer Arts and Activities Center Hartford

   Architect: Holabird & Root, Chicago

   Contractor: CMA Jansen, Milwaukee

   Comments: Working on a tight budget, the architects adapted an old canning
factory -- eight buildings in all -- for use as a multipurpose arts facility,
including a theater with a dramatic steel-truss ceiling. To keep costs down and
expose the industrial beauty of the building, they preserved much of the
original fabric, including posts and beams of white pine and timbers that were
recycled for a new grand staircase.

   "This project has an honest elegance," a juror said. "The architect was
successful in integrating the new architecture with the old."

   SPECIAL RECOGNITION WENT TO THE FOLLOWING PROJECTS:

   -- La Causa Charter School & Family Services Center

   Milwaukee

   Architect: Barrientos Design & Consulting, Milwaukee

   Contractor: Hnilicka Co., Milwaukee

   -- Wisconsin State Capitol, East Wing restoration and rehabilitation

   Madison

   Architect: East Wing Architects, Milwaukee

   Contractor: J.P. Cullen & Sons, Janesville

   -- Richland Center Depot rehabilitation

   Richland Center, Wis.

   Architect: Isthmus Architecture Inc., Madison, with Graef Anhalt Schloemer
and Associates, engineers, Madison

   Contractor: Prism; Kieler, Wis.

   -- Quad City International Airport, landside signage

   Moline, Ill.

   Architect: KEE Architecture, Inc., Madison

   Contractors: General Constructors Inc., Bettendorf, Iowa; Brandt
Construction, Milan, Ill.; Crawford Co., Rock Island, Ill.

   -- Fairlawn Mansion & Museum restoration

   Superior

   Architect: LHB Engineers & Architects, Duluth; Quinn Evans Architects, Ann
Arbor, Mich.

   Contractor: J.R. Jensen & Son Inc., Superior

   OTHER AWARDS:

   -- AIA Wisconsin gave Potter Lawson Inc. of Madison its 2002 Architecture
Firm Award for the firm's commitment to high quality design and community
service. The 89-year-old firm has left its imprint on landmarks ranging from the
Tenney Building on Madison's Capitol Square (1913) to the Frank Lloyd
Wright-designed Monona Terrace Community and Convention Center (1997).

   -- Architect Frederick Zimmermann of Madison won the group's Golden Award for
his contributions to the architecture profession, architectural education and
urban design.


CORRECTION-DATE: May 4, 2002

CORRECTION:

   The photographer who took a picture of the interior of St. Boniface Episcopal
Church in Mequon that was published in Thursday's Cue section was misidentified.
The picture was by John J. Korom, not Joseph Korum.


LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2002


                             1336 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 30, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2783 words

HEADLINE: ADRIANA'S TRIAL LAST OF THREE PARTS;
BALANCING BENEFITS AND RISKS CANCER PATIENT'S SIDE EFFECT FORCES A DIFFICULT
DECISION

BYLINE: Story by Raja Mishra, Photos by Suzanne Kreiter, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The fuzzy spots did not belong. Not in the checkout at Star Market. Yet
Adriana Jenkins saw them. And then, the familiar counter at the familiar Allston
store blurred. Her husband distantly stood smiling. She would fall over. Right
there. Adriana rushed away, to the safety of a bench, regaining her bearings
after several minutes.

   Had she eaten enough that day? Yes. Had the cancer treatments simply worn her
out? Maybe. Was the episode somehow connected to the strange new flutterings of
her heart? Oh, no.

        The experimental cancer drug she had taken for almost three months
listed congestive heart failure as a possible side effect. She had signed a
consent contract acknowledging this risk. It seemed remote at the time.

   The Globe followed Adriana Jenkins for eight months through a clinical trial
for an experimental breast cancer therapy. Clinical trials determine whether a
new medicine or treatment works, but in the process side effects sometimes are
revealed. Every side effect listed on every drug is the product of some trial
patient's suffering. Or injury. Or death.

   MORE THAN 3,000 CLINICAL TRIALS WERE CONDUCTED IN THE BOSTON AREA LAST YEAR.
PUZZLES OF BIOLOGY WERE SOLVED. CURES INCHED CLOSER. BUT THERE WERE UNEXPECTED
RASHES AND STRANGE SPELLS OF DIZZINESS. PATIENTS DOUBLED OVER WITH MYSTERIOUS
PAIN OR WERE RACKED WITH SURPRISING SEIZURES. SOMETIMES, SEVERE PROBLEMS FORCED
DOCTORS TO HALT TRIALS. MORE TYPICALLY, THE SIDE EFFECTS WERE DUTIFULLY
RECORDED, A WARNING FOR FUTURE PATIENTS. TRIAL PATIENTS SHOULDER THE RISK OF THE
UNKNOWN SO OTHER PATIENTS WILL NOT HAVE TO.

   Doctors running clinical trials routinely engage in an ethical balancing act:
When are side effects too much? When should a trial be stopped? There are no
textbooks for this. Each doctor must decide alone. These are among the most
difficult decisions made by the thousands of white-coated men and women in
Boston's hospitals and clinics. And just such a decision would soon determine
Adriana Jenkins's fate.

   Adriana took the promising new drug Herceptin, along with a more conventional
medication, to combat her aggressive breast cancer. After removing the breast,
her doctors determined the drug combination destroyed much of her cancer. But
she still had to suffer the nausea and hair loss of standard chemotherapy as a
precaution. After this misery, however, would come the payoff: The last part of
the clinical trial meant 40 more weeks of Herceptin. Adriana was increasingly
convinced the drug was healing her. She volunteered for this trial, quite
simply, to get as much of the drug as possible. Now there were just eight weeks
of chemo to get there.

   So she began biweekly infusions of Adriamycin, an older chemotherapy. Soon
she was feeling something that was not quite pain and not quite discomfort but
that deeply fatigued her. And there was her oddly fluttering heart.  Adriamycin

   Adriana had felt her heart stutter within minutes of receiving the first
infusion of Adriamycin. The nurse thought it might be nerves. Adriana had been
dreading the drug for months. An electrocardiogram was scheduled. The test
measures electric pulses in the heart, which correspond to beats. It can detect
heart damage, abnormal beats, and other defects. Adriana's test detected
nothing.

   Adriamycin pummels the DNA of cancer cells, causing them to die. But it hits
normal cells as well, producing often-vicious side effects. In contrast,
Herceptin targets only cancerous cells. Some doctors hailed it as the first
smart cancer drug. By developing it, researchers hoped to eliminate the need for
harsh drugs such as Adriamycin.

   Three days after her first Adriamycin treatment, Adriana, out on a walk with
a friend, could not maintain even a leisurely pace.

   That week, she would return home exhausted from work, plopping on the couch,
refusing phone calls, then off to bed. She felt terrible. Sleep would last nine
hours, 12 on weekends. This is not the way to start off a marriage, she thought.
But she was not in pain. Medication staved off nausea. The treatment was
bearable.

   The day after the second Adriamycin infusion, however, was different. It felt
like a car wreck. Everything was sore. Adriana got to work late; she missed an
important meeting.

   A few days later, she was running her hand through her hair. Out came a
clump. It was happening. She had already lost a breast. Now the hair. Two days
later, the shower drain collected more. That was it. Adriana decided on a
preemptive strike: Wielding scissors, in front of a mirror, she cut off most of
her hair. About two inches remained. She began wearing her wig.

   David Halligan, her husband, took to calling her Telly, after bald "Kojak"
star Telly Savalas. If her rapidly changing appearance bothered him, he didn't
show it. Their married life continued unaffected.

   "He is a saint and every day I am thankful that he is in my life," she wrote.

   Days later came the Star Market incident. Her fatigue was increasing and the
worrisome heart fluttering continued. The Dana Farber team sent her to Dr. James
Fang, a Brigham and Women's Hospital cardiologist with expertise in the side
effects of cancer drugs.

   In Fang's office, Adriana donned a hospital gown and was placed on a
treadmill for 10 minutes. She wore a tiny monitor on her chest that measured her
heart's pumping action.

   Later, Fang examined the results. He quickly called her Dana Farber medical
team. There was something wrong.  Disturbing data

   In Washington, at roughly the same time, government scientists began noticing
some troubling Herceptin data. The National Cancer Institute, an arm of the
National Institutes of Health, coordinates and monitors cancer clinical trials
around the country, serving as a clearinghouse for doctors and cancer patients.

   One trial under the institute's jurisdiction was a massive phase III trial
similar to Adriana's: About 250 breast cancer patients around the country were
given Herceptin combined with chemotherapy. The researchers had expected that
some cases of congestive heart failure - when the heart loses blood-pumping
ability - would develop, as they had in previous Herceptin trials.

   But as the data from Trial N9831 started filtering in, it appeared that more
women than anticipated showed signs of the potentially fatal condition. The
women had taken a combination of Herceptin and Taxol, another cancer drug,
following Adriamycin chemotherapy. Adriana was in Adriamycin chemotherapy. In a
few weeks, she was scheduled to take Herceptin and Taxol.

   None of the women in the Trial N9831 died. In early January, however, the
National Institutes of Health decided to freeze the trial. No more women would
be enrolled. The women already enrolled, and their doctors, received a detailed
explanation and the option to drop out. It was unclear how many were exiting.

   Dr. Eric Winer, Adriana's doctor, sat on the panel that made the call. He
backed the decision. And he began wondering if the new development had any
bearing on his patient.  Trial and error

   These are nervous times for researchers conducting clinical trials. In 1999,
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died during a gene therapy clinical trial at the
University of Pennsylvania, shaking the medical world. The trial was halted. An
investigation blamed researchers for numerous ethical and safety lapses. All
clinical trials around the country were subjected to heightened government
scrutiny. For a time last year, federal regulators shut down clinical trials at
the prestigious Johns Hopkins University Medical School after a test subject
there died.

   Clearly, clinical trials mean risk. Doctors know it. They are acutely aware
of it. Patients also know it, although their understanding depends on an able
explanation from a doctor and their own ability to comprehend.

   Adriana signed a consent form, a legal document, that clearly outlined the
possible side effects of the treatment. They filled four pages. Under the
heading of "Less Likely" risks of Herceptin was congestive heart failure. The
consent form also noted that combining drugs could produce "unknown and
potentially life-threatening side effects."

   In her journal, Adriana wrote that the risks were explained to her "fairly
well." After she weighed them against the possible benefits of Herceptin, her
choice to enter the trial was easy.

   Adriana's trial was approved in advance by Dana Farber's Institutional Review
Board, a 15-member panel, split among doctors and educated lay people, that
monitors all trials there. Every hospital and research university has one. These
boards report to the federal Office of Human Research Protections, based in
Washington, which establishes the rules for protecting trial patients. These
rules grew out of the horror of Nazi medical experiments, as nations sought to
prevent patients from exploitation.

   The review board must balance possible risks with possible benefits. Patients
headed for certain death can take larger risks. Those with minor sicknesses
cannot. Adriana fell somewhere in between, as do most trial patients.

   The Dana Farber review board had greenlighted her trial. Now it was about to
get involved again.  Vital questions

   Dr. Fang's tests had detected extra heart beats. In the time a normal heart
would beat twice, Adriana's produced three beats - premature ventricular
contractions, or PVCs. The PVCs were sporadic but frequent enough for concern.

   PVCs are not on their face worrisome. Many people get them after drinking
coffee. In fact, the tests indicated that the strength of Adriana's heart muscle
was normal. There was no sign of congestive heart failure. But the PVCs could be
an early warning of heart damage.

   The results triggered a delicate ethical debate for Fang. Right now,
Adriana's heart was healthy. And, according to her records, the cancer therapy
worked quite well. But he also knew that Herceptin occasionally produced
congestive heart failure. He'd seen it in other patients referred to him from
Dana Farber, especially those who took the drug just before Adriamycin, as
Adriana had. He knew that congestive heart failure could be a death sentence.
Yet there was no test to determine whether Adriana was developing it or simply
having harmless extra heartbeats.

   Argument and counter-argument raged in Fang's mind. There was no chart to
consult, no computer program to run. It was a gut call for Fang, who describes
himself as conservative doctor.

   Pull Adriana from the trial, he told Winer. It wasn't urgent, he advised, but
she should not receive any more Herceptin.

   Winer considered his advice, then engaged in his own moral calculus, through
his own personal prism. In the end, it would be his decision alone. Winer had
seen, first-hand, how well the Herceptin worked. Adriana's cancer had been
proliferating like mad but now was reduced to tiny millimeter specks. He wanted
her back on Herceptin. And it was clear that Adriana was in no immediate danger.

   Yet none of the 14 other women in the trial thus far had developed PVCs. In
fact, almost all of them responded quite well to the treatment. He felt
confident the trial would be a success. He felt confident Herceptin, in these
cases, worked.

   But there was the data coming out of Washington on Trial N9831. In that case,
Winer voted to freeze the trial. Now he, too, had to decide from the gut,
negotiate between the scientist in him and the doctor, the optimistic researcher
and the cautious caretaker.

   In the end, he drew on the first lesson he'd learned in medical school: "Do
no harm."

   On Jan. 16, Adriana was removed from Protocol No. 00-273.

   The Dana Farber team drafted a letter to the review board explaining its
call. The board agreed. But what would this mean for the trial data? Winer and
the board knew Adriana's PVCs must be recorded as a possible side effect. They
decided her results thus far, showing Herceptin worked well, could also be
included. But she would contribute no more to the trial results.

   Adriana would now only get Taxol. The Herceptin doses were canceled.
Precious life

   Adriana wanted as much of the Herceptin as she could possibly get. She had
originally been scheduled to get 40 more doses. Twelve doses seemed to shrink
her cancer. Imagine what 40 could do! She would take it forever if they'd allow
it. But she trusted Winer. She accepted his decision.

   The final week of Adriamycin had been tough. Twice sudden fevers came on, and
Dave rushed her to the emergency room. She lost 10 pounds. Her hair completely
fell out. It wasn't as miserable as she expected, but it was bad enough.

   A heaviness, a weariness, settled on her. There was the physical ordeal, the
suddenly absent Herceptin, the fact that Winer refused to give her significantly
better survival odds. And beneath it all, there was the reality that she could
still die.

   Her husband, Dave, had been a pillar of support but steadfastly refused to
discuss the possibility of death. No sense in dwelling on it, he said. Her
father felt the same. Adriana attended a breast cancer support group, only to
find 60-year-olds talking about their shattered lives. She just wanted to live
to 60. Only one percent of breast cancer patients are her age or younger. She
could find no one.

   Adriana began meeting with her former therapist. Years ago, they discussed
love and ambition. Now it was all about death. Adriana found no solace in
traditional religion. But her outlook took on a new cast. Life could be short.
Life should be precious.

   She wrote: "This situation, as bad as it is, has had the benefit of making me
view life in a different way. That work is work and not life. That I should not
be thinking 'I'll do that one day,' or 'I've always wanted to do that,' but to
do things now and not wait. To appreciate the people in my life as much as
possible. To appreciate everything as much as possible. Who knows what the
future will bring? It really puts in perspective the concept 'yes, we are all
going to die someday.' And, maybe I'll die within a year, maybe I won't. Maybe
I'll get hit by a car in the meantime! Maybe I'll live to 80 years old.
Regardless, this situation has afforded me the unique opportunity to live my
life with a new perspective, and has given me the time to make sure I have as
few regrets as possible."

   She drew up a must-do list: Visit Iceland, Winnipeg, Italy. Buy a Toyota MR-2
Spider sports car, learn to ride a motorcycle, slide down a fire pole.

   And she thought often of her mother, Georgeanne, who was given a year to live
from lung cancer and died in six weeks, gasping for breath, unable to arrange
her affairs, unable to say goodbye.

   Adriana began transferring funds into Dave's name. She spoke to a lawyer
about drafting a document that would give permission to turn off life support if
she was close to death.

   She thought of writing a will. But that made her cry. So she did not.
Sunnier climes

   It is a chilly March morning in Boston, but it's warmer, much warmer, in St.
John in the US Virgin Islands, and that's where Adriana and Dave are headed.
Four days on the beach await.

   "We're just going to sit," says Dave.

   Adriana has packed a new bathing suit, a Dana Farber special, a navy blue
one-piece with a pocket on the right breast she can stuff to create the illusion
of a breast. The two are all smiles.

   Adriana is taking Taxol. The side effects have been mild. In fact, in
retrospect, none of the drugs' side effects were unbearable. And losing a breast
was not as emotionally difficult as she had expected.

   The PVCs stopped days after she was pulled from the trial. The cause remains
a mystery. Winer will continue to monitor her heart. The most recent heart test
turned up nothing. He plans to eventually give her more Herceptin, later in the
year. In a few weeks, she will begin daily radiation treatments.

   The 14 other women in the trial have fared quite well. The trial has already
surpassed expectations. Once 40 women have been tested, Winer will publish the
results, probably in 2003. And thousands of women will be one crucial step
closer to a powerful new treatment.

   But Adriana's trial is over. She has no regrets. She believes the Herceptin,
even with a limited dose, may have saved her life, though the cancer could still
resurface. She believes her heart is fine and her marriage stronger and her
dreams still a distinct possibility. And now, Adriana Jenkins will get on a
plane, close her eyes, and fly off to somewhere warmer.

   "Yeah, we're just going to sit," she says.

   Raja Mishra can be reached at rmishra@globe.com.  SIDEBAR 1: PIECES OF THE
PUZZLE PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.  SIDEBAR 2: LEARNING MORE
PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, 1. JAN. 11, 2002 - A monitor is attached to Adriana
Jenkins's chest to measure her heart's pumping action after she experienced a
fluttering sensation during her clinical trial. 2. JAN. 10, 2002 - Adriana
crashes on the couch in her Brookline apartment after work. The latest round of
chemotherapy has caused hair loss and fatigue, side effects that could be
eliminated if clinical trials establish Herceptin as effective, which could
allow doctors to discard older, harsher chemotherapies.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2002


                             1337 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 30, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 971 words

HEADLINE: Maxwell Technologies reports quarterly loss

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 Maxwell Technologies reported a net loss of $5.5 million, or 53 cents per
share, for the first quarter ended March 31. That compares with net income of
$574,000, or 6 cents a share, for the three months ended March 31, 2001.

   The company also disclosed that it incurred a special charge of roughly
$266,000 in conjunction with laying off almost 30 employees at its San Diego
headquarters in January.  Maxwell now has 450 employees worldwide, with 329 in
San Diego.

   Maxwell said first-quarter sales declined to $14.3 million from $27 million
for the same period last year, although the company noted that revenue reported
in the year-ago period included $5.3 million in sales from a business that was
sold in June 2001.

   The company said a 7 percent sequential increase in sales of power and
computing systems was offset by a decline in sales of electronic components.
Maxwell makes electronic components, industrial computing systems and power
systems for use in multiple industries.

   Last week, the company announced it was consolidating its ownership of its
I-Bus/Phoenix and Electronic Components Group operating subsidiaries by
converting those units' stock and stock options into Maxwell common shares and
stock options.

   Other local earnings

   Women First HealthCare reported a first quarter profit of $243,000, or 1 cent
per share, on revenue of $9.5 million.  During the year-ago period the company
posted a loss of $1 million, 5 cents per share, on revenue of $7.1 million.

   The pharmaceutical division accounted for all of the revenue growth.  The
division had revenue of $7.5 million during the first quarter of this year,
compared with $5.1 million a year ago.

   Neurocrine Biosciences reported a loss of $15.8 million in the first quarter
ended March 31, compared with a $11.5 million loss for the same period last
year.  Revenue rose 43 percent to $5 million.

   The San Diego biotechnology company, which has an experimental drug to treat
insomnia in late-stage testing, had cash and marketable securities of $310.9
million at the end of March.

   Vista Medical Technologies posted a loss of $376,000 in the first quarter
ended March 31, compared with a loss of $940,000 in the same period a year ago.
Revenue rose 38 percent to $2.6 million.

   The Carlsbad surgical equipment developer had $1.4 million in cash and
marketable securities at the end of March.

   U.S. Laboratories Inc. reported a 67 percent gain in net income for the first
quarter ended March 31, rising to $784,000, or 16 cents a share, based on 4.9
million weighted average shares outstanding.  That compares to net income of
$469,000, or 14 cents per share, for 3.3 million weighted average shares in the
same quarter last year.

   The company said first-quarter revenue increased to more than $16 million, a
52 percent gain over the same quarter last year, when the company posted sales
of $10.5 million.

   U.S. labs provides quality control specialty services to the construction,
energy, public works, defense and related engineering and architectural design
industries.

   Collateral Therapeutics reported net income of $5.6 million in the first
quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of $3.6 million in the same period
a year ago.  Revenue rose to $12 million from $1 million.

   The San Diego gene therapy company attributed the profit to a $12 million
payment made by its research partner, Schering AG. In return for the money,
royalties paid to Collateral by Schering were reduced 2 percent.

   In March, Collateral announced that it will be acquired by Schering in a
stock deal valued at about $140 million.

   Previo reported an operating loss of $1.6 million for its second quarter,
compared with a $2.1 million operating loss for the same period the year before.

   With the inclusion of $2.7 million in income tax benefits, the San
Diego-based software company reported net income of $1.8 million, or 26 cents
per share.  For the same period a year ago, Previo reported a net loss of $1.7
million, or 26 cents per share.

   Previo reported $600,000 in revenue for the quarter, which ended March 31,
compared with $1.9 million in revenue for the same period a year ago.

   Vista Medical Technologies, reporting a 38 percent growth in first-quarter
revenue, cut its loss by more than half vs. the year-earlier quarter.  For the
first three months, the company posted a loss of $376,000, or 8 cents per share,
on revenue of $2.7 million.  During the year ago period, the company had a loss
of $940,000, or 19 cents per share, on revenue of $1.9 million.

   Other earnings

   Tyson Foods Inc., the largest U.S. producer of beef, chicken, and pork, said
fiscal second-quarter results turned to a profit as sales rose sharply, boosted
by its acquisition last year of top meatpacker IBP Inc.

   Tyson shares closed up 80 cents at $13, a rise of 6.6 percent, on the New
York Stock Exchange yesterday.  Since Tyson bought IBP last September, its
shares have outperformed the Standard & Poor's 500 index by more than 20
percent.

   "We are seeing good growth in the key drivers for growth for Tyson, which is
value-added meat," said David Nelson, analyst for Credit Suisse First Boston.

   Net income at the Springdale, Ark.-based company rose to $65 million, or 18
cents a share, in the quarter ended March 30, from a loss of $6 million, or 3
cents a share, a year earlier.

   The added revenue from the IBP operations saw second-quarter sales jump to
$5.84 billion from $1.86 billion last year.  Operating income was $179 million,
up from $23 million in the same quarter last year.  A year ago IBP reported
sales for its January-March quarter of $4.1 billion.


LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2002


                             1338 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 30, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: Maxwell Technologies reports quarterly loss

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Maxwell Technologies reported a net loss of $5.5 million, or 53 cents per
share, for the first quarter ended March 31. That compares with net income of
$574,000, or 6 cents a share, for the three months ended March 31, 2001. The
company also disclosed that it incurred a special charge of roughly $266,000 in
conjunction with laying off almost 30 employees at its San Diego headquarters in
January.

   Maxwell now has 450 employees worldwide, with 329 in San Diego. Maxwell said
first-quarter sales declined to $14.3 million from $27 million for the same
period last year, although the company noted that revenue reported in the
year-ago period included $5.3 million in sales from a business that was sold in
June 2001. The company said a 7 percent sequential increase in sales of power
and computing systems was offset by a decline in sales of electronic components.

   Maxwell makes electronic components, industrial computing systems and power
systems for use in multiple industries. Last week, the company announced it was
consolidating its ownership of its I-Bus/Phoenix and Electronic Components Group
operating subsidiaries by converting those units' stock and stock options into
Maxwell common shares and stock options. Other local earnings Women First
HealthCare reported a first quarter profit of $243,000, or 1 cent per share, on
revenue of $9.5 million.

   During the year-ago period the company posted a loss of $1 million, 5 cents
per share, on revenue of $7.1 million. The pharmaceutical division accounted for
all of the revenue growth.

   The division had revenue of $7.5 million during the first quarter of this
year, compared with $5.1 million a year ago. Neurocrine Biosciences reported a
loss of $15.8 million in the first quarter ended March 31, compared with a $11.5
million loss for the same period last year.

   Revenue rose 43 percent to $5 million. The San Diego biotechnology company,
which has an experimental drug to treat insomnia in late-stage testing, had cash
and marketable securities of $310.9 million at the end of March. Vista Medical
Technologies posted a loss of $376,000 in the first quarter ended March 31,
compared with a loss of $940,000 in the same period a year ago.

   Revenue rose 38 percent to $2.6 million. The Carlsbad surgical equipment
developer had $1.4 million in cash and marketable securities at the end of
March. U.S. Laboratories Inc. reported a 67 percent gain in net income for the
first quarter ended March 31, rising to $784,000, or 16 cents a share, based on
4.9 million weighted average shares outstanding.

   That compares to net income of $469,000, or 14 cents per share, for 3.3
million weighted average shares in the same quarter last year. The company said
first-quarter revenue increased to more than $16 million, a 52 percent gain over
the same quarter last year, when the company posted sales of $10.5 million. U.S.
labs provides quality control specialty services to the construction, energy,
public works, defense and related engineering and architectural design
industries. Collateral Therapeutics reported net income of $5.6 million in the
first quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of $3.6 million in the same
period a year ago.

   Revenue rose to $12 million from $1 million. The San Diego gene therapy
company attributed the profit to a $12 million payment made by its research
partner, Schering AG. In return for the money, royalties paid to Collateral by
Schering were reduced 2 percent. In March, Collateral announced that it will be
acquired by Schering in a stock deal valued at about $140 million. Previo
reported an operating loss of $1.6 million for its second quarter, compared with
a $2.1 million operating loss for the same period the year before. With the
inclusion of $2.7 million in income tax benefits, the San Diego-based software
company reported net income of $1.8 million, or 26 cents per share.

   For the same period a year ago, Previo reported a net loss of $1.7 million,
or 26 cents per share. Previo reported $600,000 in revenue for the quarter,
which ended March 31, compared with $1.9 million in revenue for the same period
a year ago. Vista Medical Technologies, reporting a 38 percent growth in
first-quarter revenue, cut its loss by more than half vs. the year-earlier
quarter.

   For the first three months, the company posted a loss of $376,000, or 8 cents
per share, on revenue of $2.7 million.

   During the year ago period, the company had a loss of $940,000, or 19 cents
per share, on revenue of $1.9 million. Other earnings Tyson Foods Inc., the
largest U.S. producer of beef, chicken, and pork, said fiscal second-quarter
results turned to a profit as sales rose sharply, boosted by its acquisition
last year of top meatpacker IBP Inc. Tyson shares closed up 80 cents at $13, a
rise of 6.6 percent, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.

   Since Tyson bought IBP last September, its shares have outperformed the
Standard & Poor's 500 index by more than 20 percent. "We are seeing good growth
in the key drivers for growth for Tyson, which is value-added meat," said David
Nelson, analyst for Credit Suisse First Boston. Net income at the Springdale,
Ark.-based company rose to $65 million, or 18 cents a share, in the quarter
ended March 30, from a loss of $6 million, or 3 cents a share, a year earlier.
The added revenue from the IBP operations saw second-quarter sales jump to $5.84
billion from $1.86 billion last year.

   Operating income was $179 million, up from $23 million in the same quarter
last year.

   A year ago IBP reported sales for its January-March quarter of $4.1 billion.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1339 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 30, 2002 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 585 words

HEADLINE: Md. Biotech Companies Report Quarterly Losses

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Losses continued at three Gaithersburg biotechnology companies as they spent
heavily on research and development in pursuit of profitability, an elusive goal
for the vast majority of Maryland biotech ventures.

   * Gene Logic Inc., which sells access to genetic information, said its
first-quarter loss narrowed on increased revenue.

    In the three months ended March 31, the company lost $ 7.5 million (28 cents
per share), compared with a loss of $ 10.6 million (40 cents) in last year's
first quarter.

    The company's revenue rose 44 percent, to $ 11.8 million up from $ 8.2
million, while its spending dropped 4 percent, to $ 20 million.

    The company's attributed its increased revenue to a growing number of
subscribers to its GeneExpress products, which include a variety of genetic data
used by researchers to study disease and develop new drugs.

    Among its new GeneExpress customers were Takeda Chemical, Daiichi
Pharmaceutical, Morphochem AG and Artesian Therapeutics. The company also added
10 subscribers to its GeneExpress reports, a less expensive research product the
company sells to attract new customers.

    Gene Logic shares yesterday fell 48 cents, or 3 percent, to close at $
14.50.

   * GenVec Inc., a pioneer in the controversial field of gene therapy, said its
first-quarter loss nearly doubled on shrinking revenue and increased spending.

    In the three months ended March 31, the company lost $ 6.4 million (29 cents
per share), compared with a loss of $ 3.3 million (18 cents) in the same period
last year.

    The company's revenue fell to $ 628,000, from $ 2 million in last year's
first quarter. Its spending rose to $ 7.3 million from $ 5.8 million as the
company prepared for new patient trials. The company ended the quarter with $
34.4 million in cash and investments.

    The company attributed the decline to the lack of payments from its research
collaboration with Pfizer Inc. to develop its lead product, BioBypass, for heart
and artery disease. In January, the two companies announced that Pfizer would
end its participation in the partnership in July, citing business
considerations.

    This quarter's revenue came mainly from money earned under its three-year, $
10.2 million collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases to develop experimental AIDS vaccines.

    GenVec said it would start two second-stage patient trials of TNFerade, a
gene therapy for cancer, in patients with cancers of the pancreas and esophagus.
It will also begin its first human tests of a gene therapy called PEDF for
blindness.

    GenVec shares were unchanged yesterday at $ 3.05.

   * Antex Biologics Inc., which develops vaccines and antibiotics, said its
first-quarter loss grew on increased revenue, and it announced plans to start
patient trials for four products this year.

    In the three months ended March 31, the company lost $ 2.4 million (19 cents
per share), compared with a loss of $ 2.2 million (20 cents) in the same period
last year.

    The company's revenue rose to $ 130,425, from $ 47,865 last year. But its
research-and-development expenses rose to $ 1.5 million from $ 1.1 million.

    Later this year, the company plans to start second-stage patient trials for
its Helivax vaccine for bacterial infections and a vaccine for middle-ear
infections. It also plans to start first-stage trials for its Tracvax vaccine
against chlamydia and an antibiotic called AP-158.

    Antex shares fell to $ 1.24 yesterday, down a penny.

   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2002


                             1340 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                    April 29, 2002 Monday City final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS - INDIANAPOLIS, INC.; Pg. 01C

LENGTH: 828 words

HEADLINE: Bioethicist says issue is likely to intensify;
Significant strides in genetic research are hailed by some sides, criticized by
others.

BYLINE: BY BILL W. HORNADAY BILL.HORNADAY@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   Before addressing Indiana's technology community last Thursday, Paul Root
Wolpe said he felt somewhat awkward -- like an eavesdropper in a family
conversation.

   To be sure, the prospect of Indiana being left in the dust of America's
high-tech revolution is the kind of stuff that roils feathers, fractures
factions and fosters fingerpointing. But the National Aeronautics and Space
chief bioethicist warned of another upcoming debate -- biotechnical research --
that promises to dwarf the societal maelstrom that abortion has posed for the
past two decades.

   And it just so happens that Indiana is turning to biotechnology as a major
avenue to make up its lost economic ground.

   "I've predicted for the last 10 years that biotechnology will be the next
great ethical fight in our culture," said Wolpe, who also serves as a senior
fellow of the Center of Bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania.

   "My message is simple: The world is fundamentally changing. People are
worried, very worried. Business is vulnerable, very vulnerable. And strategic
planning in ethics is indispensable. Without it, you can expect a number of
businesses to ultimately shipwreck on the rocks of bioethics."

   Wolpe knows first-hand about the dangers of biotechnology gone bad. It was at
his own university in September 1999 where Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old
Arizonan with a rare metabolic disease, became the first known person to die as
a direct result of a gene therapy experiment.

   The public and scientific backlash was so intense that similar research
ground to a halt for nearly a year -- even though Gelsinger was aware of the
risk and knew he would not directly benefit from the treatment, Wolpe said.

   Move from that -- scientific investigation with results potentially
beneficial to mankind -- to instances where such work is co-opted to satisfy
human vanity and the odds increase for biotechnological abuse.

   "By taking genes from certain species, we are creating species we have never
seen before -- such as mice that glow green and glow-in-the-dark bunnies.
Through such experiments, researchers hope to find easier ways to track how gene
therapy affects different parts of the body," Wolpe said.

   "Now there's a 'biogenetic artist' who wants to use similar technology to
create a bio-luminescent dog. That kind of thing is worrisome. You can read on
Web sites how our youngsters dream of creating humans with webbed feet and gill
slits to colonize the oceans. Yet there's nary a word about moral or ethical
considerations -- nor is it science fiction They can engineer an ear on the back
of a mouse as a replacement. Ask people how they feel about that? Biotechnology
has a large 'yuck' factor to it."

   Adding to the confusion that biotechnology brings to the public are media
outlets -- namely newsmagazines -- that exaggerate bioresearch, Wolpe said. As
examples, he pointed to covers of Time, Newsweek and U.S. News and World Report,
each of which made reference to genes that govern specific traits such as
intelligence, criminality, even infidelity.

   "Such claims -- these single-gene theories -- are genetically spurious."
Wolpe said. But most people never read past the cover. All they (magazines) are
interested is having a flashy cover so they can generate sales."

   Further confusion appears certain, Wolpe said, in that many groups that
influence large sectors of the public appear to be split on whether they favor
or oppose biotechnical research. The "pro" list included 80 Nobel laureates, 95
members of Congress and 112 university presidents, while the "cons" included the
American Cancer Society, which withdrew from a key research coalition,-- and the
Catholic Church.

   Foreign governments appear just as fragmented.

   The United States and Australia each limit stem cell research to some extent,
while Israel, China and the United Kingdom have no prohibition. France bans it
altogether. Russia banned therapeutic cloning just days ago, following the lead
of France, Germany and a plan now before the U.S. Senate. Yet China, Israel and
the United Kingdom permit the practice.

   When President Bush weighed in on the topic, he offered a compromise -- one
that limits stem cell research to 64 existing lines, Wolpe said.

   "That was brilliant," he said. "In what seemed to be a no-win situation, he
took something from both sides and gave something to both sides."

   As the debate over biotechnical research continues, Wolpe said that more and
more people will be tempted to ask who will play God in the 21st century, rather
than focus on a more important question.

   "Look around you. Nothing is natural anymore. The oceans are not what they
were before man started polluting them. The atmosphere is not the atmosphere it
once was. Ever since man fashioned the first tools and technology, he has
altered this planet," Wolpe said.

   "The question we should be asking is this: Do we play God with stewardship?"

   Call Bill W. Hornaday at 1-317-444-6202.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002


                             1341 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2002 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             April 29, 2002 Monday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS - INDIANAPOLIS, INC.; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 819 words

HEADLINE: Bioethicist says issue is likely to intensify

BYLINE: By, BILL W. HORNADAY BILL.HORNADAY@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   Before addressing Indiana's technology community last Thursday, Paul Root
Wolpe said he felt somewhat awkward -- like an eavesdropper in a family
conversation.

   To be sure, the prospect of Indiana being left in the dust of America's
high-tech revolution is the kind of stuff that roils feathers, fractures
factions and fosters fingerpointing. But the National Aeronautics and Space
chief bioethicist warned of another upcoming debate -- biotechnical research --
that promises to dwarf the societal maelstrom that abortion has posed for the
past two decades.

   And it just so happens that Indiana is turning to biotechnology as a major
avenue to make up its lost economic ground.

   "I've predicted for the last 10 years that biotechnology will be the next
great ethical fight in our culture," said Wolpe, who also serves as a senior
fellow of the Center of Bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania.

   "My message is simple: The world is fundamentally changing. People are
worried, very worried. Business is vulnerable, very vulnerable. And strategic
planning in ethics is indispensable. Without it, you can expect a number of
businesses to ultimately shipwreck on the rocks of bioethics."

   Wolpe knows first-hand about the dangers of biotechnology gone bad. It was at
his own university in September 1999 where Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old
Arizonan with a rare metabolic disease, became the first known person to die as
a direct result of a gene therapy experiment.

   The public and scientific backlash was so intense that similar research
ground to a halt for nearly a year -- even though Gelsinger was aware of the
risk and knew he would not directly benefit from the treatment, Wolpe said.

   Move from that -- scientific investigation with results potentially
beneficial to mankind -- to instances where such work is co-opted to satisfy
human vanity and the odds increase for biotechnological abuse.

   "By taking genes from certain species, we are creating species we have never
seen before -- such as mice that glow green and glow-in-the-dark bunnies.
Through such experiments, researchers hope to find easier ways to track how gene
therapy affects different parts of the body," Wolpe said.

   "Now there's a 'biogenetic artist' who wants to use similar technology to
create a bio-luminescent dog. That kind of thing is worrisome. You can read on
Web sites how our youngsters dream of creating humans with webbed feet and gill
slits to colonize the oceans. Yet there's nary a word about moral or ethical
considerations -- nor is it science fiction They can engineer an ear on the back
of a mouse as a replacement. Ask people how they feel about that? Biotechnology
has a large 'yuck' factor to it."

   Adding to the confusion that biotechnology brings to the public are media
outlets -- namely newsmagazines -- that exaggerate bioresearch, Wolpe said. As
examples, he pointed to covers of Time, Newsweek and U.S. News and World Report,
each of which made reference to genes that govern specific traits such as
intelligence, criminality, even infidelity.

   "Such claims -- these single-gene theories -- are genetically spurious."
Wolpe said. But most people never read past the cover. All they (magazines) are
interested is having a flashy cover so they can generate sales."

   Further confusion appears certain, Wolpe said, in that many groups that
influence large sectors of the public appear to be split on whether they favor
or oppose biotechnical research. The "pro" list included 80 Nobel laureates, 95
members of Congress and 112 university presidents, while the "cons" included the
American Cancer Society, which withdrew from a key research coalition,-- and the
Catholic Church.

   Foreign governments appear just as fragmented.

   The United States and Australia each limit stem cell research to some extent,
while Israel, China and the United Kingdom have no prohibition. France bans it
altogether. Russia banned therapeutic cloning just days ago, following the lead
of France, Germany and a plan now before the U.S. Senate. Yet China, Israel and
the United Kingdom permit the practice.

   When President Bush weighed in on the topic, he offered a compromise -- one
that limits stem cell research to 64 existing lines, Wolpe said.

   "That was brilliant," he said. "In what seemed to be a no-win situation, he
took something from both sides and gave something to both sides."

   As the debate over biotechnical research continues, Wolpe said that more and
more people will be tempted to ask who will play God in the 21st century, rather
than focus on a more important question.

   "Look around you. Nothing is natural anymore. The oceans are not what they
were before man started polluting them. The atmosphere is not the atmosphere it
once was. Ever since man fashioned the first tools and technology, he has
altered this planet," Wolpe said.

   "The question we should be asking is this: Do we play God with stewardship?"

   Call Bill W. Hornaday at 1-317-444-6202.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2009


                             1342 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 26, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 NAMES & GAMES

LENGTH: 710 words

BODY:

   Thank God I was in the office yesterday when the official NFL Calendar from
The Associated Press came across the wire. It was dangerously incomplete, as
usual, on top of which it was downright pungent with arcane items, such as:

    June 15 -- Deadline for old clubs to withdraw original qualifying offer to
unsigned restricted free agents and still retain exclusive negotiating rights by
substituting tender of 110 percent of previous year's salary.

    What?

    But somehow, no mention of this:

    July 19 -- Drug sentencing hearing of former Dallas Cowboys superblob Nate
Newton for toting weed weighing a mere 213 pounds, which is, technically, no
more than Nate himself weighed for the fifth-grade picnic.

    Do I have to do everything?

    Here's the full NFL Calendar that includes my additions. I've planned a
fairly seamless presentation, although our more astute fans might be able to
determine what's from me and what's from the league office. Or not.

    April 26-28 -- Rookie minicamp.

    May 14 -- NFL spring meeting, Houston.

    June 1 -- Deadline for old clubs to send tender to unsigned unrestricted
free agents to receive exclusive negotiating rights for rest of season if player
is not signed by another club by July 22.

    June 1 -- Deadline for old clubs to send tender to unsigned restricted free
agents or to extend qualifying offer to retain exclusive negotiating rights.

    June 2 -- Deadline for new clubs to figure out what June 1 was all about.

    June 9-13 -- Veteran minicamp.

    June 14-16 -- Stay-free minicamp.

    June 17-19 -- Conditioning camp.

    June 20-22 -- Shampooing and volumizing camp.

    June 23--Chemical peel.

    June 26-28--Emergency long-snapper camp.

    July 1 -- Deadline for steroid users to begin use of masking agents.

    July 15 -- Maxicamp begins. Injured reserve list open for business.

    July 16 -- First "I dunno if Kordell's the answer" talk-show caller.

    July 17 -- First "Why don' dey give 'at El Randall a shot?" talk-show
caller.

    July 18 -- Deadline for Green Bay Packers to begin suspension proceedings on
Terry Glenn if they hope to duplicate what the New England Patriots went through
last year.

    Aug. 3 -- American Bowl, Osaka, Japan: San Francisco vs. Washington.

    Aug. 4 -- Japan Bowl, Memphis, Tenn: Nagasaki vs. Tokyo.

    Aug. 5 -- Pro Football Hall of Fame game: Houston vs. New York Giants.

    Aug. 6 -- Pro Bowling Hall of Fame game: Sheboygan vs. Wilkes-Barre.

    Aug. 7 -- Deadline to think of a better nickname for Houston Texans.

    Aug. 29 -- Deadline to claim former Cleveland Browns cult figure Ben Gay on
waivers.

    Aug. 30 -- Deadline for rain checks on buy-one-tube-of-Ben Gay-get-one-free
offer at Kuhn's.

    Sept. 2 -- Deadline for submitting the league's Passer Rating System for the
Nobel Prize for mathematics.

    Sept. 5 -- Regular season begins for the first time on a Thursday night: San
Francisco at New York Giants. National Anthem: Al Pacino, star of "Any Given
Thursday."

    Sept. 9 -- Todd Pedersen thumps five field goals in the Steelers' opener at
New England, but six other attempts are blocked and returned for touchdowns as
the Patriots roll, 42-15.

    Sept. 9 -- John Madden makes regular-season debut on "Monday Night
Football," sparking a new contract that pays him $312,500 a game, which is more
than $1,700 a minute whether there's a commercial showing or not. Not to be
bitter.

    Sept. 11 -- Five months after getting a hero's welcome upon being traded
from New England, and three days after an 11-for-30, three-interception
performance in the opener against the New York Jets, new Bills quarterback Drew
Bledsoe has his dog poisoned. Next week's National Anthem: Al Pacino, star of
"Dog Day Afternoon."

    Dec. 23 -- Deadline for filing criminal complaints against Ray Lewis that
could still keep him out of the playoffs.

    Dec. 31 -- Playoff picture cast into chaos as executives for 8-8 Houston
Texans try to establish "most fans named Joe Bob" as primary tiebreaker
procedure.

    Jan. 4-5 -- Wild-card playoffs

    Jan. 6-7 -- Jokers Wild playoffs

    Jan. 11-12 -- Divisional playoffs

    Jan. 19 -- Conference championships

    Jan. 26 -- Super Bowl at San Diego

    Feb. 2 -- Pro Bowl at Honolulu

    Feb. 3--Pro Bowling Hall of Fame remodeling begins, St. Louis.

NOTES:
Gene Therapy

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2002


                             1343 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             April 26, 2002, Friday

SECTION: CITY TIMES; AMY SCHERZER'S DIARY; Pg. 2

DISTRIBUTION: CITY TIMES; NORTH OF TAMPA

LENGTH: 1175 words

HEADLINE: This dance is a surprise

BYLINE: AMY SCHERZER

BODY:


   DANCE OF OPTIMISM: Robyn Dekeyser surprised her family by dancing Sleeping
Beauty's Rose Adagio at the "Stars for Life" benefit for the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation. They had no idea she would be performing Saturday night at the A La
Carte Pavilion. Dekeyser, a 32-year-old mother of a 2-year-old, was diagnosed
with cystic fibrosis when she was 21 days old.

   "They're really making progress on gene therapy," said pediatric
pulmonologist  David Rosenberg during the silent auction. Several of his young
CF patients were presenters at the gala, including  Morgan Holloway, 6, Colin
Santos, 5, and Aaron Joseph, 12. They presented a rose and a plaque to 17
"stars," including Dekeyser, nominated for their community involvement.

   Tara Parker, 15, told Richard Weiss' "65 roses" story. Weiss, 40, of South
Tampa was about 7 when he heard his mother discussing his diagnosis on the
phone. He was sure she said he had "65 roses." Since then, the rose has become a
symbol of the CF Foundation. After that story, 65 roses sold instantly at $ 20
each. Every buyer was entered into a drawing for two tickets on American
Airlines.  Brooke Ward of Riverview got the lucky rose.

   To join the CF Walk-a-thon on May 18, starting in Old Hyde Park Village and
continuing 6.2 miles along Bayshore Boulevard, call 258-0266.

   FOR THE CHILDREN: She's a woman of few words:  Columba Bush, first lady of
Florida. "For the Children - thank you," Bush said when honored with the  Helen
A. Davis award at The Children's Home annual donor recognition luncheon at the
Hyatt Regency Tampa.

   The home was at 3302 N Florida Ave. when Davis was president of the board of
directors in 1965-66. She and her late husband,  Sam, got involved when they
adopted their daughter.

   "Back then, the board did it all, from haircuts to fixing broken pipes,"
Davis recalled. "Sam ran Tampa Ship Repair and Drydock Co. and constantly sent
workers to do repairs."

   Davis remembers driving all over town looking for land, finally persuading
city officials to donate 37 acres on Memorial Highway, the home's current
location. The site has grown to 89 acres.

   "When  Ann Murphey (director of development in 1989) called me up in
Highlands, N.C., to tell me they named an award for me, I told her no, don't do
that, and she said there wouldn't be a Children's Home without Helen and Sam
Davis," Davis said.

   Other, more verbal lunch speakers included Mayor Dick Greco, who noted that
the home was 110 years old and added, "It's nice to be invited to something
older than you."

   At this moment, 26 children living at the home await adoption.

   SPOT OF TEA: Ubiquitous English tomato sandwiches were listed on the menu at
the "Raj Tea Party," just above samosas, makka poa, mulligatawny soup and
pappadums.

   Organizer/hostess  Beverly Rogers has never been to India but she loved
studying the culture while preparing for the Tampa Yacht Club's monthly theme
tea party. Welcoming more than 50 women, she asked them to imagine they were in
the viceroy's mansion during the rule of the British raj. But first, she
introduced  Cathy Franks,  wife of Gen.  Tommy Franks,  and  Judy Robb,  wife of

 Adm. "Rookie" Robb. The memsahibs leisurely sampled fresh teas from Delhi,
scones and Indian delicacies, a most civilized respite from the usual frantic
pace.

   WHEN COOKIE MET ALEC: Now that Kim Basinger is out of the picture, Cookie
Buchman may be moving onto the scene. The Palma Ceia resident met
actor/political activist Alec Baldwin at the Florida Democratic Convention in
Orlando April 13 and 14. She and her son Eric, 23, both delegates, heard Al
Gore, John Kerry, Joseph Lieberman, Bill McBride, Janet Reno, Darryl Jones and
others at the Wyndham Palace in Buena Vista. But meeting Baldwin at a private
reception put her over the top.

   Maybe Baldwin felt the vibes, because later that night, she heard, "Hello
Cookie!" It was Baldwin calling to her across the hotel.

   "He remembered my name," said Buchman, still swooning at the thought.

   SMORGASBORD OF ART: Guests sampled all genres of art in The Cube last week at
"A Taste of the Arts" to benefit the University of South Florida's newly renamed
College of Visual and Performing Arts, formerly the College of Fine Arts.  Ron
Jones continues as dean of about 1,000 arts majors and nearly 150 faculty and
staff.

   The Cube is a striking venue for a party; USF really should figure out a way
to buy it. Dance and theater students made use of the light and space to show
their many talents. VIPs got an even better view from second-floor tables. The
marimba quartet impressed, but vocalist Kay Lowe wowed with selections from
Phantom of the Opera.

   Bidders got great deals on artwork by Jeffrey Kronsnoble, Bruce Marsh,
Josette Urso and others. Proceeds from the live and silent auctions become
scholarships for USF students.

   COURT OF HONOR: The Krewe of Venus named attorney Rhea Law "Lady of the Law,"

 and journalist for the Mayor's Paper, Steve Otto, "Court Scribe" April 19 at
the President's Masquerade Ball. King and Queen Glen and Tara Freeman gave the
honorees an alabaster statue of Venus. Krewe president  Sharon Phillips honored
charter members still active in the krewe with a sterling silver fleur de lis
pin. The band, Mainstream, dedicated the 1965 hit Ride Sally Ride to the krewe,
which was founded that year.

   THE ROYAL LINE: Here's a prediction you can bet your last beads on. In about
20 years, say 2022, Lauren Gonzmart's adorable 5-month-old twins, Michael and
Isabella, will be occupying the throne of the Krewe of the Knights of Sant'
Yago.

   The grandchildren of King Richard and Melanie Gonzmart and
great-grandchildren of the late King Cesar and Adela Gonzmart met some of their
future subjects at a Las Damas de Sant' Yago Queen's Luncheon given in honor of
La Reina XXX Monica Martino at the Columbia restaurant. Queen Monica was one of
the models wearing fashions from several boutiques, including Pink Palm,
Material Girls, Adria's and M's.

   To pass along tips to Amy Scherzer, reach her at 226-3332 or
scherzer@sptimes.com.

   Sharon Alexander Gold, left, Columba Bush and Helen A. Davis attend the
Children's Home's annual donor recognition luncheon.

   Twins Michael and Isabella Laurato pose with grandma Melanie, left, cousin
Jessica and mom Lauren Gonzmart. Look for them on the throne of the Krewe Of
Sant' Yago by 2022.

   Joe Holloway adjusts his son Morgan's bow tie as Colin Santos smiles. The
boys were Cystic Fibrosis ambassadors at the "Stars for Life" benefit Saturday.

   Steve and Robyn Dekeyser of Lutz enjoyed "Stars for Life" Saturday; Robyn
Dekeyser danced the Rose Adagio at the A La Carte Pavilion.

   Gretchen Warren, professor of dance and ballet mistress, left, visits with
Sandy Frye and Margaret Miller at "A Taste of the Arts."

   Three sisters were three muses at "A Taste of the Arts." They are Teresa
Oscher, left, Alice Carlton and Barbara Edgerton.

   Mary Straw and Wally Wilson bid up the artwork at "A Taste of the Arts"
fundraiser at the Cube.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, AMY SCHERZER, (7); Twins Michael and Isabella Laurato with
grandma Melanie, cousin Jessica and mom Lauren Gonzmart. (ran CITY TIMES);
Sharon Alexander Gold, Columba Bush and Helen A. Davis attend the Children's
Home's annual donor recognition luncheon.; Mary Straw and Wally Wilson bid up
the artwork at "A Taste of the Arts" fundraiser at the Cube. (ran CITY TIMES);
Gretchen Warren, Sandy Frye and Margaret Miller at "A Taste of the Arts." (ran
CITY TIMES); Sisters Teresa Oscher, Alice Carlton and Barbara Edgerton. (ran
CITY TIMES); Joe Holloway adjusts his son Morgan's bow tie as Colin Santos
smiles.; Steve and Robyn Dekeyser

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2002


                             1344 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 25, 2002, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: THISWEEK; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: Fighting birth defects is goal of Sunday's WalkAmerica

BYLINE: CAROL E. VAUGHN, Houston Chronicle correspondent

BODY:

   Up to 1,500 WalkAmerica participants are expected to converge at Greenspoint
Mall for the March of Dime's largest fund-raiser at 9 a.m. Sunday.

   Proceeds from the five-mile walk support pioneering research and innovative
programs to save babies born prematurely or with birth defects.

   March of Dimes statistics show birth defects are the leading killer of babies
in the United States, while low birth weight is the second leading cause of
infant deaths.

   Last year the Greenspoint community raised $ 114,000 during the walk that
weaves around the Greenspoint community. The route is uniquely designed so it
never strays more than a half-mile from the mall property, said Reggie Gray,
walk site chairman and vice president of marketing for Alliance Retail
Group/Greenspoint Mall.

   "The goal for the Greenspoint WalkAmerica is $ 119,000," said April Aberly,
development coordinator for the March of Dimes. About $ 13,000 of that goal will
come from corporate sponsors, she noted.

   "The rest of the money comes from area businesses, schools and organizations
that form teams that participate in the walk. It is those team dollars that make
up the rest of the money."

   Walk site presenting sponsor is Kerr-McGee Oil & Gas Corp., whose honorary
chairman of the event, vice president Darrell Hollek, will lead the procession
past his company's headquarters on the walk.

   Other corporations taking part in the event are CRI International, ATOFINA,
The Greenspoint Club, CityView/Lincoln Property Co., IKON Office Solutions, PM
Realty Group, Swift Energy and the Greater Greenspoint District.

   This year the event continues a new incentive for individuals, called the
Franklin Milers sponsorship, a $ 100 donation that allows funders to lead the
walkers through the first mile of the route.

   Gray, the first individual to invest in a "Miler" last year, said the
donation has been very popular among business people who want to get involved
but don't have time to obtain walk sponsors. As site chairman, his goal this
year is to gather 50 Miler walkers.

   The route gathers walkers at the northern end of the Greenspoint Mall parking
lot and takes a western route down Greens Road. It makes a short loop at Greens
Parkway, then returns east down Greens Road and proceeds to Tom Wussow Park,
exiting and traveling south down Northchase Drive, past Benmar, then U-turning
back up Northchase. Walkers go past the Wyndham Hotel, cross Greenspoint Drive,
then return to the mall property.

   "The walkers get a first glimpse at our new Tom Wussow Park," Gray said. The
park will officially open to the public the in early May.

   Lunch is being served by volunteers after the walk, and Gray said the walk is
self-paced. Courtesy vans will be available for those needing to cut short their
journeys.

   Since it was organized in the north Houston area in 1993, the Greenspoint
WalkAmerica has raised more than $ 500,000. Of the money raised in WalkAmerica,
the organization says, 76 cents of each dollar is spent on research and programs
that save babies' lives.

   Research initiatives the funds benefit include prematurity studies, gene
therapy, a national folic acid campaign, health care coverage and the March of
Dimes Resource Center.

   "The walk has always been very popular here in Greenspoint because there has
always been an active committee with solid corporate and community leaders who
get the word out," said Shelia Redmon-Jones, communications manager for the
Greater Greenspoint District.

   Employees and residents enjoy the opportunity to gather together for a good
cause. No one can argue with the importance of healthy babies."

   March of Dimes officials report these local statistics:

   This year, in the 16-county Texas Gulf Coast area, 567 babies will die before
their first birthday. Of those, 332 will die in the first month of life, 147
will die from birth defects, 77 will die from low birth weight or prematurity,
and 53 will die from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome.

   For more information about the walk, call Aberly at 713-623-2020.


GRAPHIC: Map: March of Dimes Walk America route; Houston Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2002


                             1345 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 25, 2002, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: THISWEEK; Pg. 08

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: Fighting birth defects is goal of Sunday's WalkAmerica

BYLINE: CAROL E. VAUGHN, Houston Chronicle correspondent

BODY:

   Up to 1,500 WalkAmerica participants are expected to converge at Greenspoint
Mall for the March of Dime's largest fund-raiser at 9 a.m. Sunday.

   Proceeds from the five-mile walk support pioneering research and innovative
programs to save babies born prematurely or with birth defects.

   March of Dimes statistics show birth defects are the leading killer of babies
in the United States, while low birth weight is the second leading cause of
infant deaths.

   Last year, the Greenspoint community raised $ 114,000 during the walk that
weaves around the Greenspoint community. The route is uniquely designed so it
never strays more than a half-mile from the mall property, said Reggie Gray,
walk site chairman and vice president of marketing for Alliance Retail
Group/Greenspoint Mall.

   "The goal for the Greenspoint WalkAmerica is $ 119,000," said April Aberly,
development coordinator for the March of Dimes. About $ 13,000 of that goal will
come from corporate sponsors, she noted.

   "The rest of the money comes from area businesses, schools and organizations
that form teams that participate in the walk. It is those team dollars that make
up the rest of the money."

   Walk site presenting sponsor is Kerr-McGee Oil & Gas Corp., whose honorary
chairman of the event, vice president Darrell Hollek, will lead the procession
past his company's headquarters on the walk.

   Other corporations taking part in the event are CRI International, ATOFINA,
The Greenspoint Club, CityView/Lincoln Property Co., IKON Office Solutions, PM
Realty Group, Swift Energy and the Greater Greenspoint District.

   This year the event continues a new incentive for individuals, called the
Franklin Milers sponsorship, a $ 100 donation that allows funders to lead the
walkers through the first mile of the route.

   Gray, the first individual to invest in a "Miler" last year, said the
donation has been very popular among business people who want to get involved
but don't have time to obtain walk sponsors. As site chairman, his goal this
year is to gather 50 Miler walkers.

   The route gathers walkers at the northern end of the Greenspoint Mall parking
lot and takes a western route down Greens Road. It makes a short loop at Greens
Parkway, then returns east down Greens Road and proceeds to Tom Wussow Park,
exiting and traveling south down Northchase Drive, past Benmar, then U-turning
back up Northchase. Walkers go past the Wyndham Hotel, cross Greenspoint Drive,
then return to the mall property.

   "The walkers get a first glimpse at our new Tom Wussow Park," Gray said. The
park will officially open to the public the in early May.

   Lunch is being served by volunteers after the walk, and Gray said the walk is
self-paced. Courtesy vans will be available for those needing to cut short their
journeys.

   Since it was organized in the north Houston area in 1993, the Greenspoint
WalkAmerica has raised more than $ 500,000. Of the money raised in WalkAmerica,
the organization says, 76 cents of each dollar is spent on research and programs
that save babies' lives.

   Research initiatives the funds benefit include prematurity studies, gene
therapy, a national folic acid campaign, health care coverage and the March of
Dimes Resource Center.

   "The walk has always been very popular here in Greenspoint because there has
always been an active committee with solid corporate and community leaders who
get the word out," said Shelia Redmon-Jones, communications manager for the
Greater Greenspoint District.

   Employees and residents enjoy the opportunity to gather together for a good
cause. No one can argue with the importance of healthy babies."

   March of Dimes officials report these local statistics:

   This year, in the 16-county Texas Gulf Coast area, 567 babies will die before
their first birthday. Of those, 332 will die in the first month of life, 147
will die from birth defects, 77 will die from low birth weight or prematurity,
and 53 will die from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome.

   For more information about the walk, call Aberly at 713-623-2020.


GRAPHIC: Map: March of Dimes WalkAmerica route; Houston Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2002


                             1346 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 25, 2002, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: THISWEEK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 685 words

HEADLINE: Fighting birth defects is goal of Sunday's WalkAmerica

BYLINE: CAROL E. VAUGHN, Houston Chronicle correspondent

BODY:

   Up to 1,500 WalkAmerica participants are expected to converge at Greenspoint
Mall for the March of Dimes' largest fund-raiser at 9 a.m. Sunday.

   Proceeds from the five-mile walk support pioneering research and innovative
programs to save babies born prematurely or with birth defects.

   March of Dimes statistics show birth defects are the leading killer of babies
in the United States, while low birth weight is the second leading cause of
infant deaths.

   Last year, the Greenspoint community raised $ 114,000 during the walk that
weaves around the Greenspoint community. The route is uniquely designed so it
never strays more than a half-mile from the mall property, said Reggie Gray,
walk site chairman and vice president of marketing for Alliance Retail
Group/Greenspoint Mall.

   "The goal for the Greenspoint WalkAmerica is $ 119,000," said April Aberly,
development coordinator for the March of Dimes. About $ 13,000 of that goal will
come from corporate sponsors, she said.

   "The rest of the money comes from area businesses, schools and organizations
that form teams that participate in the walk. It is those team dollars that make
up the rest of the money," Aberly said.

   Walk site presenting sponsor is Kerr-McGee Oil & Gas Corp., whose honorary
chairman of the event, vice president Darrell Hollek, will lead the procession
past his company's headquarters on the walk.

   Other corporations taking part in the event are CRI International, ATOFINA,
The Greenspoint Club, CityView/Lincoln Property Co., IKON Office Solutions, PM
Realty Group, Swift Energy and the Greater Greenspoint District.

   This year the event continues a new incentive for individuals, called the
Franklin Milers sponsorship, a $ 100 donation that allows funders to lead the
walkers through the first mile of the route.

   Gray, the first individual to invest in a "Miler" last year, said the
donation has been very popular among business people who want to get involved
but don't have time to obtain walk sponsors. As site chairman, his goal this
year is to gather 50 Miler walkers.

   The route gathers walkers at the northern end of the Greenspoint Mall parking
lot and takes a western route down Greens Road. It makes a short loop at Greens
Parkway, then returns east down Greens Road and proceeds to Tom Wussow Park,
exiting and traveling south down Northchase Drive, past Benmar, then U-turning
back up Northchase. Walkers go past the Wyndham Hotel, cross Greenspoint Drive,
then return to the mall property.

   "The walkers get a first glimpse at our new Tom Wussow Park," Gray said. The
park will officially open to the public in early May.

   Lunch is being served by volunteers after the walk, and Gray said the walk is
self-paced. Courtesy vans will be available for those needing to cut short their
journeys.

   Since it was organized in the north Houston area in 1993, the Greenspoint
WalkAmerica has raised more than $ 500,000. Of the money raised in WalkAmerica,
the organization says, 76 cents of each dollar is spent on research and programs
that save babies' lives.

   Research initiatives the funds benefit include prematurity studies, gene
therapy, a national folic acid campaign, health care coverage and the March of
Dimes Resource Center.

   "The walk has always been very popular here in Greenspoint because there has
always been an active committee with solid corporate and community leaders who
get the word out," said Shelia Redmon-Jones, communications manager for the
Greater Greenspoint District. "Employees and residents enjoy the opportunity to
gather together for a good cause. No one can argue with the importance of
healthy babies."

   March of Dimes officials report these local statistics:

   This year, in the 16-county Texas Gulf Coast area, 567 babies will die before
their first birthday. Of those, 332 will die in the first month of life, 147
will die from birth defects, 77 will die from low birth weight or prematurity,
and 53 will die from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome.

   For more information about the walk, call Aberly at 713-623-2020 or access
the Web site at http://www.modtxgulfcoast.org


GRAPHIC: Map: Location of the March of Dimes Walk America route (color); Houston
Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2002


                             1347 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     April 24, 2002 Wednesday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1103 words

HEADLINE: Medical research reform weighed;
 Senate panel pledges stronger protections for experiment volunteers

BYLINE: Tom Pelton

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Senators vowed yesterday to seek legislation that would
strengthen federal protections for volunteers in medical experiments, saying
they are concerned about reports of flaws and loopholes in existing regulations.

   "If patients fear that their safety is not adequately protected in medical
research, the cures of the future will be placed in jeopardy," Sen. Edward M.
Kennedy, chairman of the committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions,
said during a hearing on the issue yesterday.

   The Massachusetts Democrat is working with Sen. Bill Frist, a Tennessee
Republican, to draft a bill that would strengthen federal oversight of
experiments, compel disclosure of conflicts of interest and require full
disclosure of risks to study subjects, according to aides.

   Their effort has been driven by a recent series of scandals at academic
medical centers, including the death in June of a healthy 24-year-old in an
asthma study at the Johns Hopkins University and the death in 1998 of an
18-year-old volunteer in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania.

   "Congress has made clear its commitment to biomedical research," said Frist,
the Senate's only physician. "However, until recently, there has been too little
attention paid to protecting the individuals who are the focus of this critical
research."

   The Maryland General Assembly recently made a similar push for greater
accountability in medical experiments, approving a bill that compels
universities to publicly disclose the minutes of their scientific review boards.

   Witnesses at yesterday's hearing described a system of reviewing experiments
nationally that is overwhelmed, inconsistent and often poorly equipped to
protect the 2.3 million people a year who volunteer for clinical trials.

   Federal laws have loopholes that do not require researchers to disclose their
own financial conflicts of interest to volunteers or review boards, according to
testimony from critics of the current system. An unknown number of deaths and
injuries in experiments go unreported, and existing regulations do not fine or
penalize scientists who break safety rules, critics said.

   Moreover, the university review boards designed to scrutinize experiments are
overwhelmed with work, critics added, and provide little or no monitoring of
experiments to make sure researchers perform them as approved.

   Cherlyn Mathias, a nurse who worked as a research coordinator at the
University of Oklahoma in 1999 and 2000, said she believes safety violations and
cover-ups are common among researchers.

   She told the committee she was forced out of her job more than a year ago
after she complained to federal authorities about a series of problems in a
melanoma cancer vaccine trial.

   Mathias said a researcher she worked with failed to seek review board
approvals and exaggerated promises of a cure for melanoma when he described the
study to volunteers. He also let subjects inject themselves with the
experimental vaccine and store it at dangerously warm temperatures in their home
refrigerators, Mathias said.

   "By the time I blew the whistle in June of 2000, the university had formed a
committee that included the dean of the medical college," said Mathias. But "the
committee was engaged in acts of cover-up instead of promptly reporting as
required by the federal regulations."

   Mathias, now manager of the clinical trials department for the Harris
Methodist Fort Worth Hospital in Texas, said the University of Oklahoma has
since made several improvements to strengthen its oversight of experiments. But
she said that problems still haunt research around the country. Even in her new
job in Texas, Mathias said, she feels unhealthy financial pressure to meet
quotas of enrolling certain numbers of volunteers in clinical trials per month.

   "My performance is based on how many people I enroll in clinical trials,"
said Mathias. "It's a situation that creates conflict."

   Marjorie Speers, former acting director of a group of scientific ethics
experts called the National Bioethics Advisory Commission, said a national
system of accreditation should be created to make sure that researchers receive
education on federal safety rules and comply with them, or else risk
professional censure.

   "It is ethically indefensible to not fully protect volunteers in research,"
said Speers, leader of a nonprofit organization called the Association for the
Accreditation of Human Research Protection Programs.

   Charles A. Johnson, a representative for the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, a technology industry trade group, also supported federal
legislation, but as a way of eliminating what he called a confusing patchwork of
federal and state regulations that sometimes conflict. The system would work
better if the federal government created a single, streamlined set of
regulations that would override the sometimes widely varying and overly
restrictive state laws, said Johnson, an associate director of Genentech Inc. of
San Francisco.

   "Protecting research participants and promoting medical research are mutually
attainable," said Johnson.

   But Dr. P. David Charles, an associate professor of neurology at Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, said he believes most medical researchers do not show
the disregard for safety rules that Mathias described. A few tragedies should
not overshadow the tremendous successes of medical research, Charles said.

   "We have a system in our country that provides great medical cures ... and
most doctors still hold first to the rule, 'First, do no harm,'" said Charles.
He said he favors improving safety, but cautioned against overburdening
researchers with regulations.

   Dr. Greg Koski, executive director of the federal oversight agency charged
with protecting volunteers in experiments, was taken off the speaker's list for
yesterday's hearing at the last minute because of a scheduling problem,
according to Kennedy's office.

   Koski refused to comment on the legislation being drafted by Kennedy and
Frist. But, after the hearing, he said he has been working hard during the past
18 months to increase protections for volunteers, as he helped carve out a role
for the new Office for Human Research Protections.

   The agency captured the attention of researchers nationally last year when it
briefly suspended human experimentation at Johns Hopkins because of safety
lapses discovered in the wake of volunteer Ellen Roche's death in the asthma
study.

   "We are trying to build a strong safety net for volunteers, because we
realize that it is necessary to maintain the public trust," Koski said.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002


                             1348 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    April 24, 2002, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1236 words

HEADLINE: $50M PLAN BY PARTNERS FOR CENTER ON GENETICS

BYLINE: By Liz Kowalczyk, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Massachusetts General Hospital and Brigham and Women's Hospital will spend at
least $50 million on a new genetics center and recruit more than 300 researchers
and staff, part of an unprecedented wave of spending by US universities and
medical centers hoping to position themselves as leaders in genetics research
and treatment.

   Partners HealthCare, the parent organization of the two hospitals, will
establish the center with Harvard Medical School at three locations in Boston
and Cambridge over several years.

      The center, including laboratory space and a genetic testing facility for
patients, will be competing for faculty and patients with a number of other
universities and hospitals that are investing as much or more in
genetics-related initiatives. Yale University and the University of Michigan,
for example, are each pledging more than $200 million for genetics projects.

   But as part of its initiative, Partners is planning a quirky strategy to
encourage the world to equate Boston with genetics and genomics research:
producing an Imax movie.

   Partners plans to raise $8 million to $10 million more to film and distribute
an educational giant-screen movie on genomics, which it would then try to sell
to the world's 227 Imax theaters. Imax theaters, many of which are located in
museums, show ultra-realistic films that fill a viewer's peripheral vision.
Partners has hired Peter Georgi, who produced and directed the British
Broadcasting System's Imax film "The Human Body," to write the movie treatment.

   Development is in the earliest stages, and Partners executives said they have
not decided on the details of the film, including whether it will discuss gene
therapy and cloning controversies. Georgi will work with Partners scientists and
executives to develop an approach, aiming for release in three years.

   "This is one way we could project ourselves to the entire world," said Raju
Kucherlapati, scientific director of the new Harvard-Partners Center for
Genetics and Genomics. "When people think about human genetics we want them to
think about Boston."

   Harvard and the Boston hospitals' financial resources and access to genetic
data on thousands of patients are expected to make them major players in an
exploding area of medicine, said Alan Guttmacher, a top official at the National
Human Genome Research Institute.

   But he said dozens of universities and teaching hospitals are investing
heavily in genetics research and genomics - the study of all the genetic
material inside an organism - as a way to win more federal research dollars for
uncovering the genetic roots of disease in individuals, attract patients who
want genetic testing, and discover genetically tailored drugs that can be sold
to industry.

   "The benefits of the human genome project to day-to-day health care have been
few so far," said Guttmacher, senior clinical advisor to the institute's
director. "But in the near future they are going to be considerable. It won't
change medicine tomorrow, but it will change medicine over the next decade."

   Still, Guttmacher said, the competition revving up between universities must
not overtake safety and ethics, in a field that saw the death of a Pennsylvania
teenager in a gene therapy trial three years ago. "You really really want to
make sure people are very cognizant of the legal, ethical, and social issues
this area is rife with," he said. "You don't want these places to become so
competitive that they circumvent safeguards to get their product to market
before everyone else does."

   Guttmacher said he's particularly concerned that hospitals obtain informed
consent from patients whose DNA they are testing for predisposition to diseases
- something that's not as easy as it might seem.

   If researchers are testing Ashkenazi Jews in a particular region for genetic
mutations that lead to cancer, for example, they will face a dilemma: whether to
obtain permission just from individuals who donate their DNA. Or whether to seek
consent from representatives of all Ashkenazi Jews, who might end up learning
something about their risk for cancer that they don't want to know. Ashkenazi
Jews, who are of Eastern European background, are known to have a greater risk
of carrying a genetic mutation that causes breast cancer.

   "This is different than taking someone's cigarette smoking history," he said.
"These are immutable qualities that can't be changed."

   The Human Genome Research Institute doesn't collect information about how
much money universities and hospitals are investing in genetics and genomics
research and treatment. But federal research grants from the institute alone
have quadrupled, from $105 million to $429 million, over the past decade.

   And the list of institutions spending millions to build research centers and
recruit top faculty is growing steadily. In addition to Michigan and Yale,
Columbia University will spend an estimated $50 million to $70 million to build
a new institute of genetics and genomics, said Conrad Gilliam, professor of
genetics and development. The University of California at Davis, Princeton
University, and Stanford University also are making significant investments.

   "This is a huge horse race; everyone is getting into it at the same time,"
said Karl Leif Bates, spokesman for Michigan's Life Sciences Institute. "And
we're all trying to recruit the same 20 to 30 top scientists."

   In Boston, Kucherlapati said that Partners has a distinct advantage: a
database of health information on 300,000 individuals from the women's, nurses,
and physicians health studies, dating back to 1977. Partners has DNA samples on
about 200,000 of the study participants. "That's a gold mine," he said. "If we
want to study a particular disease, we can go into the cohort and get the DNA
samples and study them. If you want to do a population-base study, you need the
populations, and we are the only ones that have that."

   Harvard will create a new academic department as part of the center and will
recruit 22 to 25 new faculty members over the next several years, each of whom
will bring about 15 lab researchers. The center will recruit another 100
administrators and support staff. Another 70 to 80 researchers already work in
the field.

   By the summer, Kucherlapati plans to open a laboratory of molecular medicine
on Landsdowne Street in Cambridge, where Mass. General and the Brigham will
provide genetic testing for different types of cancer and eventually for a wide
range of diseases. The center's two other sites will be in a new building at
Mass. General and at a medical school research facility under construction in
the Longwood Medical Area.

   A portion of the $50 million will pay for equipment to collect, process, and
store blood samples and systems for making those samples available to
researchers, while keeping patient identities confidential.

   Depending on their particular strengths, universities and hospitals are
pursuing different strategies in genetic research.

   Gilliam at Columbia, for example, said that the university does not have
access to a large storehouse of patient DNA, as Partners does, but that sorting
through thousands of samples looking for genetic mutations may not be the best
approach.

   "That's a gamble, and it's very expensive," he said. "The other way is to be
more hypothesis-oriented, and that's what we're going to do."

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002


                             1349 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 23, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 855 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE BRIEFS Stephen Reucroft and John Swain are experimental
particle physicists who teach at Northeastern University.;
DETECTING LAND MINES

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN REUCROFT AND JOHN SWAIN

BODY:

   A longstanding problem in many parts of the world is sniffing out land mines,
which still maim or kill a horrifying 20,000 innocents every year. Now it looks
like there may be a dramatic leap in the technology that can be used to find
them. Scientists in Germany and Russia have devised a new way of detecting the
nitrogen in TNT from a distance. The work is a variation on the magnetic
resonance effect used in medical imaging. Instead of magnetizing the rather
tricky nitrogen nuclei directly, they report, one can more easily magnetize
hydrogen atoms, and then get them to transfer their magnetization to the
nitrogen. Not only is the new technique more sensitive than its predecessors,
but it's also sensitive to details of the manufacture of the TNT.

   ref.: Journal of Physics D (Applied Physics), May 7, 2002.

    Going batty

   The cause of a mysterious fatal disease in Guam may have finally been tracked
down: It looks like it comes from eating bats. Paul Alan Cox of the National
Tropical Botanical Garden in Kalaheo, Hawaii, and noted neurologist Oliver Sacks
have correlated the rise in the neurological disease lytico-bodig with an
increase in the consumption of "flying foxes," a kind of fruit bat considered a
delicacy by locals. These bats eat cycad seeds containing powerful neurotoxins,
which can be concentrated in the bodies of the bats. Interestingly, people in
Guam cook with flour made from these seeds, but are aware of their toxic effects
and wash them carefully to remove the toxins. Lytico-bodig is characterized by
sluggishness, paralysis, tremors, and dementia, and is always fatal.

   ref.: Science, April 12, 2002, and Neurology, March 26, 2002.  Smart glasses

   Tired of trying to get the bartender's attention for a refill? Paul Dietz and
a bunch of presumably thirsty people at Mitsubishi Electric Research
Laboratories in Cambridge, have developed a system that labels glasses with tiny
electronic ID tags that draw power from transmitters in the bar, and report back
when the glass is getting empty. Good to know that science is tackling life's
little frustrations as well as its cosmic questions.

   ref.: New Scientist, April 6, 2002.  Bubble boy cured

   A Welsh baby has been cured of "bubble boy" disease, or severe combined
immunodeficiency, and another baby treated similarly is showing signs of
improvement. The disease is due to a gene defect that leaves the patient's
immune system in a condition where even minor infections are fatal. To try to
help the babies, Adrian Thrasher and his colleagues at the Great Ormond Street
Hospital took some of their stem cells that would develop into immune cells, and
used a modified gibbon retrovirus to insert a good copy of the faulty gene. The
cells were then put back into the babies' bodies. This is actually the third
trial of gene therapy for this disease, with the first having been done in Paris
in 2000, and a striking example of how far we're coming in understanding genetic
illness.

   ref.: New Scientist, April 6, 2002.  A less-repulsive universe?

   Over the last few years, studies of distant supernovae have led scientists to
believe that, not only is the universe expanding, but the rate at which it's
expanding is increasing with time - as if a cosmic repulsive force were making
the universe expand ever more rapidly. Now John Terning of Los Alamos National
Laboratory in New Mexico and his colleagues are arguing that a cosmic
acceleration may be the wrong conclusion to draw from the supernovae
observations. They suggest that photons from the distant supernovae might be
turning into hypothetical particles called axions as they travel to Earth,
giving rise to an effect that looks like dimming.

   ref.: Physical Review Letters, April 22, 2002.  New hope for herpes patients

   New drugs may have herpes on the run. James J. Crute, now at Aurora
Biosciences in San Diego, and his colleagues have found several compounds that
inhibit a key enzyme that the herpes virus needs in order to replicate. In mice
at least, they seem to work dramatically well. Gerald Kleymann and his
colleagues at Bayer AG in Wuppertal, Germany, also have found other agents that
have similar activity, and there's a real hope that a key weakness of the virus
is accessible to attack. Herpes isn't just an inconvenient disease, either - it
can be fatal for people with compromised immune systems.

   ref.: Nature Medicine, April 2002.  Branching sparks

   One of the great beauties of physics is that often seemingly disparate
phenomena turn out to have common underlying explanations. The latest example of
this is the realization that electrical sparks like lightning fork for basically
the same reason that growing coral and snowflakes branch. Ute Ebert of the
Center for Mathematics and Computer Science in Amsterdam and her colleagues
showed that the same basic mechanisms that magnify small initial perturbations
are at work in both these cases - roughly speaking, if one little bit gets
ahead, it finds itself with less competition from neighbors. Better able to
grow, it then races off to form a fork.

   ref.: Physical Review Letters, April 29, 2002.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002


                             1350 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 23, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 5; Health & Fitness; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: VITAL SIGNS: PATTERNS;
Cold Virus May Shrink Tumors

BYLINE:  By Eric Nagourney

BODY:

   A new study suggests that, properly administered, the same virus that causes
the common cold may also be able to shrink tumors.

        The researchers -- from Stanford University, the Mayo Clinic in
Rochester, Minn., and the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston -- presented
their findings at a recent meeting of the Society of Cardiovascular and
Interventional Radiology in Baltimore.

    The researchers used a modified form of the adenovirus, a common cold virus,
on 33 patients with gastrointestinal cancer that had spread to the liver. The
virus was introduced by catheter into an artery that leads to the liver, and the
primary goal of the experiment was to determine whether the procedure was safe.

   Apart from causing a mild flu in most of the patients, the technique appears
to pose no risk, the researchers reported. It also appears to have some effect:
the patients' tumors shrank, and those receiving the highest dosages of the
virus lived longer.

   The approach is similar to that used in gene therapy: common viruses are
altered so they carry needed genetic material into a patient. But in this case
the cold virus itself was the intended treatment, although researchers modified
it genetically so that it would attack only cancer cells.

   Although the research still has a long way to go, the technique may
eventually offer cancer patients a tumor-killer without the side effects of
chemotherapy. The lead researcher, Dr. Daniel Y. Sze, a radiologist at Stanford,
said the process appeared to capitalize on the inability of cancer cells to use
antibodies to protect themselves against attack. Ordinary exposure to a cold
virus, however, is not enough to help people with cancer.

   "Almost none of the virus would ever reach the tumor," Dr. Sze said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Stuart Goldenberg)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2002


                             1351 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                             April 23, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: FE

LENGTH: 447 words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's disease and its treatments

BODY:

   Q:It seems that quite a few well-known people have Parkinson's disease. How
common is it and is there an effective treatment?

   - David

   A:Parkinson's disease is a chronic, progressive neurological condition, most
commonly characterized by tremors of the extremities and head, rigidity or
stiffness, slowness of movement and loss of balance.

   Several public figures, including Michael J. Fox, Janet Reno and Pope John
Paul II, have the disease. It affects more than 500,000 people in this country,
and 50,000 cases are diagnosed each year.

   Most people develop Parkinson's disease after age 50, but up to 10 percent of
cases are diagnosed in people under 40.

   It results when there is damage to specialized brain cells that produce the
chemical dopamine. Dopamine is needed for normal muscle movement. Without it,
nerve cells fire randomly, producing uncontrolled movements.

   The exact cause of damage to these dopamine-producing cells is not known.
Some researchers believe it may be due to a gene malfunction. Other theories
point to an environmental toxin, accelerated aging or free radicals (a type of
oxygen molecule that causes damage to cells).

   There is no test to diagnose Parkinson's disease. It is difficult to
recognize early on since symptoms can be subtle and easily confused with other
conditions or normal aging. Doctors may need to watch a patient closely over
time before they can confidently diagnose it.

   A variety of treatments may lessen symptoms, but no current treatment can
stop its progress.

   Patients respond differently, so treatment needs to be tailored to each
individual.

   In general, medications for Parkinson's can replace dopamine (Sinemet),
imitate its action (Mirapex), prevent its breakdown (Tasmar), or enhance its
action (Eldepryl).

   Patients who do not respond to medications may consider an implantable device
in the brain that can be activated to block tremors. Other types of brain
surgery can be performed in certain patients to relieve severe tremors.

   Since none of these treatments can cure Parkinson's disease, researchers are
exploring options such as gene therapy and more controversial treatments such as
using fetal tissue or embryonic stem cells to replace damaged,
dopamine-producing cells. *

   Dr. Reina A. Marino is a board-certified radiologist and author who has
lectured on women's health topics, cancer detection and preventive medicine. The
opinions expressed here are not a substitute for a medical evaluation. If you
have a health concern, consult a qualified health-care provider. E-mail Dr.
Marino at good.health@phillynews.com, or write her care of the Daily News, Box
7788, Philadelphia, Pa. 19101.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2002


                             1352 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 22, 2002 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; Features Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 233 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy May Have Cured Four Boys

BYLINE: DAVID BROWN, WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   French researchers say that four boys stricken with a usually fatal type of
immune deficiency are living normal lives following gene therapy procedures
done, in one case, as long ago as 2 1/2 years ago.

   A paper in Thursday's New England Journal of Medicine expands on a report two
years ago showing benefit in the months immediately following the replacement of
a defective gene with a functional one.

   The new study, which includes the experience of two more patients and a much
longer period of observation, raises the possibility the boys may be the first
human beings cured by gene therapy.

   Ernest Beutler, a gene-therapy expert at Scripps Research Institute in La
Jolla, said of the procedure's effect: "I would guess that very likely it's
going to be permanent. That's a rather comforting length of time."

   All four boys have a rare condition called X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency, or SCID, which has numerous causes. In the X-linked form,
immune system cells lack a receptor for substances, called interleukins, on
their surfaces. It is the ailment that afflicted David, the "bubble boy" in
Texas who spent most of his life in a sterile tent before dying in 1984 at age
12.

   All four children now live at home. Before they were treated, all had
suffered severe infections or skin conditions caused by immune deficiency. These
subsided and haven't recurred, the researchers reported.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2002


                             1353 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       April 21, 2002 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. M10

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: LEARNING; Class unravels DNA research for non-scientists

BODY:

   Biotechnology and DNA aren't sterile test-tube concepts. As proof, Molly
Fitzgerald-Hayes, a biochemist at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst,
points to a series of recent news reports: the cloning of a cat; efforts to
identify the remains of victims of the World Trade Center disaster; the release
from prison of a man wrongly accused of murder. The stories have a common
thread, she says: They all involve biotechnology and DNA.

   When Fitzgerald-Hayes realized several years ago that DNA and the Human
Genome Project were going to play a major role in her students' lives, she was
inspired to offer a course on the subject.

   The class, MyDNA: Making the Human Genome Work for You, gives students a
grounding in DNA and the implications of DNA research on everyday living.
Students discuss issues such as human and animal cloning, stem-cell research,
genetic engineering, cancer, gene therapy and genetically modified foods.

   During one class meeting, students isolate their own DNA and laminate it on a
card.

   "An understanding of these and other topics will be critical to living in the
21st century," said Fitzgerald-Hayes. Her co-teacher and collaborator is Frieda
Reichsman, who has a doctorate in molecular and cellular biology from UMass and
specializes in using multimedia and the Internet to teach biochemistry.

   "Understanding the technology of DNA research will enable students to make
informed decisions about contemporary personal, political and ethical choices
facing society," Fitzgerald-Hayes said. There are no prerequisites for the
class, "because the whole point is to make DNA science accessible to everyone,
regardless of their background in science."

   The "rough draft" of the human genetic blueprint was revealed when scientists
released the sequence of the human genome last February. The human genome is the
"master plan" for a human body, and contains the list of genes that direct the
production of all the proteins and other products needed to make a human being,
Fitzgerald-Hayes explains. The course has a strong Web-based component. Computer
simulations enable students to see how proteins and DNA fit together and
interact, "which is so critical when you are teaching science, because you are
asking students to understand something they can't see," Reichsman said.
"Molecules are all different sizes and shapes, and they are three-dimensional,
so this enables students to really understand how DNA and the proteins it
interacts with fit together."

   The class doesn't just make the students conversant in an important
scientific topic, Fitzgerald-Hayes says. It equips them to be better citizens.
"Knowledge is power. Being a responsible and effective citizen in a democracy
requires that the voters and their government representatives understand the
scientific concepts underlying many important public policy decisions."

   She points to the current public debate over embryonic stem-cell research as
an example. "The impact of DNA science can be intensely personal. Every day,
regular people are faced with intimate and often life-and-death decisions that
require a working knowledge of genes and DNA. If there's a mistake in the way
the DNA is strung together, it can kill you or cause you to pass a disease on to
your child. It can show who murdered someone, you or the guy down the street.
It's very powerful."

   The class is part of a larger effort, the MyDNA Project, which is funded by
the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation. In addition to the academic course,
activities include the Gateway to MyDNA Web site. The site offers learning
activities and explanations about the human genome. In addition to this spring's
undergraduate course, an outreach course on DNA was taught last fall to area
retirees, through the Five College Learning in Retirement Program.

   Visit the Gateway to MyDNA Web site at www.bio.umass.edu-biochem-mydna- and
the MyDNA course Web pages at
bcrc.bio.umass.edu-courses-spring2002-biochm-biochm193a-.

   $130: UMass freshman Sarah Wise, left, works with professor Molly
Fitzgerald-Hayes and freshman Lauren Palmer as they test DNA. Photo courtesy of
Stan Sherer-UMass


LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2002


                             1354 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             April 21, 2002 Sunday

SECTION: REGION

LENGTH: 873 words

HEADLINE: Director of gene institute at Penn steps down from post

BYLINE: Susan FitzGerald Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   A University of Pennsylvania scientist whose cutting-edge gene-therapy
experiment resulted in the first death of a patient in such a study, will step
down as director of the school's Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   Dr. James M. Wilson came to Philadelphia in 1993, when the new field of gene
therapy held the tantalizing promise of novel treatments and even cures for a
wide range of disease.

   But the promise has remained largely unfulfilled, and the 1999 death of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., in one of Wilson's gene-therapy research
projects halted much of Wilson's groundbreaking work. It also led to a broader
examination of whether scientists were moving too quickly to take gene therapy
from the laboratory into human tests.

   The dean of Penn's School of Medicine notified the faculty in an e-mail memo
Friday that "Dr. Wilson has decided to step down as Director effective July 1,
2002." Wilson said he planned to stay at Penn to teach and do research.

   Dean Arthur H. Rubenstein said the move came after a faculty committee had
reviewed the overall status of gene therapy and, specifically, the focus and
organization of Penn's program. The committee concluded that Penn needed to
broaden its approach to finding new treatments, he said.

   After Gelsinger died, the federal Food and Drug Administration shut down all
human gene-therapy trials sponsored by Wilson's institute. An agency
investigation later found that the experiment in which Gelsinger died was marked
by numerous violations of rules for conducting the research properly.

   The agency notified Wilson in November 2000 that it was beginning proceedings
to permanently bar him from doing any more research on human subjects, a
procedure that is ongoing, an FDA spokeswoman said.

   Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy was sponsoring eight gene-therapy
clinical trials at the time of Gelsinger's death, and none has been resumed.

   In his memo to the medical school faculty, Rubenstein said: "The faculty
report concludes that along with gene therapy, cell-based science will
contribute importantly to the next generation of novel therapies. . . . To this
end, the committee has recommended that the Institute broaden its scientific
focus to include cell-based therapies, as well as stem cell biology and
molecular virology."

   Rubenstein's memo did not specify what Wilson's future at Penn would be, but
in a statement later Friday, Wilson said: "I look forward to the opportunity to
dedicate more of my time to teaching and research in the development of novel
gene-delivery vehicles and their application in the treatment of diabetes,
cystic fibrosis, and infectious diseases." Wilson, who is a professor of
research medicine at Penn and has both a medical degree and a doctorate in
biological chemistry, said he planned to have a "long and productive tenure at
Penn."

   As director of the institute, Wilson oversaw a staff of about 100 researchers
and support workers and a budget that next fiscal year includes $12.7 million in
financing from the National Institutes of Health and other outside agencies,
Penn spokeswoman Rebecca Harmon said. His personal intensity and dedication to
working long hours set the tone for the institute.

   Considered a rapidly rising star in the burgeoning field of gene therapy,
Wilson represented a new breed of scientist - one who was also an entrepreneur.
In 1992, he founded a biotechnology company called Genovo Inc. with the goal of
taking gene therapy from the laboratory to the marketplace. Eight years later,
he received stock worth $13.5 million when the company was sold to Targeted
Genetics Corp. of Seattle.

   In an interview Friday, Rubenstein said he felt it was not wise for Penn to
put so much emphasis on gene therapy when success in the field had been limited
and other new therapies, such as using stem cells to treat disease, were showing
potential.

   "The promise in 1992 was like it would be a fantastic and wonderful thing for
patients," he said, "and it has proved to be extremely challenging, not just at
Penn, but all over the world."

   The study in which Gelsinger participated in September 1999 was typical of
gene-therapy experiments: A genetically engineered cold virus was used to send
copies of corrective genes into the body to treat, or even permanently fix, a
genetic disorder.

   Gelsinger suffered from a mild form of an inherited liver disorder called
ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, and he came to Penn after learning
that Wilson was doing a gene-therapy experiment targeting the disease.
Gelsinger's body mounted an immune-system response to the gene therapy and it
killed him.

   Gelsinger's family sued Penn, Wilson, and others connected with the trial,
alleging among other things that the patient-consent form Gelsinger signed
underplayed the experiment's risks. The suit was settled in November 2000 for an
undisclosed sum.

   Alan Milstein, the Gelsinger family's lawyer, said Friday that he thought it
fitting that Wilson step down as head of Penn's gene-therapy effort.

   "This move has been a long time coming and comes way too late for Jesse
Gelsinger," he said.

   Contact Susan FitzGerald

   at 215-854-2780 or sfitzgerald@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2002


                             1355 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 21, 2002, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-9

LENGTH: 476 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy found to successfully treat 'bubble boy disease'

BYLINE: Linda A. Johnson; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors apparently
have cured four boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder dubbed
"bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune systems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored and he is improving
with other treatment.

   The doctors two years ago reported initial success with the first two
patients; the update in Thursday's New England Journal of Medicine shows the
treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Dr. Jennifer M. Puck, head of the immunologic genetics section at the
National Human Genome Research Institute.  "This is exciting and it's
important."

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest 11 months.  The oldest is now
about 4.

   Puck, who was not involved in the research, said scientists are getting
better at gene-therapy experiments, but patients treated for other disorders
still need regular, expensive medication to survive.

   The study is welcome news for the gene-therapy field, which suffered a
setback when an experiment killed a teen-ager at the University of Pennsylvania
in 1999. The death raised fears that the experiments might be too dangerous and
led to efforts to increase safety.

   The five French boys were born with severe combined immunodeficiency, or
SCID, an inherited disease that occurs in about 1 in 75,000 births.  The
best-known sufferer was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in a
germ-proof plastic enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   The French boys had X-linked SCID, a severe form that strikes only boys.  It
is the most common form of SCID, accounting for about half the cases.

   The boys lacked a crucial protein because of a genetic mutation, so. they
could not make two types of infection-fighting immune cells.  A third type did
not work, leaving their bodies open to infection.

   Many babies with the disorder are now saved with bone-marrow transplants, but
they need monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies culled
from donated blood, for the rest of their lives.

   To reverse the gene defect, doctors at Necker Hospital in Paris drew the
boys' bone marrow, culling stem cells and mixing them them with a harmless virus
in which a gene that makes the missing protein had been inserted.  After the
virus infected the bone-marrow cells, millions were injected into his
bloodstream.

   Repeated tests showed the boys' bone-marrow cells make the immune cells they
lacked.


GRAPHIC: 1 CHART; On the net

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2002


                             1356 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            April 20, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: FRONT-PAGE

LENGTH: 875 words

HEADLINE: Director of gene institute exits post;
Penn's Wilson is stepping down. A 1999 gene-therapy death brought intense
scrutiny to research work there.

BYLINE: Susan FitzGerald Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   A University of Pennsylvania scientist whose cutting-edge gene-therapy
experiment resulted in the first death of a patient in such a study, will step
down as director of the school's Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   Dr. James M. Wilson came to Philadelphia in 1993, when the new field of gene
therapy held the tantalizing promise of novel treatments and even cures for a
wide range of disease.

   But the promise has remained largely unfulfilled, and the 1999 death of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., in one of Wilson's gene-therapy research
projects halted much of Wilson's groundbreaking work. It also led to a broader
examination of whether scientists were moving too quickly to take gene therapy
from the laboratory into human tests.

   The dean of Penn's School of Medicine notified the faculty in an e-mail memo
yesterday that "Dr. Wilson has decided to step down as Director effective July
1, 2002." Wilson said he planned to stay at Penn to teach and do research.

   Dean Arthur H. Rubenstein said the move came after a faculty committee had
reviewed the overall status of gene therapy and, specifically, the focus and
organization of Penn's program. The committee concluded that Penn needed to
broaden its approach to finding new treatments, he said.

   After Gelsinger died, the federal Food and Drug Administration shut down all
human gene-therapy trials sponsored by Wilson's institute. An agency
investigation later found that the experiment in which Gelsinger died was marked
by numerous violations of rules for conducting the research properly.

   The agency notified Wilson in November 2000 that it was beginning proceedings
to permanently bar him from doing any more research on human subjects, a
procedure that is ongoing, an FDA spokeswoman said.

   Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy was sponsoring eight gene-therapy
clinical trials at the time of Gelsinger's death, and none has been resumed.

   In his memo to the medical school faculty, Rubenstein said: "The faculty
report concludes that along with gene therapy, cell-based science will
contribute importantly to the next generation of novel therapies. . . . To this
end, the committee has recommended that the Institute broaden its scientific
focus to include cell-based therapies, as well as stem cell biology and
molecular virology."

   Rubenstein's memo did not specify what Wilson's future at Penn would be, but
in a statement later yesterday, Wilson said: "I look forward to the opportunity
to dedicate more of my time to teaching and research in the development of novel
gene-delivery vehicles and their application in the treatment of diabetes,
cystic fibrosis, and infectious diseases." Wilson, who is a professor of
research medicine at Penn and has both a medical degree and a doctorate in
biological chemistry, said he planned to have a "long and productive tenure at
Penn."

   As director of the institute, Wilson oversaw a staff of about 100 researchers
and support workers and a budget that next fiscal year includes $12.7 million in
financing from the National Institutes of Health and other outside agencies,
Penn spokeswoman Rebecca Harmon said. His personal intensity and dedication to
working long hours set the tone for the institute.

   Considered a rapidly rising star in the burgeoning field of gene therapy,
Wilson represented a new breed of scientist - one who was also an entrepreneur.
In 1992, he founded a biotechnology company called Genovo Inc. with the goal of
taking gene therapy from the laboratory to the marketplace. Eight years later,
he received stock worth $13.5 million when the company was sold to Targeted
Genetics Corp. of Seattle.

   In an interview yesterday, Rubenstein said he felt it was not wise for Penn
to put so much emphasis on gene therapy when success in the field had been
limited and other new therapies, such as using stem cells to treat disease, were
showing potential.

   "The promise in 1992 was like it would be a fantastic and wonderful thing for
patients," he said, "and it has proved to be extremely challenging, not just at
Penn, but all over the world."

   The study in which Gelsinger participated in September 1999 was typical of
gene-therapy experiments: A genetically engineered cold virus was used to send
copies of corrective genes into the body to treat, or even permanently fix, a
genetic disorder.

   Gelsinger suffered from a mild form of an inherited liver disorder called
ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, and he came to Penn after learning
that Wilson was doing a gene-therapy experiment targeting the disease.
Gelsinger's body mounted an immune-system response to the gene therapy and it
killed him.

   Gelsinger's family sued Penn, Wilson, and others connected with the trial,
alleging among other things that the patient-consent form Gelsinger signed
underplayed the experiment's risks. The suit was settled in November 2000 for an
undisclosed sum.

   Alan Milstein, the Gelsinger family's lawyer, said yesterday that he thought
it fitting that Wilson step down as head of Penn's gene-therapy effort.

   "This move has been a long time coming and comes way too late for Jesse
Gelsinger," he said.

   Contact Susan FitzGerald

   at 215-854-2780 or sfitzgerald@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2002


                             1357 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        April 20, 2002, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 491 words

HEADLINE: Biotech opportunity knocks, and city should open doors

BYLINE: David Hendricks


BODY: DALLAS - San Antonio's biotechnology dreams started even before the term
"biotechnology" became known.

    The 1968 founding of the South Texas Medical Center was the first
manifestation of the city's dream.

    In the 1980s, then-Mayor Henry Cisneros revived the dream as biotechnology
came into focus as engineered biology, a new path for medical advances.

    But biotech now reaches beyond the human building blocks known as DNA into
energy, agriculture and tissue and gene therapies.

    That is why it will be the industry of the 21st century, replacing chemicals
of the 20th century, Rice University President Malcolm Gillis said here Friday.
It also is why Dallas Federal Reserve Bank President Robert McTeer staged a
conference on biotech economics, attended by 175 people.

    Although health care is San Antonio's largest industry, the city still is
knocking on the door to become a top-tier biotech city. The Fed conference
illuminated the inner workings, its value and strategies that people in San
Antonio need to understand better.

    The first aspect this conference clarified is biotech's unlimited future.
Newer, better drugs may seem expensive, but they save money in the long run
through fewer doctor visits, hospital stays and days missed at work, plus longer
lives.

    Columbia University Business Professor Frank Lichtenberg presented a vast
amount of proof. An example: a typical new drug costing $18 more than the
medicine it replaces will prevent future medical expenditures of $129.

    Dr. C. Thomas Caskey, president of Cogene Biotech Ventures and associated
with Baylor College of Medicine, reviewed the latest research in antibodies,
vaccines, gene therapy, stem cells and transplants made possible by new genome
information.

    But, Caskey said, Texas, with only a handful of public biotech companies,
lags in the introduction of new products in relation to biotech investment in
the state.

    California is still the biotech champion and likely will move ahead with San
Francisco's new real estate-driven Mission Bay district.

    Texas should pursue talent, venture capital and incentives, Caskey said,
plus advertise itself better.

    UCLA Finance Professor Michael Darby characterized the high-risk,
high-reward industry as one populated by academic-industry partners and star
scientists who often publish articles.

    An audience member from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
in Dallas noted that it costs $1.2 million to attract a new star scientist,
including laboratories and salary. But that pays off better than older,
established scientists.

    That is why San Antonio needs to succeed in its quest to land a $1 billion
federal vaccines lab. It would attract bigger starts than it already has, which
in turn would help attract even more of them as the city strives to achieve its
old dream.

    dhendricks@express-news.net


LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2002


                             1358 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 19, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 711 words

BODY:

   Once in this great country, there were maybe five medically certifiable
draftniks confined to New Jersey attics with grease-stained notebooks, Betamax
tapes, and hemorrhoid creams. Today you can hardly attend a poetry reading
without jostling someone who can tell you which linebackers still will be
available in tomorrow's fifth round, and their blood types.

    So don't ask me about sleepers. There are no sleepers in the NFL draft
anymore because you're all paying way too much attention. Everybody knows every
body. There's no pro football fan worth his adult beverage who couldn't sit down
and write a viable draft capsule on any first-rounder: "Big physical corner
[well good, because nobody's looking for a smallish, reticent corner] who should
have an impact at the next level [well that's the whole point, isn't it?]"

    To find legitimate sleepers in the modern draft, players virtually no one
knows about, and to examine their upsides and downsides, you need somebody with
absolutely, positively nothing to do. No need to thank me.

    Why so few experts know of these three guys remains a puzzle, although it's
likely related to the fact that they don't really, you know, exist. Honk if you
think that'll stop us.


    Benny "The Jet" DeBussy, quarterback, 6 feet 1 22/37, 207.8 pounds, Cole
College of Bartending.

    Upside: Big-time arm to go with Miller-time thirst ... Can deliver the home
run ball, but so what, this ain't baseball ... Has great pocket skills, rarely
dropping wallet, car keys, change, etc. except while intoxicated ... Great
leader and intensely competitive as evidenced by Eagle Scout status (won the
Pinewood Derby as a 7-year-old, probably because his father, a design engineer
for General Dynamics, helped him with his car, though I'm sure no one's still
bitter about that) ... Cut down drastically on his misreads as a senior after
failing to understand a single line of even John Grisham as an underclassman ...
Sees the entire field, but offensive line played so poorly in front of him that
he more commonly saw the entire sky.

    Downside: Will disappear now and again (not from the game ... from the
state) ... a mean drunk ... has no remorse about throwing into traffic ...
missed part of sophomore year when he became convinced the mascot was an alien
... not the best decision-maker ... Says "Why me? Why me?" an awful lot.

    Projection: Late-round pick by the Bengals. Released before August.


    Brian "Sonny" Jorgelsen, cornerback, 6 feet 1 28/23, 192.2 pounds, Cal Poly
Wannacracker-San Clemente.

    Upside: Likely the biggest sleeper in the draft ... Slept through his
sister's wedding ... inexperienced cover guy whose size indicates he could
easily blow up at the pro level, although he could just as easily blow up the
local waste treatment plant ... Great ball skills, including the one where you
throw the ball into the ground and catch it one-handed on the rebound; personnel
directors love this trick, even though it has no known application ... Great
closing speed. Once closed "Laffers," a campus bar, by downing six Coors Lights
in 20 minutes at last call.

    Downside: Other nickname is "Coke spoon" ... Triggered suspicions he might
be "on something" when he qualified for Daytona 500 without a vehicle ... Not
terribly interested in, like, tackling ... doesn't have superior makeup speed
... wears mascara and blush a couple of days a week.

    Projection: Free-agent signee of the Bengals. Makes practice squad.


    Freddy "Homer" Simpson, defensive tackle, 6-6, 603.24 pounds, Sante Fe
Circus Academy.

    Upside: Could become first 600-pounder in NFL history, although scouts say
he'll probably play at 598, 599 to maintain "quickness" ... Started gaining
weight after losing commercial audition to Subway's "Jared" ... So wide he once
tackled two opponents simultaneously, although neither had ball ... Always
around the football, but then, how could he not be?

    Downside: Tremendous backside ... Takes a lot from the table ... Has tools,
but they include those associated with auto theft.

    Projection: Signs five-year $30 million contract including $17 million
signing bonus with Bengals. Sustains career-ending neck injury in mini-camp.
Bengals spokesman: "Who knew he had a neck?"

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2002


                             1359 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 19, 2002, Friday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. B-9

LENGTH: 1353 words

HEADLINE: Ban reproductive but not therapeutic cloning

BYLINE: Inder Verma; Verma is a professor in the laboratories of genetics and
molecular and cell biology at The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, and an
American Cancer Society professor of molecular biology. He was one of the first
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation Franklin D. Roosevelt Investigators and
is past president of the American Society for Gene Therapy.

BODY:
 Science relies on facts, while society is influenced by color, caste and creed.
Society often views scientists' motives with suspicion because change can be
difficult to accept.  It is therefore important for scientists to make their
case to the public with the hope that understanding the issues will lead to an
informed opinion.

   The issue is the "C" word -- cloning.  Ever since the cloning of the sheep
Dolly in Scotland, debate has raged between clergy, politicians, doctors and
scientists to ban all forms of human cloning for ethical and scientific reasons.

   Cloning is a technology in which the nucleus of a donor cell (obtained from
skin, liver or muscle) is excised and transferred to an egg whose own nucleus
has been removed.  Consequently, the resulting embryo inherits all the genetic
traits of the donor cell.  This procedure also is referred to as nuclear
transplantation, which unlike cloning doesn't conjure up images of row after row
of grotesque-looking identical creatures with human features.

   In the current debate, the most important message is that cloning really
refers to two procedures:

   (1) Reproductive cloning to make identical babies.  No one in this country --
not scientist, not ethicist nor politician -- is advocating any form of
reproductive cloning.  Two expert committees from the National Academy of
Sciences, 40 Nobel laureates and dozens of national and international scientific
organizations have concluded that there is no scientific or ethical
justification for allowing human cloning.  The scientific community will agree
and support the call to ban human reproductive cloning by legislation that
imposes criminal and civil penalties on those who attempt human cloning by
implanting the product of nuclear transplantation into a woman's womb.

   (2) Therapeutic cloning for regenerative medicine.  The purpose of
therapeutic cloning is to create embryonic stem cells that are genetically
matched to a patient for the purpose of repairing damaged tissue or organs.

   Let us take the case of a diabetic patient who has lost the ability to
produce insulin because the cells making insulin (islet cells in the pancreas)
are destroyed.  One can isolate the nucleus from the skin cell of the patient,
transfer it to an egg (obtained from a volunteer or from excess eggs available
in a fertility clinic) whose nucleus has been removed and allowed to grow in a
petri dish to form a blastocyst.

   This pin-head sized blastocyst, formed usually within 72 hours, has 150 to
200 cells, each of which has the potential to form any cell type in the body,
including islet cells capable of producing insulin.  Because the nucleus was
obtained from the diabetic donor, the resulting islet cells producing insulin
will now be the patient's exact immunological match and hence will not be
rejected.

   Critics of therapeutic cloning say that the administration (following
President Bush's speech on stem cells on Aug. 9, 2001) has allowed the use of
nearly 60 established embryonic stem cell lines (ES cells), which should be used
to generate insulin producing islet cells for transplantation into diabetic
patients.  The problem is that the transplanted islets in most patients will be
rejected because the ES cell lines were generated from a non-immunologically
matched person.  It is possible to treat the patient with immunosuppressive
drugs, but these have harmful side effects and hence are not very desirable.

   We must understand the basic difference between reproductive and therapeutic
cloning.  By banning all forms of cloning we risk losing one of the most
promising hopes of treating devastating diseases like diabetes and Parkinson's.
It is unfortunate that cloning has become an ideological dispute.  Bush told a
gathering of nearly 200 lawmakers, religious leaders, bioethicists and patients
that, "We must stop human cloning by stopping it before it starts." The
president and his staff feel that by allowing work on approved stem cell lines,
we can achieve the same goals.  No doubt, the existing approved embryonic stem
cell lines will yield important biological clues, but they will not help in the
treatment of needy patients.

   The House of Representatives, with insufficient debate, passed a bill
providing criminal penalties for anyone undertaking any type of cloning.  Sen.
Sam Brownback, R-Kan., and Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., have sponsored the Human
Cloning Prohibition Act (S 1899), which will criminalize all forms of human
cloning, including creation of stem cells for medical therapies.  A press
release from Brownback's office states that President Bush supports the bill,
and it appears nearly 40 senators are leaning toward supporting the bill banning
all forms of cloning.

   I was disappointed that Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., a cardiology surgeon and
supporter of scientific research, endorses the bill and refers to therapeutic
cloning as a purposeful creation and destruction of human embryos.  U.S. Sens.
Arlen Specter, R-Pa., Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., and Edward Kennedy, D-Mass.,
are sponsoring bills in the Senate that would criminalize efforts to create
cloned babies, but allow research using cloned stem cells.

   If the Senate passes the Brownback-Landrieu bill, which not only bans all
forms of cloning, but also prevents the importation of medical treatments
developed in other parts of the world using nuclear transplantation technology
required for cloning, it will have a chilling effect on American science.  Many
promising young and established scientists may find a more suitable and friendly
environment abroad to undertake research in one of the most exciting
developments in modern molecular medicine.

   I encourage you all to urge your representatives in the House and Senate to
not get caught up in ideology and politics, but to think of the millions of
patients who can benefit from new therapies.


GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; John Overmyer

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2002


                             1360 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 19, 2002 Friday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-9

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: Ban reproductive but not therapeutic cloning

BYLINE: Inder Verma, Verma is a professor in the laboratories of genetics and
molecular and cell biology at The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, and an
American Cancer Society professor of molecular biology. He was one of the first
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation Franklin D. Roosevelt Investigators and
is past president of the American Society for Gene Therapy.

BODY:

   Science relies on facts, while society is influenced by color, caste and
creed.

   Society often views scientists' motives with suspicion because change can be
difficult to accept.

   It is therefore important for scientists to make their case to the public
with the hope that understanding the issues will lead to an informed opinion.
The issue is the "C" word -- cloning.

   Ever since the cloning of the sheep Dolly in Scotland, debate has raged
between clergy, politicians, doctors and scientists to ban all forms of human
cloning for ethical and scientific reasons. Cloning is a technology in which the
nucleus of a donor cell (obtained from skin, liver or muscle) is excised and
transferred to an egg whose own nucleus has been removed.

   Consequently, the resulting embryo inherits all the genetic traits of the
donor cell.

   This procedure also is referred to as nuclear transplantation, which unlike
cloning doesn't conjure up images of row after row of grotesque-looking
identical creatures with human features. In the current debate, the most
important message is that cloning really refers to two procedures: (1)
Reproductive cloning to make identical babies.

   No one in this country -- not scientist, not ethicist nor politician -- is
advocating any form of reproductive cloning.

   Two expert committees from the National Academy of Sciences, 40 Nobel
laureates and dozens of national and international scientific organizations have
concluded that there is no scientific or ethical justification for allowing
human cloning.

   The scientific community will agree and support the call to ban human
reproductive cloning by legislation that imposes criminal and civil penalties on
those who attempt human cloning by implanting the product of nuclear
transplantation into a woman's womb. (2) Therapeutic cloning for regenerative
medicine.

   The purpose of therapeutic cloning is to create embryonic stem cells that are
genetically matched to a patient for the purpose of repairing damaged tissue or
organs. Let us take the case of a diabetic patient who has lost the ability to
produce insulin because the cells making insulin (islet cells in the pancreas)
are destroyed.

   One can isolate the nucleus from the skin cell of the patient, transfer it to
an egg (obtained from a volunteer or from excess eggs available in a fertility
clinic) whose nucleus has been removed and allowed to grow in a petri dish to
form a blastocyst. This pin-head sized blastocyst, formed usually within 72
hours, has 150 to 200 cells, each of which has the potential to form any cell
type in the body, including islet cells capable of producing insulin.

   Because the nucleus was obtained from the diabetic donor, the resulting islet
cells producing insulin will now be the patient's exact immunological match and
hence will not be rejected. Critics of therapeutic cloning say that the
administration (following President Bush's speech on stem cells on Aug. 9, 2001)
has allowed the use of nearly 60 established embryonic stem cell lines (ES
cells), which should be used to generate insulin producing islet cells for
transplantation into diabetic patients.

   The problem is that the transplanted islets in most patients will be rejected
because the ES cell lines were generated from a non-immunologically matched
person.

   It is possible to treat the patient with immunosuppressive drugs, but these
have harmful side effects and hence are not very desirable. We must understand
the basic difference between reproductive and therapeutic cloning.

   By banning all forms of cloning we risk losing one of the most promising
hopes of treating devastating diseases like diabetes and Parkinson's. It is
unfortunate that cloning has become an ideological dispute.

   Bush told a gathering of nearly 200 lawmakers, religious leaders,
bioethicists and patients that, "We must stop human cloning by stopping it
before it starts."

   The president and his staff feel that by allowing work on approved stem cell
lines, we can achieve the same goals.

   No doubt, the existing approved embryonic stem cell lines will yield
important biological clues, but they will not help in the treatment of needy
patients. The House of Representatives, with insufficient debate, passed a bill
providing criminal penalties for anyone undertaking any type of cloning. Sen.
Sam Brownback, R-Kan., and Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., have sponsored the Human
Cloning Prohibition Act (S 1899), which will criminalize all forms of human
cloning, including creation of stem cells for medical therapies.

   A press release from Brownback's office states that President Bush supports
the bill, and it appears nearly 40 senators are leaning toward supporting the
bill banning all forms of cloning. I was disappointed that Sen. Bill Frist,
R-Tenn., a cardiology surgeon and supporter of scientific research, endorses the
bill and refers to therapeutic cloning as a purposeful creation and destruction
of human embryos.

   U.S. Sens. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., and Edward
Kennedy, D-Mass., are sponsoring bills in the Senate that would criminalize
efforts to create cloned babies, but allow research using cloned stem cells. If
the Senate passes the Brownback-Landrieu bill, which not only bans all forms of
cloning, but also prevents the importation of medical treatments developed in
other parts of the world using nuclear transplantation technology required for
cloning, it will have a chilling effect on American science.

   Many promising young and established scientists may find a more suitable and
friendly environment abroad to undertake research in one of the most exciting
developments in modern molecular medicine. I encourage you all to urge your
representatives in the House and Senate to not get caught up in ideology and
politics, but to think of the millions of patients who can benefit from new
therapies.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: John Overmyer

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1361 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 19, 2002 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: The Promise of Cloning

BODY:

   ANYONE WHO suffers from, or who has a friend or loved one who suffers from,
Parkinson's disease or Alzheimer's or from one of the terrible, wasting
autoimmune disorders such as multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis -- which
means almost everyone -- knows the toll these diseases take. The pain; the loss,
sometimes tragically early, of human potential. Among the gifts that science
promises, during this period of breathtaking innovation, are genetic therapies
that may ease this suffering, even cure these diseases, enabling millions of
people to live better, longer lives.

    The hope of these treatments is why we disagree with President Bush and
those in Congress who would ban a promising -- albeit nascent -- technology in
which cloning techniques are used to produce that miracle of modern therapy, the
stem cell. This is not the same as cloning to replicate actual human beings,
which should be banned, the sooner the better. This is something different. In
"therapeutic" cloning, the DNA from an adult cell is injected into an
unfertilized egg which has been stripped of its nucleus. The egg is shocked,
basically, so that it begins to divide. In a few days it becomes a blastocyst, a
tiny cluster of cells that have not yet taken on specific functions. From those,
some cells are harvested, then grown into those amazingly flexible things called
stem cells, which can develop into all sorts of healthy tissue.

    President Bush has called for a ban on this form of research as well as on
cloning human beings. He asked the Senate to pass a bill, similar to one that
passed the House, that could turn serious doctors and researchers into serious
felons, imposing a criminal penalty of up to 10 years in jail and civil fines of
at least $ 1 million, on anyone who uses cloning technology. In addition, the
legislation would ban the importation of any cloned embryo or its product. Under
this bill, if you had Parkinson's, not only would you be precluded from using
cloning-derived stem cells to treat yourself here; if you went to Europe to do
so, you could be arrested upon returning with the "product" in your body.

    Stem cells can be obtained from a variety of sources, it is true. Cloning
research is just one among a number of pioneering techniques, and it may not
turn out to be the most efficacious or valuable. Many scientists testify,
though, that it is promising enough to pursue further. The great potential
advantage of cloning-derived stem cells is their compatibility with the
patient's immune system -- no fear of rejection. The patient produces the cure.

    Embryonic stem cell research is a morally difficult issue; it challenges
anyone who has thought long and hard about when life truly begins -- and under
what circumstances some prototypical life form may be ended -- to think again.
We respect those who see this form of research as creating life to destroy life,
and therefore unacceptable. But we don't think that is the right way to look at
it. A blastocyst is not a fetus. It is not a pregnancy. To use cloned cells to
save lives is not destroying human beings in the service of research. As science
evolves, law will have to also. But for now the Senate bill is too broad and
should be defeated; only cloning to make babies should be banned. Therapeutic
cloning, and the promise it holds for people, should be allowed to proceed, with
careful attention to where it goes.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2002


                             1362 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2002 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                       April 18, 2002 Thursday 2 EDITION

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: Bubble boys recovering after gene treatment;
Young patients living normally and at home

BYLINE: LINDA A. JOHNSON ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors have
apparently cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder
dubbed bubble boy disease.

   The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune systems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off diseases.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored.

   Two years ago, doctors at Necker Hospital in Paris reported initial success
with the first two patients; the update Thursday in the New England Journal of
Medicine shows the treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Dr. Jennifer Puck from the National Human Genome Research Institute, who
was not involved in the research.

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies.

   They were born with severe combined immunodeficiency, a rare inherited
disease. The boys lacked a crucial protein because of a genetic mutation: They
could not make two types of infection-fighting immune cells, and a third type
did not work, leaving their bodies open to infection.

   To reverse the gene defect, the doctors in Paris drew bone marrow from the
boys. They culled stem cells from the marrow and mixed them with a harmless
virus in which a gene that makes the missing protein had been inserted. After
the virus infected the bone marrow cells, millions of each boy's cells were
injected into his bloodstream.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                             1363 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 18, 2002, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: French cure 4 boys of 'bubble' disorder

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: LINDA A. JOHNSON

BODY:

   In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors have
apparently cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder
dubbed "bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune systems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored and he is improving
with other treatment.

   The doctors two years ago reported initial success with the first two
patients; the update in today's New England Journal of Medicine shows the
treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Dr. Jennifer M. Puck, head of the immunologic genetics section at the
National Human Genome Research Institute.

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest 11 months. The oldest of the
boys is now about 4.

   Puck, who was not involved in the research, said scientists are getting
better at gene therapy experiments, but so far patients treated for other
disorders still need regular, expensive medication to survive.

   The study is welcome news for the gene therapy field, which suffered a
setback when an experiment killed a teen-ager at the University of Pennsylvania
in 1999. The death raised fears that the experiments might be too dangerous and
led to efforts to increase safety.

   The five French boys were born with severe combined immunodeficiency, or
SCID, an inherited disease that occurs in about 1 in 75,000 births. The
best-known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in a
germ-proof plastic enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   The French boys had X-linked SCID, a severe form that strikes only boys. It
is the most common form of SCID, accounting for about half the cases.

   The boys lacked a crucial protein because of a genetic mutation. As a result,
they could not make two types of crucial infection-fighting immune cells, and a
third type did not work, leaving their bodies open to infection.

   Many babies with the disorder are now saved with bone marrow transplants, but
they need monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies culled
from donated blood, for the rest of their lives.

   To reverse the gene defect, doctors at Necker Hospital in Paris drew bone
marrow from the boys. They culled stem cells from the marrow and mixed them with
a harmless virus in which a gene that makes the missing protein had been
inserted. After the virus infected the bone marrow cells, millions of each boy's
cells were injected into his bloodstream.

   Repeated tests showed the boys' bone marrow cells continue to make the immune
cells they once lacked. In addition, they have gotten inoculated against some
childhood diseases - shots that once would have killed them.

   Sonia Skarlatos, gene therapy coordinator at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, said the results do not prove the boys' immune systems have
been permanently repaired, but it is the longest-lived success in gene therapy
so far. Some of the boys' stem cells still have the defective gene, but enough
have the normal one to give them a good immune system, she said.


LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2002


                             1364 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 18, 2002, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 64 words

HEADLINE: INSIDE

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   'VIVE LA FRANCE!'


   A guide to this year's Houston International Festival, which salutes France.

   Preview


   'BUBBLE BOY' CURES


   French doctors have used gene therapy to cure four little boys of "bubble boy
disease."

   Page 10A


   NEW RAMP WORK


   Work begins this weekend on the second of six ramps to be rebuilt at the West
Loop-Southwest Freeway interchange.

   Page 23A



GRAPHIC: Drawing: 1. A guide to this year's Houston International Festival,
which salutes France (color); Map: 2. Location of New Ramp Work (b/w)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2002


                             1365 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     April 18, 2002 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03A

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: Cure reported for immune disorder;
'Bubble boy' efforts mark a breakthrough for gene therapy

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors apparently
have cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder dubbed
"bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune systems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored, and he is improving
with other treatment.

   The doctors two years ago reported initial success with the first two
patients; the update in today's New England Journal of Medicine shows that the
treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment, and the disease was reversed,"
said Jennifer M. Puck, head of the immunologic genetics section at the National
Human Genome Research Institute.

   "This is exciting, and it's important."

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest was 11 months.

   The oldest of the boys is now about 4.

   Puck, who was not involved in the research, said scientists were getting
better at gene therapy experiments, but so far patients treated for other
disorders still need regular, expensive medication to survive.

   The study is welcome news for the gene therapy field, which suffered a
setback when an experiment killed a teenager at the University of Pennsylvania
in 1999.

   The death raised fears that the experiments might be too dangerous and led to
efforts to increase safety.

   The five French boys were born with severe combined immunodeficiency disease,
or SCID, an inherited disease that occurs in about 1 in 75,000 births.

   The best-known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in a
germ-proof plastic enclosure until his death in 1984 at age 12.


LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2002


                             1366 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            April 18, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL

LENGTH: 722 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy aids 4 with 'bubble boy disease'

BYLINE: Linda A. Johnson Associated Press

BODY:

   In the strongest success yet for gene therapy, French doctors say they have
cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune-system disorder dubbed
"bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 21/2 years, appear to have healthy immune
systems and are growing normally at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored and he is improving
with other treatment.

   The doctors initially reported success with the first two patients two years
ago. The update in today's New England Journal of Medicine indicates the
treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Jennifer M. Puck, head of the immunologic genetics section at the National
Human Genome Research Institute in the United States. "This is exciting and it's
important."

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest 11 months. The oldest of the
boys is now about 4.

   Puck, who was not involved in the research, said scientists were getting
better at gene-therapy experiments, but patients treated for other disorders
still need regular, expensive medication to survive.

   The study is welcome news for the field of gene therapy, which entered public
awareness with high expectations more than a decade ago, then produced no clear
breakthroughs despite many clinical trials. In 1999, a healthy patient died in
Philadelphia, stopping the field in its tracks.

   The death of Jesse Gelsinger - an Arizona teenager with a mild form of a rare
liver disorder who was participating in a clinical trial at the University of
Pennsylvania - raised fears that the experiments might be too dangerous and led
to efforts to increase safety nationwide. The Penn trial was stopped and the
institute that conducted it was severely restricted.

   Since then, findings from gene-therapy researchers have come less frequently,
although one of the preliminary success stories, involving hemophilia, was
reported across the street from Penn, at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   Today's findings involve a study of five French boys born with severe
combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, an inherited disease that occurs in 1 in
75,000 births. The best-known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy,"
who lived in a germ-proof plastic enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   The French children had X-linked SCID, a severe form that strikes only boys.
It is the most common form of the disease, accounting for about half the cases.

   The boys lacked a crucial protein because of a genetic mutation. As a result,
they could not make two types of critical, infection-fighting immune cells, and
a third type did not work, leaving the boys open to infection.

   Many babies with the disorder are saved with bone-marrow transplants, but
they need monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies culled
from donated blood, for the rest of their lives.

   To reverse the gene defect, doctors at Necker Hospital in Paris drew bone
marrow from the boys. They culled stem cells from the marrow and mixed them with
a harmless virus in which a gene that makes the missing protein had been
inserted. After the virus infected the bone-marrow cells, millions of each boy's
cells were injected into his bloodstream.

   Repeated tests showed the boys' bone-marrow cells continued to make the
immune cells they once lacked. In addition, they have been vaccinated against
some childhood diseases - shots that once would have killed them.

   Sonia Skarlatos, gene-therapy coordinator at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, said the results did not prove the boys' immune systems had
been permanently repaired, but their cases are the longest-lived successes in
gene therapy. Some of the boys' stem cells still have the defective gene, but
enough cells have the normal one to give them a good immune system, she said.

   Skarlatos said the approach could eventually help cure some other genetic
diseases, including hemophilia and another form of SCID.

   "In the next five years or so, I would expect to see some results," she said.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                             1367 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 18, 2002 Thursday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-2

LENGTH: 443 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY APPEARS TO CURE 'BUBBLE BOY' DISEASE

BYLINE: LINDA A. JOHNSON, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors have
apparently cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder
dubbed "bubble boy disease."

    The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune systems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

    The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored and he is improving
with other treatment.

    The doctors two years ago reported initial success with the first two
patients; the update in today's New England Journal of Medicine shows the
treatment is still working.

    "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Dr. Jennifer M. Puck, head of the immunologic genetics section at the
National Human Genome Research Institute. "This is exciting and it's important."

    The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies. The oldest of the boys is now about 4.

    Puck, who was not involved in the research, said scientists are getting
better at gene therapy experiments, but so far patients treated for other
disorders still need regular, expensive medication to survive.

    The study is welcome news for gene therapy field, which suffered a setback
when an experiment killed a teen-ager at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999.
The death raised fears that the experiments might be too dangerous and led to
efforts to increase safety.

    The five French boys were born with severe combined immunodeficiency, or
SCID, an inherited disease that occurs in about 1 in 75,000 births.

    The best-known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in
a germ-proof plastic enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

    Many babies with the disorder are now saved with bone marrow transplants,
but they need monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies
culled from donated blood, for the rest of their lives.

    To reverse the gene defect, doctors at Necker Hospital in Paris drew bone
marrow from the boys. They culled stem cells from the marrow and mixed them with
a harmless virus in which a gene that makes a crucial missing protein had been
inserted. After the virus infected the bone marrow cells, millions of each boy's
cells were injected into his bloodstream.

    Repeated tests showed the boys' bone marrow cells continue to make the
immune cells they once lacked.

    In addition, they have gotten inoculated against some childhood diseases --
shots that once would have killed them.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                             1368 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 18, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 429 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy credited with cure of 4 youngsters with 'bubble boy
disease'

BYLINE: Linda A. Johnson; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, researchers say, French
doctors apparently have cured four young boys of the rare and deadly immune
system disorder dubbed "bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune systems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored and he is improving
with other treatment.

   The doctors two years ago reported initial success; the update in today's New
England Journal of Medicine shows the treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Dr. Jennifer M. Puck, head of the immunologic genetics section at the
National Human Genome Research Institute.  "This is exciting and it's
important."

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest 11 months.  The oldest of the
boys is now about 4.

   The boys were born with severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, an
inherited disease that occurs in about 1 in 75,000 births.  The best-known
victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in a germ-proof
plastic enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   The French boys had X-linked SCID, a severe form that strikes only boys.  It
is the most common form of SCID, accounting for about half the cases.

   The boys lacked a crucial protein because of a genetic mutation.  As a
result, they could not make two types of crucial infection-fighting immune
cells, and a third type did not work, leaving their bodies open to infection.

   Many babies with the disorder are now saved with bone marrow transplants, but
they need monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies culled
from donated blood, for the rest of their lives.

   To reverse the gene defect, doctors at Necker Hospital in Paris drew bone
marrow from the boys.  They culled stem cells from the marrow and mixed them
with a harmless virus in which a gene that makes the missing protein had been
inserted.  After the virus infected the bone marrow cells, millions of each
boy's cells were injected into his bloodstream.

   Repeated tests showed the boys' bone marrow cells continue to make the immune
cells they once lacked.  In addition, they have gotten inoculated against some
childhood diseases -- shots that once would have killed them.



LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2002


                             1369 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   April 18, 2002 Thursday Three Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 617 words

HEADLINE: 4 BOYS ARE APPARENTLY CURED OF RARE IMMUNE SYSTEM DISORDER;
 GENE THERAPY COMBATS "BUBBLE BOY DISEASE"

BYLINE: The Associated Press Tina Hesman Of The Post-Dispatch Contributed To
This Report.

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors have
apparently cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder
dubbed "bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune syst ems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partly restored; he is improving with
other treatment.

   The doctors reported initial success two years ago with the first two
patients; the update in today's New England Journal of Medicine shows the
treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Dr. Jennifer Puck of the National Human Genome Research Institute.

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest 11 months. The oldest of the
boys is now about 4.

   Puck, who was not involved in the research, said that scientists were getting
better at gene therapy experiments, but that so far patients treated for other
disorders still need regular, expensive medication to survive.

   The study is welcome news for the gene therapy field, which suffered a
setback when an experiment killed a teen-ager at the University of Pennsylvania
in 1999. The death led to efforts to increase safety.

   The five French boys were born with severe combined immunodeficiency, or
SCID, an inherited disease that occurs in about one in 75,000 births. The
best-known victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy," who lived in a
germ-proof plastic enclosure until his death at age 12 in 1984.

   The French boys had X-linked SCID, a severe form that strikes only boys. It
is the most common form of SCID, accounting for about half the cases.

   The boys lacked a key protein because of a genetic mutation. As a result,
they could not make two types of crucial infection-fighting immune cells and a
third type did not work, leaving them open to infection.

   Many babies with the disorder are now saved with bone marrow transplants, but
they need monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies culled
from donated blood, for the rest of their lives.

   To reverse the gene defect, doctors at Necker Hospital in Paris drew bone
marrow from the boys. They culled stem cells from the marrow and mixed them with
a harmless virus in which a gene that makes the missing protein had been
inserted. After the virus infected the bone marrow cells, millions of each boy's
cells were injected into his bloodstream.

   Repeated tests showed that the boys' bone marrow cells continued to make the
immune cells they once lacked. They also have been inoculated against some
childhood diseases - shots that once would have killed them.

   Sonia Skarlatos, gene therapy coordinator at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, said that the results do not prove that the boys' immune
systems have been permanently repaired, but that it is the longest-lived success
in gene therapy so far.

   Bryce Crerie, now 2, of Scott Air Force Base, has the X-linked form of SCID.
He had a bone marrow transplant at St. Louis Children's Hospital in October 2000
but needs monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin. He will need the
infusions for the rest of his life.

   "We would definitely consider (gene therapy) if he was a candidate for it and
they felt it would cure him," said Lisa Crerie, Bryce's mother. "As it stands
now, he has to do the IV therapy. If we thought gene therapy would end that, we
would definitely do it."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC; Post-Dispatch Graphic/chart with illustration - Gene therapy;
Source: Molecular Biology of the Cell, Dallas Morning News, KRT; Gene therapy
treatments compensate for genetic defects or to introduce beneficial genes into
the body. A common approach is to put the therapeutic gene into a harmless
virus. Gene therapy techniques are not designed so that patients will pass the
genes on to future generations.; A. Doctors extract bone marrow from boys who
have X-linked severe combined (immune deficiency) known as SCID or the Bubble
Boy Syndrome. Stem cells taken from the bone marrow are grown in a petri dish.;
B. Scientists pack into a virus a good copy of the immune system gene that is
damaged in SCID. The virus is mixed with the stem cells taken from the bone
marrow.; C. The virus infects the stem cells and injects the good copy of the
gene into the cell's DNA. Doctors inject stem cells carrying the immune system
gene back into the boys.; D. The repaired stem cells produce functioning immune
cells, allowing the boys to fight off infections.; (Illustrations show the
location of the GOOD GENE within the VIRUS in the STEM CELL.)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                             1370 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2002 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            April 18, 2002 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 224 words

HEADLINE: MDs report 4 'bubble boys' have been cured

BODY:

   In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors have
apparently cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder
dubbed "bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune systems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

    The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored and he is improving
with other treatment.

    The doctors two years ago reported initial success with the first two
patients; the update in today's New England Journal of Medicine shows the
treatment is still working.

    "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Jennifer M. Puck, head of the immunologic genetics section at the National
Human Genome Research Institute. "This is exciting and it's important."

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest 11 months. The oldest of the
boys is now about 4. Puck, who was not involved in the research, said scientists
are getting better at gene therapy experiments, but so far patients treated for
other disorders still need regular, expensive medication to survive.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             1371 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            April 18, 2002 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: French Research Offers Promise of Gene Therapy Cure

BYLINE: David Brown, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    French researchers say that four boys stricken with a usually fatal type of
immune deficiency are living normal lives after gene therapy procedures done, in
one case, as long ago as 2 1/2 years ago.

    A paper in today's New England Journal of Medicine expands on a report two
years ago showing benefit in the months immediately after the replacement of a
defective gene with a functional one. The new study, which includes the
experience of two more patients and a much longer period of observation, raises
the possibility the boys may be the first humans cured by gene therapy.

    "It is always difficult to use the term 'cured,' " said Marina
Cavazzana-Calvo of the Necker Hospital for Sick Children in Paris. "All we can
say without problem is that the effect is reproducible in other children, and
lasts long-term."

    Ernest Beutler, a gene therapy expert at Scripps Research Institute in La
Jolla, Calif., said of the procedure's effect: "I would guess that very likely
it's going to be permanent. That's a rather comforting length of time."

    While theoretically appealing, gene therapy has been plagued with problems.
One of the biggest is the difficulty of delivering genes to cells needing them.
Another is that it has been difficult to reach stem cells -- the progenitors of
mature, fully developed tissue -- so that the correction becomes permanent. A
third problem is the possibility that inserting genes into a cell's chromosomes
might trigger a catastrophe, notably cancer.

    The French team appears to have tackled the first two problems and avoided
the third.

    All four boys have a rare condition called X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID), which has numerous causes. In the X-linked form, immune
system cells lack a receptor for surface substances called interleukins. It is
the ailment that afflicted David, the "bubble boy" who spent most of his life in
a sterile tent in Texas before dying in 1984 at age 12.

    Two of the children treated by the French team left their sterile
environments 45 days after gene therapy, and two after 90 days. All four are now
living at home. Before they were treated, all had suffered either severe
infections or skin conditions caused by immune deficiency. These subsided and
have not recurred, the researchers reported.

    The French team treated a fifth boy, but the therapy was only partially
effective. He received a bone marrow transplant -- the usual treatment for SCID,
if a good match can be found -- and is doing moderately well, Cavazzana-Calvo
said.

    In all, the Necker Hospital team has performed gene therapy on nine children
with X-linked SCID, she said, although details on four recent cases haven't been
reported. She did say, however, that seven of the nine children are healthy and
living at home.

    In the four successful cases described in the journal article, the
researchers report that cells from all the major types in the immune system --
lymphocytes, monocytes and granulocytes -- contained inserted genes. This
suggests the gene had been delivered to the stem cells.

    In the procedure, the French researchers took bone marrow cells -- the
source of blood stem cells -- from the patients and infected them with a
retrovirus carrying the normal gene as a payload. The cells were then grown in
large quantities and returned to the boys. They then homed to the bone marrow,
and to other tissues, on their own.

    SCID is a particularly appealing target for gene therapy because blood cells
are fairly easy to get and they return to the place where they're needed.
Equally important, only a small number of cells need to be corrected of their
defects to make a difference to the patient.

    For example, in the French experiment, only 5 percent of antibody-making
cells (B cells) picked up the gene. This apparently was enough to work, as all
the boys are surviving without antibody infusions, which they previously needed.

    "If we can't cure SCID, we aren't going to be able to cure anything," said
W. French Anderson, the gene therapy pioneer who in 1990 performed the first
authorized gene therapy experiment at the National Institutes of Health. "The
fact that it has now been cured opens the door for developing effective gene
therapy for other diseases."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                             1372 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2002 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    April 17, 2002 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: COMPOUND HIGHLIGHTS TUMORS

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: OHSU researchers have discovered a chemical that shows up on MRIs
longer, aiding surgical efforts

   Researchers at Oregon Health & Science University have hit on an unusual way
to take pictures of some brain tumors, by injecting patients with a chemical
similar to minute rock crystals covered in sugar.

   Using the chemical can help doctors identify brain tumors on magnetic
resonance images, or MRIs, said Dr. Edward Neuwelt, a neurosurgeon and head of
OHSU's Blood-Brain Barrier Program. The chemical, called ferumoxtran-10, could
be especially helpful in letting a surgeon check progress during and after
tumor-removal surgery, because it stays in body tissues and shows up on MRI
scans for more than a day.

   Neuwelt and colleagues reported their findings in the current issue of the
American Journal of Neuroradiology.

   The paper suggests that, for certain types of brain tumors, the chemical
could be a useful new "contrast agent" -- a chemical injected into the body to
help doctors take better pictures of hidden biological structures.

   Ferumoxtran is made of tiny bits of iron oxide, like that in the mineral
magnetite, that are then covered in a sugar called dextran.

   "I sort of call these sugar-coated Geritol," Neuwelt joked.

   The researchers discovered ferumoxtran's unique imaging abilities in a bit of
scientific serendipity.

   The team started looking at the chemical because its tiny size is similar to
that of some viruses, Neuwelt said. Doctors want to use these viruses as a
carrier to deliver genetic therapy to the brain, and Neuwelt was studying
whether the similar-sized iron oxide particles could help show where such
viruses travel in the brain.

   In the course of that work, they discovered ferumoxtran's long-lasting
photogenic quality. The iron in the particles seems to bind with the "reactive
inflammatory cells" on the edge of brain tumors, outlining them on MRIs, Neuwelt
said.

   "We just got a little extra," he said. "Sometimes it's better to be lucky
than smart."

   For the published study, researchers injected ferumoxtran into the veins of
17 patients with brain tumors and took MRI scans of their brains. They compared
these with scans taken using contrast agents containing the metallic element
gadolinium, currently the standard for brain tumors.

   Although gadolinium works for 30 minutes to an hour, images showed that
ferumoxtran helped highlight tumors for more than a day. That could help
surgeons take repeated images during and after surgery to help them determine
whether they have removed as much of a tumor as is possible.

   Doctors could use repeated injections of gadolinium for the same purpose,
Neuwelt said, but that can confuse the issue because another gadolinium
injection would highlight healthy brain tissue that was accidentally bruised
during surgery.

   OHSU will soon open an operating room that contains an MRI -- a rare
combination in medical centers -- which will help surgeons take advantage of
ferumoxtran imaging, Neuwelt said.

   The team's research also uncovered drawbacks to ferumoxtran images -- in
particular that it did not show up as well as gadolinium in pictures of certain
types of tumors.

   In an editorial about Neuwelt's research in the same journal issue, Dr.
Philip Gutin, a neurosurgeon with Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said
the study does not mean that ferumoxtran should replace gadolinium.

   Gutin said ferumoxtran "appears to be far more inconsistent and variable than
gadolinium" in taking high-quality tumor photos. But he said the research
indicates that ferumoxtran could be useful for taking pictures during and after
brain surgery. You can reach Andy Dworkin at 503-221-8239 or by e-mail at
andydworkin@news.oregonian.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                             1373 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                     APRIL 15, 2002, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1315 words

HEADLINE: Veteran biotech investors offer tips from trenches

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
Over the years I've heard from many retail investors who've been baffled or
burned by biotech. To help prevent future scorchings, I recently surveyed 135
biotech investors, seeking tips, tricks and hard-earned lessons.

    These market-hardened biotech investors made three basic recommendations: be
patient, take profit when you can, and don't believe hype. Although this may
sound like Investing 101, their lessons have the added credibility of being
based on real life.

    This survey grew out of a chance encounter with Michael Sterns, executive
vice president of BioSpace.com, the biotech portal in San Francisco.

    I told Sterns that I wished I had some way to get inside the heads of
biotech investors. He suggested I put up a survey on BioSpace.com.

    Soon, I was sifting through e-mail responses from as far away as Singapore
and Switzerland, although the bulk came from the United States -- with a healthy
helping from the Bay Area.

    The survey wasn't scientific. It represents the views of people who
regularly visit a biotech portal. With that caveat in mind, here's what I found.

    I divided the respondents into two groups -- those with more and those with
fewer than five years of biotech investing experience. Roughly one-third of the
sample, or 47 respondents, fell into the more experienced category.

    These veterans, who averaged 11 years in biotech, had survived at least a
couple of bull and bear cycles. Most (38 out of 47) preferred to buy individual
stocks. The remainder relied on biotech mutual funds. Among the 47 veterans,
biotech holdings represented an average of 40 percent of their total portfolio.

    One key question was how did these biotech veterans perform over time? My
first tally showed an average return of 139 percent. When I eliminated a few
respondents who claimed gains of between 500 and 2,000 percent, the average
dropped to a still-healthy 39 percent.

    However, because this was a seat-of-the-pants survey, the more solid -- and
still encouraging -- figure is this: After an average of 11 years, 41 of 47
respondents, or 87 percent, had positive yields. The six who reported being in
the red had an average loss of 24 percent.

    When it came to advice, patience was the dominant theme among the veterans.
"Drugs take years to develop," wrote one seven-year veteran from Germantown, Pa.
The survey revealed 10 other comments along the same lines. "Biotechs are
long-term investments," wrote one 13-year veteran from Valley Center (San Diego
County).

    Yet some veterans sounded other themes, the most surprising of which was the
admonition to trim winning holdings and harvest profit to offset likely losses
on other biotech stocks. So while the veterans advised patience, they apparently
didn't espouse blind loyalty -- even to winners.

    "Set a price target at which you would be willing to sell at least half of
your position, and then stick to it," wrote a 10-year investor from Springfield,
Ohio. An investor from Brooklyn, N.Y., said eight years in biotech had taught
him, "Sell when you profit, don't be greedy."

    Another theme of equal strength was distrust for professional advice. "Do
not listen to brokers," wrote one 18-year veteran from Redwood City. "When it
comes to biotech they don't know their butt from a hot rock." One 18-year
veteran from Felch, Mich., said: "Do all of your own research. Never take any
sell-side advice."

    Other biotech veterans recommended contrarian investing: Buy when everyone
else is selling and sell when the herd is buying. "Look for the knee-jerk
reaction either up or down, and go in the opposite direction," wrote an investor
from San Diego.

    The veterans also suggested focusing on companies with more than one product
in development. "Ideally you want companies with a mix of Phase III and Phase II
products," wrote an eight-year veteran from Empire, Mich.

    Not surprisingly, I noted some differences when I looked at the 88 investors
with fewer than five years' experience. For instance, their performance lagged:
36 respondents (41 percent) reported losses averaging 25 percent. But that still
left 6 out of 10 novices ahead an average of 15 percent.

    About 30 percent of the new investors relied on mutual funds, a higher
percentage than the veterans. Among those who did pick stocks, the average
portfolio held 12 issues. Biotech represented 44 percent of their overall equity
holdings.

    In the advice category, the newer investors seemed more distrustful. I
shouldn't overplay the differences between the veterans and the novices because,
to some extent, they're artificial. The survey elicited essay-style responses
that I jammed into categories.

    Nevertheless, by my tally, 20 newcomers -- nearly 1 in 4 -- made some
comment indicating distrust of experts and the need for independent research.

    "Do not blindly invest in the hot companies that make nice stories in the
media (i.e. stem cells, gene therapy)," wrote a biotech novice from St. Louis.
"Often, these companies have an unproven technology, are years away from
revenue, or have had their stocks run up to excessive levels."

    A newcomer from Indonesia wrote: "Don't trust anyone, especially startup
companies. Do your own due diligence, check and recheck that the company has the
management that is capable of delivering the results. And don't fall in love
with the company (wife is OK)."

    When you think about it, distrust makes perfect sense given that many
newcomers became biotech investors during 2000, when hype over the Human Genome
Project caused a biotech bubble. When the market corrected, they learned the
hard way.

    "When my stock was highly priced I was afraid to sell, worrying that it
would (continue to) go up and I would be left out of further share price
escalation," wrote a novice investor from Vienna, Va. "In nearly every case I
should have sold at least part of my position at that point."

    An investor from Singapore echoed the same note as some of the veterans --
it's important to harvest profit from successful stocks rather than holding them
in hopes of getting compound returns. "Learn to be a disciplined seller," he
wrote. "It's more important to tell yourself it's time to sell than to buy."

    Finally, although the newcomers evidenced less patience than the veterans,
some were learning that virtue. "Patience would seem to be the key," wrote an
investor from Australia. "Wait until the downside risk is very low on some
rational basis (i.e. strong cash backing) and then purchase. Once you do
purchase, be patient, very patient. If it doesn't get there, so be it."

    There was one point on which I couldn't find a "right" answer: What is the
ideal size of a biotech stock portfolio to diminish risk?

    We've all learned not to put all our eggs in one basket. Given the average
number of stocks people reported holding, most investors seem to have decided to
reduce risk by owning many companies.

    But I believe the best risk-reduction strategy is to know everything
possible about the stocks one owns. Because there's a tension between owning a
large portfolio and studying each holding in detail, perhaps your rule should be
not to buy any stock you haven't had time to fully research.

    A respondent from San Francisco added this tip: If you're investing in a
company with a novel medicine, survey whether physicians would prescribe it --
even if that means cracking open the phone book and cold-calling doctors.

    "Get as much information as you can from the end user (the decision-maker)
that will be purchasing or prescribing the company's product," the writer said.
"What do they think? Is this a true breakthrough or hype? Are there any barriers
to attaining market share? Would they invest?"

    Following these tips isn't going to guarantee success as a biotech investor.
But if you approach the task methodically, at least you'll kick yourself less if
you lose!


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2002


                             1374 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       April 14, 2002 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 009

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: Docs calling all volunteers - Shrinking test pool delays new drug
trials

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   A major problem in getting new drugs and treatments approved is enrolling
enough subjects for the clinical trials.

   A startling 87 percent of trials have to be delayed because they can't find
enough volunteers, researchers say.

   Since the shocking death of an 18-year-old boy in a gene therapy trial three
years ago at the University of Pennsylvania, the problem has become even worse.

   "We have lots of new medications out there, but they are all competing for
the same patient population," said Diana Anderson, who heads a company that
helps find volunteers for trials of rheumatology drugs. "Sometimes, it's like
finding a needle in a haystack."

   The result is that approval of new drugs is often delayed, hurting patients
who could benefit from them, she said.

   The issue is being addressed by researchers from around the world this week
at a conference in Toronto. The Association of Clinical Research Professionals
is looking to find new ways of enrolling subjects, including using the Internet,
and has forged a partnership with Yahoo! as a way to provide clinical trial
information to prospective subjects.

   But researchers attending the conference also will hear from Paul Gelsinger,
the father of Jesse Gelsinger, the boy who died in the notorious gene therapy
trial gone wrong.

   Gelsinger said he wants to tell the researchers that the "informed consent"
process, in which subjects are supposed to be told of the possible risks and
benefits to them, needs fixing.

   "Flaws are prevalent in the system," Gelsinger said in an interview. "There's
a real problem and a danger to people. Most subjects don't realize it."

   Gelsinger said he is in favor of allowing people with serious illnesses who
have no viable treatment options to join research studies that might help them,
but has questions about allowing healthy individuals to be used as guinea pigs.

   "In my son's case, the research was being done to help those in a serious
situation, but they were using relatively healthy people to experiment on," he
said. "The researchers couldn't even see the dangers. They had so many
influences on them. That's when the money starts running the show."

   Jesse Gelsinger had enrolled in a trial to test a treatment for an inherited
enzyme deficiency, but died when researchers injected his liver with an
adenovirus designed to deliver a gene-therapy agent.

   The virus shut down his liver and he died a few days later. The irony was
that Gelsinger wasn't particularly sick; he suffered from a mild form of the
enzyme disorder. The treatment he was testing was designed to treat babies with
a fatal form of the disorder.

   Two new guides have been published this month in a bid to help potential
subjects decide whether to enroll in trials.

   "Should I Enter a Clinical Trial?" is written by Anderson and published by
the American Association of Health Plans and the Emergency Care Research
Institute. It is available electronically at no cost at either www.ecri.org or
www.aahp.org.

   The other is "Informed Consent" (Thompson, $ 16.95) by Kenneth Getz, chief
executive officer of CenterWatch, a Boston-based organization providing
information on the clinical trials industry.

   "The message is that you have to know a lot more than what they tell you in
the informed consent form," Getz said.

   He urged potential subjects to ask plenty of questions and review the study
protocol with a trusted adviser such as a family doctor.

   "People need to know these are experiments and there are risks involved," he
said.


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                             1375 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 14, 2002 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Part R; Features Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1600 words

HEADLINE: The Great White Hope;
THE UNFIT A History of a Bad Idea By Elof Axel Carlson Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press: 452 pp., $25 * BUILDING A BETTER RACE Gender, Sexuality, and
Eugenics from the Turn of the Century to the Baby Boom By Wendy Kline University
of California Press: 220 pp., $35

BYLINE: TONY PLATT, Tony Platt is a professor of social work at Cal State,
Sacramento and is researching the history of the Huntington Library.

BODY:

   Between the world wars, Southern California was a hotbed of eugenics
activism. A Pasadena think tank with the Orwellian title of the Human Betterment
Foundation lobbied for compulsory sterilization laws and forged a mutual
admiration society with its counterparts in Nazi Germany. Professors from
Caltech and USC worried about the high birthrate among Mexican "peon type"
families. In Los Angeles, the Institute of Family Relations vetted young
couples' biological compatibility for marriage.

   The proponents of eugenics were not obscure cranks but the best and brightest
representatives of the small elite that dominated Southern California until the
1950s. The Human Betterment Foundation enjoyed the active support of banker
Henry Robinson as well as social scientist William Munro and Nobel Prize-winning
physicist Robert Millikan, all of whom also served on the board of trustees of
San Marino's Huntington Library, one of the country's most exclusive archives
and a leading cultural institution of Southern California.

   Eugenics found wide support in Europe and the United States from the last
part of the 19th century through the first third of the 20th. It was based,
according to its founder, English scientist Francis Galton, on a desire to
improve the human stock by giving "the more suitable races or strains of blood a
better chance of prevailing speedily over the less suitable." Its earliest
proponents in the United States used eugenics to promote their beliefs in the
genetic superiority of Nordic civilizations over "backward" peoples, namely all
others, and to express their anxiety about the degeneration of middle-class
Aryans through a declining birthrate and miscegenation.

   Though the movement to improve the human species through the scientific use
of heredity ebbed in the wake of Nazism, it has been revived recently in debates
on the racial basis of intelligence, sociobiology and human genetic engineering.

   Between 1907 and 1940, more than 35,000 involuntary sterilizations were
carried out by the U.S. government on poor women, mostly in California. But
these efforts paled next to the deeds of the Nazi regime. Under the 1933 Law for
the Prevention of Genetically Diseased Offspring, the Third Reich compulsorily
sterilized about 400,000 victims, broadly categorized as "socially unfit by
virtue of defective biology." It was the top of a slippery slope that led to the
killing of 100,000 mentally ill patients and then to the mass-produced butchery
of millions. For eugenicists, sterilization was not so much a technical
procedure to enhance physical and mental health as it was a way to cleanse the
body politic of racial impurities.

   "The Unfit" and "Building a Better Race" are useful but problematic additions
to a growing revisionist literature on the topic. The canon under challenge was
established by Mark Haller in his 1963 book "Eugenics" and in Daniel Kevles'
authoritative study, which appeared first as an essay in the New Yorker, then as
a 1985 book, "In the Name of Eugenics." Kevles argues that, by the mid-1930s,
the right-wing version of eugenics "had generally been recognized as a farrago
of flawed science." After World War II, according to Kevles, biologists managed
to repudiate Nazi pseudoscience and reestablish human genetics as a "solid field
of science that would explain the complexities of human heredity and assist
medicine by illuminating the relationship of genetics to disease."

   Feminist historian Wendy Kline and genetics expert Elof Axel Carlson take
issue with the position that eugenics was a short-run fad. "The 'golden age' of
eugenics," argues Kline, "occurred long after most historians claim the movement
had vanished." They place their arguments in a grand sweep of history: Carlson
from Deuteronomy to gene therapy, Kline from Teddy Roosevelt to family values,
as her book places eugenics in turn of the century angst about changing gender
roles and fears of "race suicide" by white middle-class Americans.

   Carlson, who teaches biology at the State University of New York at Stony
Brook, looks at his profession's moral responsibility for contributing to the
myth of "degeneracy theory." His book's publisher, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
on Long Island, was home base for many years to Harry Laughlin, the "notorious
representative" of eugenics, who was awarded an honorary doctorate in medicine
by the University of Heidelberg in 1936 for his contributions to Nazi racial
science.

   The authors caution against a conspiracy-minded view of eugenics as a
"unilateral conservative social movement." Kline argues that it enjoyed broad
appeal among reformers, feminists and professionals and that it was a "tenacious
and popular ideology." Carlson finds "many strange bedfellows" in its ranks.

   This was certainly true in California. The Human Betterment Foundation also
counted among its supporters banker Charles Goethe, Stanford University
chancellor David Starr Jordan, Los Angeles Times Publisher Harry Chandler and
self-taught biologist Paul Popenoe, who became famous for his advice in the
Ladies' Home Journal to readers asking, "Can This Marriage Be Saved?"

   Kline and Carlson share the view that supporters of eugenics had a perverse
obsession with regulating sexuality. To Carlson, it was male masturbation that
"served as the first theory of degeneracy," and he cites research done at an
Indiana prison in the early 1900s by Harry Clay Sharp, a doctor who sterilized
176 men "solely for the purpose of relief from the habit of masturbation." On
the other side of the country at about the same time, reports Kline,
psychologists and doctors tried everything from quarantine to sterilization to
ensure that the licentious "feeble-minded" woman did not reproduce "high-grade
morons." By the 1930s, Dr. Robert Latou Dickinson, a leading eugenicist and
former president of the American Gynecological Society, was advising his
colleagues to consider sterilization for women with engorged genitalia, a sure
sign of a propensity to "sexual pathology."

   Carlson quickly abandons the link between eugenics and sexuality. Kline, on
the other hand, devotes her book to the insight that eugenics was aimed at
containing women's erotic independence and restricting their sexuality to
reproduction. In the two years after the close of World War I, 30,000 "khaki-mad
girls" were arrested near military bases in this country on suspicion of
promiscuity and prostitution. For eugenicists in the 1920s, women classified as
mentally ill "symbolized the danger of female sexuality unleashed" because they
threatened to reproduce defective children.

   In the 1940s, Kline continues, eugenicists reinvented themselves as family
counselors, promoting "marriage and motherhood as a central goal of womanhood."
They drew upon the homophobic research of psychologist Lewis Terman "to create
rigid standards of masculinity and femininity as a way of shoring up traditional
gender roles and family patterns." By the 1980s, Kline concludes, the New
Right's campaign for "pro-life, pro-chastity, and pro-motherhood" represented an
updated version of the old eugenics agenda. She notes that in the front ranks of
today's campaign for responsible fatherhood is sociologist David Popenoe, son of
the leading American eugenicist of the 1920s, whom she says inherited part of
his father's obsession with "reproductive morality."

   Kline has a powerful argument that today's right-wing preoccupation with
family morality is rooted in the eugenics movement of the 1920s. She weakens it,
however, with sparse and selective evidence. She makes a point of stressing that
her analysis is relationship-based, not focused only on women. But, except for a
brief discussion of homosexuality, men's sexuality is not addressed. Kline
asserts, no doubt correctly, that eugenics had a "powerful appeal to generations
of Americans," but she fails to show how it achieved popular acceptance. More
significant, after promising that her book will address "anxieties about race
and gender" in the eugenics movement, Kline abandons one of those two goals. We
learn, for instance, little about the racist assumptions of eugenics or how
sterilization policies were differentially applied nationwide or about the
staggering numbers of Puerto Rican and American Indian women who were sterilized
in the 1960s and 1970s.

   The authors diverge in their approach and conclusions. Carlson's folksy prose
brims with irrelevant detours, rambling footnotes and idiosyncratic opinion.
(For some reason he thinks this country is "largely a classless society.") As a
biologist and amateur historian, he should not be expected to be familiar with
arcane journal articles, but there is no excuse for ignoring the last decade's
scholarship on eugenics. By contrast, Kline promises more than she delivers. Her
slim 164 pages of text do not provide enough texture and evidence to back up her
thesis. Because her insightful theoretical framework is draped over rather than
integrated into her analysis, the reader is required to read between too many
lines. Pity, because her core idea is provocative and her research opens up new
lines of investigation. The strength of Kline's book is that it makes
connections in social policy we might otherwise miss. It alerts us to the thread
of continuity from Victorian doctors who feared that it had become "sex o'clock
in America," to proponents of "family values" hawking the dangers of moral
decay. I am much more persuaded by Kline's wake-up call than I am by Carlson's
reassurance that "we have taken charge of our health, of our reproduction, of
our psyches."

GRAPHIC:  (no caption) PHOTOGRAPHER: Illustration by SUSAN TIBBLES / For The
Times

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                             1376 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 14, 2002 Sunday FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 960 words

HEADLINE: CELL THERAPY SHOWS PROMISE IN TREATING MALIGNANT BRAIN TUMORS

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER, MILWAUKEE JOURNAL SENTINEL

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Scientists at the National Institutes of Health for the first time have
engineered a type of immature human brain cell to carry potent anti-cancer
substances directly to malignant tumors in animals.

    The potential therapy represents a promising new avenue for dealing with one
of the most intractable problems in medicine -- effectively seeking out and
killing tumors in the human brain.

    Far from being a cure, so far, the technique has been used only in mice that
have human tumor cells in their brains. But the mice live up to three times
longer than mice that do not get the therapy, said Howard Fine, the NIH
scientist who developed the technique.

    Fine said he now is working to move the therapy from mice to people. That
could be a matter of months or longer, he said.

    The concept adds a new twist to the dynamic field of stem cell research.
Stem cells are master cells that can become other types of cells such as those
that make various tissues including blood, muscle and brain.

    When it comes to treating neurological disorders such as Parkinson's
disease, Alzheimer's disease and stroke, stem cells generally are thought of as
potential replacement cells for damaged or diseased brain cells.

    However, Fine's idea is to use them as vehicles that make and deliver potent
cancer drugs to tumors in parts of the brain that are hard to reach.

    "It is like a Trojan horse," said Fine, chief of the neuro-oncology branch
at NIH.

    The approach uses a type of neural stem cells, immature cells that have been
genetically manipulated to produce anti-cancer substances.

    Fine's technique takes advantage of a unique characteristic of neural stem
cells. When transplanted into the brain, they migrate to areas where tumors,
known as gliomas, have formed.

    "They tend to surround tumors," said Arlene Chiu, a scientist with the
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

    That's important because cancer cells often are dispersed throughout the
brain and are not always confined to one self-contained tumor.

    In addition, brain disorders can be especially hard to treat because of the
blood-brain barrier, a layer of cells in cerebral blood vessels that only allow
certain substances to pass into the brain. While the barrier helps keep diseases
out of the brain, it also can block the action of many drugs on brain cells.

    Traditional therapies -- chemotherapy, radiation and surgery -- all have
disadvantages. Overall survival rates for the 17,000 people who are diagnosed
with a brain tumor each year have not improved much.

    In recent years, gene therapy has raised hopes but has yet to produce much
success. In typical gene therapy, a virus is genetically engineered to produce
protein that is toxic to cancer cells.

    However, Fine's concept of using neural stem cells is an entirely new
approach.

    The cells are obtained from adult human bone marrow, not embryonic stem
cells. Embryonic stem cells, such as those that were first isolated by
researchers at the University of Wisconsin--Madison, come from the inner cell
mass of human embryos obtained from fertility clinics.

    Known as bone marrow-derived neural component cells, they have the ability
to become different types of brain cells. In other research, neural stem cells
have been obtained from fetal or embryonic tissue.

    By using cells derived from a patient's own bone marrow, problems with
immune system rejection of the cells could be avoided, Fine said.

    Using genetically engineered viruses, Fine has manipulated the cells to
produce two substances that are toxic to brain tumors.

    The cells are injected into the brains of mice that previously had been
injected with human brain tumor cells. Fine said he already has tried his
technique on about 100 mice.

    In general, the treated mice live 40 to 60 days, compared with 19 to 21 days
in the untreated mice, he said.

    One of the two substances produced by Fine's engineered neural cells
interferes with a tumor's ability to form the blood vessels that are needed for
the tumor to grow; the other substance triggers so-called cell suicide in
tumors.

    Cutting off a tumor's blood supply, known as anti-angiogenesis, today is one
of the most active areas of cancer research. More than 30 anti-angiogenesis
drugs now are being tested on various kinds of cancer.

    Judah Folkman, the pioneer of anti-angiogenesis cancer therapy, said Fine's
idea is clever and that he is the only one trying it.

    "It is very exciting," said Folkman, an Andrus professor of pediatric
surgery at Harvard Medical School and director of the surgical research
laboratory at Children's Hospital in Boston. "What he is doing is much more
elegant (than other brain tumor therapies)."

    Folkman, who has worked with Fine, said his idea has real potential for
treating brain tumors in people.

    Neural stem cells also are being evaluated for other approaches in treating
brain tumors, including as a way to replenish normal brain cells that are
destroyed in traditional chemotherapy and to strengthen the immune system so it
can more effectively attack brain tumors, said Minesh Mehta, chairman of the
department of human oncology at the UW--Madison.

    Mehta, who is familiar with Fine's work, said it is very innovative but more
testing is needed.

    Eventually, human trials could be done through a group that both Mehta and
Fine belong to, the North American Brain Tumor Consortium.

    Because of UW--Madison's strong presence in the area of stem cell research,
those trials could involve the university, Mehta said.

    Fine said that in the next few months he hopes to test his approach on
monkeys. That should give him a good indication of whether there are any unknown
problems that could cause toxicity in humans.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2002


                             1377 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                     April 14, 2002 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1411 words

HEADLINE: STRETCHING LIFETIME

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN and DON COLBURN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Medical researchers have made progress against cystic fibrosis, and
they seek a cure, but the disease remains an early killer

   Kari Dollarhyde is 19.

   In the harsh reality of cystic fibrosis, she's well into middle age.

   Half the people born with the disease die by age 32.

   And this is progress.

   Forty years ago, children with cystic fibrosis rarely reached school age. A
generation ago, half died by their mid-teens.

   Decades of medical research have spawned better antibiotics, new drugs and
other treatments that have dramatically extended the lives of people with cystic
fibrosis. Now, 40 percent of patients with the disease are 18 or older.

   But for 30,000 U.S. residents with cystic fibrosis, medical research has
moved too slowly. Cystic fibrosis remains a life sentence of infections,
hospital stays and early death. Last week, the disease killed 19-year-old
McMinnville resident Brandy Stroeder, who was waiting for a heart-liver-lung
transplant that might have extended her life.

   It would not have cured her -- cystic fibrosis has no cure.

   Teams of U.S. scientists, including several in the Northwest, are researching
protein-altering drugs and possible genetic therapies -- techniques that
scientists expect will yield a cure. On Friday, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
gave a half-million dollars to an Oregon Health & Science University researcher
whose work could help spur cures. But even hopeful estimates put such therapies
five, 10 or more years down the road.

   These facts dog the roughly 1,000 Oregon and Washington residents with cystic
fibrosis.

   "The hardest thing about living with CF is knowing there is no cure and it's
a fatal disease," Dollarhyde said last week at Providence St. Vincent Medical
Center, where she was being treated. "It's like having a child. You take it with
you wherever you go. You feed it. You take care of it. And it affects everything
you do."

   Yet Dollarhyde, the same age as Stroeder, doesn't let the disease keep her
down for long. She graduated from high school in Bend. She played soccer and
basketball. She commutes from Hillsboro to her job as a clerk for the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers in Troutdale. She takes classes at Portland Community
College.

   "CF affects every move and decision I make," she said. But "I never let it
put limitations on me."

   Lifelong sickness Cystic fibrosis is a little like drowning every day.

   A defect in one gene causes the body to make thick, sticky mucus that gums up
the lungs, pancreas and intestines. The mucus invites frequent lung infections,
damaging them -- the cause of death for most patients. But the disease often
makes itself known through digestive problems, usually before a baby's first
birthday.

   That was the case with Dollarhyde. As a newborn, she had a massive appetite
but didn't gain weight, recalled her mother, Tanya Young. At 4 months -- the age
doctors diagnosed her disease -- Dollarhyde weighed barely 8 pounds. She had up
to a dozen bowel movements a day, Young said.

   Then the lung problems started, "with a little dry cough," Young said.

   For most patients, those little coughs turn into hacking ones, regular
wheezing and trouble breathing. To get by, patients generally use "clapping" --
they, or a helper, hit their chest or back with cupped hands while the patient
angles downward. It helps loosen the sticky mucus so the patient can cough it
out. Still, lung infections remain common, including bronchitis and pneumonia.

   Dollarhyde has had countless lung infections and three sinus surgeries. She
averages three trips a month to the doctor and three trips a year to the
hospital. Cystic fibrosis has caused problems beyond her lungs. Her spleen is
enlarged, her liver scarred, her gallbladder removed. One lung is damaged.

   Twice a day, she dons a high-tech life vest hooked up to an air compressor.
It rapidly inflates and deflates, jostling and loosening the mucus that clogs
her lungs. She gives herself two shots a day of insulin for diabetes. She takes
eight pancreatic enzyme pills with every meal.

   The bill for six weeks of medicines: $5,000.

   Such advancements have doubled the life expectancy of cystic fibrosis
patients. Pancreatic supplements are the main treatment for digestive problems,
along with a high-protein, low-fat diet. Antibiotic and antimicrobial drugs
control infections. Other drugs help open airways.

   Two relatively new inhaled drugs have significantly improved the quality of
life for patients, said Robert Beall, president of the national Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation. One is Pulmozyme, which helps thin mucus. The other is the
antibiotic Tobi, which fights a dangerous bacterial infection.

   "There is greater hope now than we've ever had," Beall said.

   Still, drugs treat the disease's symptoms, not its root cause. Even
transplants only buy time. Beall said half of the patients die within five years
of getting new lungs.

   Toward a cure Stopping the sticky mucus -- the root cause of the disease --
is the aim of the next wave of treatments.

   The mucus thickens because an important protein, CFTR, fails to fold into the
right shape when the body makes it, said Dr. William Skach, the OHSU researcher
just awarded the $480,000 Cystic Fibrosis Foundation grant. In healthy bodies,
that protein helps chloride ions pass through cell walls. But in cystic fibrosis
patients, the protein never makes it to the cell membranes to open those
channels. So mucus lacks the right balance of salt and water, getting sticky and
thick.

   Skach has been studying the early formation and folding of CFTR for years. He
found that other proteins interact with CFTR, some helping it fold, others
identifying incorrectly shaped molecules. The latter process catches and kills
misfolded CFTR protein in cystic fibrosis patients at a sort of cellular
"quality-control checkpoint," he said.

   The grant will help Skach's lab study dozens of proteins and the way they
interact with CFTR. He hopes to identify which ones help the folding and which
ones stop mistakes. That could point to new areas on molecules where drugs could
be targeted, or new ways to design drugs to help the CFTR molecules get to the
cell membrane, where they belong.

   "What we'd ultimately like to do is help these proteins get past this
quality-control checkpoint," he said.

   Meanwhile, Seattle researchers are working on a therapy that would insert a
"good" copy of the cystic fibrosis gene into affected cells. Specifically,
researchers are trying to find a Trojan horse virus that can hold the good gene
and insert it into the right cells.

   A private company in Seattle is already testing one virus, called AAV2, on
people. And Dusty Miller, a researcher with the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center in Seattle, has tested "a whole bunch of" viruses on mice and is applying
to begin human trials. He wants to test AAV2 and a related virus, AAV6, to see
which can best deliver genes to lung-lining cells.

   Today, Beall said, about 18 cystic fibrosis drugs are in clinical trials --
up from none when the cystic fibrosis gene was discovered in 1989. Most of the
drug tests are in the early phases, but "we're hopeful we can have drugs that
will treat the basic defect within five years," he said.

   Gene therapy is further from the market, Beall said. A recent death in a
Pennsylvania gene-therapy trial has especially slowed the development and
testing of genetic therapies, researchers said.

   "Before, it was hard. Now it's getting almost impossible to get approval for
these" therapy trials, Miller said.

   The process is also slowing because, as researchers learn more about the
disease, they realize how difficult it is to design effective therapies, said
Susan Banks-Schlegel, who leads the Cystic Fibrosis Scientific Research Group at
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   Researchers "are learning incredible things. But the more they learn, as with
a lot of things, it gets more complicated," she said. "I think people had been
optimistic that it could happen in a much shorter time span."

   Dollarhyde may or may not live to see a cure for cystic fibrosis. But she is
planning for her future. She aims to finish a degree in architectural design at
PCC. Someday, she would like to have a child.

   "I look ahead," she said. "But not really far ahead."

   You can reach Don Colburn at doncolburn@news.oregonian.com or 503-294-5124.
You can reach Andy Dworkin at andydworkin@news.oregonian.com or 503-221-8262.

GRAPHIC: Photo - by Fredrick D. Joe/The Oregonian; Graphic - Illustration - How
cystic fibrosis is inherited; Sidebar - Cystic Fibrosis; Sidebar - Stroeder's
mom keeps up fight for organ donors

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2002


                             1378 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 12, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 697 words

BODY:

   On the vast notorious course of this off again-on again sportswriting career,
I've covered exactly one Masters, the 1988 affair won by Sandy Lyle with a
performance so pristine and compelling I can't recall a single stroke of it.

    Standing in the sweet Georgia sunshine near the 18th green on Sunday, I did
not commit to memory whether Lyle's final putt was 16 inches or 16 feet, but as
he stood over it in the requisite thick-as-bricks silence, I remember only that
I thought to myself, "If I belch really loud now, I'll go into golf history.
Spectacularly. Irredeemably."

    Just one typically robust esophageal spasm, a fateful milieu-splitting
AARRRREEP! For instant immortality. Ben Hogan three-putted this green one Sunday
in 1946. A big AARRRREEP couldn't have hurt him.

    But somewhere in that thought, Lyle's ball hit the bottom of the cup, and my
editors have ever since decided that Augusta's "tradition like no other" does
not require that I be an eyewitness. Not to be bitter. After all, you can't
trust me.

    Today, the Masters and Augusta National are no less in need of a little
humility.

    Colin Powell doesn't take himself as seriously as Augusta National takes the
Masters and everything else about the game it has turned into a sacrament. The
secretary of state might be tiptoeing through global geo-political land mines
this weekend, but c'mon, we're talking about the possible collapse of Greg
Norman here.

    The Masters needs to allow the gallery to go shirtless.

    Or, OK, just the men.

    It needs somebody to run the length of the 14th fairway flashing some of his
behind, preferably a competitor, but you can't expect the moon.

    Alas, the pro golfers have a singular focus that's almost beyond human.
Their minds are digitized video recorders that enable them to recount in giant
verbal bursts every shot they've taken over the past five hours. If you prefer,
five months. Pressed, five years.

    "Twelve was driver,5-iron to within 10, two putts. Thirteen was driver,
6-iron to the fringe. Three putts. Fourteen ..." And on and on.

    I've gone into baseball clubhouses talking with relievers who had gotten one
hitter out and were unable to remember what pitches they threw. Maybe it was
Masters envy, but I tried to imagine the Pirates' Kip Wells being forced to
recount his round against the Reds Wednesday night.

    "Fastball, they hit the crap out of it. Slider, hit the snot out of it.
Changeup, oh they hit the heck out of that pitch. Fastball again, wild pitch."
But not on and on. Manager Lloyd McClendon rescued Wells in the second inning,
perhaps because he was not interested in finding out if Cincinnati could score
in the low 90s.

    But one rant at a time.

    The one golfer in this Masters with enough dearth of pretense to bring the
ambiance a lot closer to humanity is John Daly, whose documented compulsions and
frailties, though they've brought him a barely manageable misery, have made him
seem far more real to the gallery that stretches far beyond the weekend's
azaleas.

    I can believe that, given an exacting blend of skill and karma, Daly can win
the thing. I do not believe that Tiger Woods drives a Buick SUV.

    In Gerry Dulac's excellent piece on Daly from Augusta this week, the "blond
bomber" described a nascent interest in songwriting. He plays guitar and hangs
out with a country singer buddy, writing lyrics to songs like "All My Exes Wear
Rolexes."

    If Daly never makes another cut on the tour, the attempt to bring country
music to golf is enough to secure his legacy. Golf and the Masters in particular
could use a stiff dose of country ethos to help it get over itself, although the
song titles could prove difficult. Some practice swings:

    "My wife ran off with my caddie and I miss him."

    "My good clubs treat me bad and my bad clubs treat me good."

    "If the phone don't ring you'll know it's another collapsed endorsement
deal."

    "Thank God and the Callaway corporate jet you're gone."

    "Please, Jesus, Repeal the Capital Gains Tax."

    "It's a Bloody Mary Front Nine."

    "My Score's Still Higher Than My Mom's Inmate Number."

    Ah well, I know I'll have this all worked out before I return to Augusta.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2002


                             1379 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 11, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-12

LENGTH: 450 words

HEADLINE: Scientists alarmed by Bush's stand on bill

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 San Diego scientists yesterday expressed alarm over President Bush's support
for banning the creation of embryos to develop stem cells, saying it would close
an emerging medical frontier in the United States that could cure serious
illnesses.

   The ban Bush advocates is contained in federal legislation called the
Brownback bill.

   "The Brownback bill, and other bills like it ... ban a potentially valuable
research practice, one that has use both for understanding disease as well as
potentially for treating disease," said Dr. Lawrence Goldstein, UCSD professor
of cellular and molecular medicine and an investigator at the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute.

   Dr. Fred Levine, UCSD associate professor of pediatrics and a member of the
UCSD Cancer Center, said "if research is banned, then it will prevent
researchers from entering the field."

   Bush, who believes using embryos for stem cell research would destroy
"nascent human life," said he supports continued research into adult stem cells.

   Researchers have suggested that adult stem cells could be taken from
developed adult tissue -- blood, muscle and brain, for example -- and grown into
new types of cells.

   But some San Diego scientists said yesterday that the president overstated
the value of using adult stem cells as a substitute for embryonic stem cells.

   "I think he's overinterpreting how strong the science is on adult stem cells,
but ... he's not a scientist so that shouldn't be all that surprising,"
Goldstein said.

   "To say that we should use adult stem cells and we should not worry so much
about embryonic sources, that's not a reasonable conclusion," Goldstein said.

   Scientists said they believe the Brownback bill could criminalize research
into therapeutic applications for people suffering from Parkinson's disease,
diabetes and other illnesses.

   And Goldstein, citing the recent departure of stem cell researchers from the
University of California, San Francisco to England, said he fears that new
government restrictions on research could prompt more scientists to pursue their
work abroad.

   But Dr. Theodore Friedmann, a UCSD pediatrics professor and director of the
university's Program in Human Gene Therapy, was more optimistic.

   "I think science in this country is still so powerful and so attractive that
not many people are going to pick up and move their careers elsewhere sprited on
by this issue," he said.

   Researchers with CyThera, Inc., said the Brownback bill would not affect
their work.  The San Diego biotechnology company is developing nine of about 60
embryonic stem cell lines approved by the Bush administration in August.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2002


                             1380 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 11, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-12

LENGTH: 445 words

HEADLINE: Scientists alarmed by Bush's stand on bill

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   San Diego scientists yesterday expressed alarm over President Bush's support
for banning the creation of embryos to develop stem cells, saying it would close
an emerging medical frontier in the United States that could cure serious
illnesses. The ban Bush advocates is contained in federal legislation called the
Brownback bill. "The Brownback bill, and other bills like it ... ban a
potentially valuable research practice, one that has use both for understanding
disease as well as potentially for treating disease," said Dr.

   Lawrence Goldstein, UCSD professor of cellular and molecular medicine and an
investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Dr. Fred Levine, UCSD
associate professor of pediatrics and a member of the UCSD Cancer Center, said
"if research is banned, then it will prevent researchers from entering the
field." Bush, who believes using embryos for stem cell research would destroy
"nascent human life," said he supports continued research into adult stem cells.
Researchers have suggested that adult stem cells could be taken from developed
adult tissue -- blood, muscle and brain, for example -- and grown into new types
of cells. But some San Diego scientists said yesterday that the president
overstated the value of using adult stem cells as a substitute for embryonic
stem cells. "I think he's overinterpreting how strong the science is on adult
stem cells, but ... he's not a scientist so that shouldn't be all that
surprising," Goldstein said. "To say that we should use adult stem cells and we
should not worry so much about embryonic sources, that's not a reasonable
conclusion," Goldstein said. Scientists said they believe the Brownback bill
could criminalize research into therapeutic applications for people suffering
from Parkinson's disease, diabetes and other illnesses. And Goldstein, citing
the recent departure of stem cell researchers from the University of California,
San Francisco to England, said he fears that new government restrictions on
research could prompt more scientists to pursue their work abroad. But Dr.
Theodore Friedmann, a UCSD pediatrics professor and director of the university's
Program in Human Gene Therapy, was more optimistic. "I think science in this
country is still so powerful and so attractive that not many people are going to
pick up and move their careers elsewhere sprited on by this issue," he said.
Researchers with CyThera, Inc., said the Brownback bill would not affect their
work.

   The San Diego biotechnology company is developing nine of about 60 embryonic
stem cell lines approved by the Bush administration in August. Bruce Lieberman:
(619)293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1381 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            April 11, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: EAST NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; To the Rim; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: Caucus to present heart-health talk

BYLINE: By Tina Soong

BODY:

   The Louisiana Asian-American Women's Caucus will present "You and Your
Heart," a health seminar featuring Dr. Myung Park, a cardiologist at Ochsner
Hospital and a Korean-American, on April 26 from 7:30 to 9:30 p.m. at the Travel
Lodge Airport Hotel, Kenner. The seminar is free and open to the public.

   Among other issues, Park will discuss risk factors that contribute to the
development of heart disease, including hypertension, diabetes and obesity. She
also will focus on ways to stay heart-healthy and on the latest medical and
surgical advancements in heart-disease treatments.

   "Part of the mission of the Louisiana Asian-American Women's Caucus is
providing health care for the Asian-American women in the metropolitan New
Orleans area," caucus President Sun Kim said. "This is the first LAWC health
seminar. We plan to conduct regular health seminars throughout the year on
different topics."

   Health services provided by the caucus since September 2000 include free
cervical cancer screenings and mammograms for Asian-American women who do not
have medical insurance. More than 65 Asian-American women have been served. If
problems are detected, follow-up tests and care also are available.

   For appointments and further information on free cervical cancer screenings
and mammograms, call Elena Cho at 283-0959. Translators will be provided for
women who do not speak English, Kim said.

   The caucus is a member of the Louisiana Women's Health Collaborative, an
umbrella organization of about 15 major health organizations in the greater New
Orleans area including the American Cancer Society, Tulane University Hospital
and Clinic, the Ochsner radiation/oncology department, University Hospital, East
Jefferson Hospital, the Louisiana Breast Cancer Task Force, the Susan G. Komen
Breast Cancer Foundation and the Cancer Association of Greater New Orleans.

   Founded in 1998, the Louisiana Asian-American Women's Caucus also seeks to
address social, economic, cultural, family, career and other issues facing
Asian-American communities. The caucus encourages greater participation in
community affairs and the political process to increase visibility of
Asian-American women at community events and in dialogues on social issues, Kim
said.

   For more information, call Kim at 837-5342.

   . . . . . . .

   The New Orleans Chapter of the Organization of Chinese American Women
recently installed new officers for 2002.

   Nancy Chung, an economist and market analyst with the Department of Housing
and Urban Development's New Orleans office, is the new president; Lingyan Shu,
chief technology officer of Concise Info Technology, is vice president; Na Li,
postdoctoral research fellow in the gene therapy program at Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, is treasurer; Leda Fan, an attorney at the
law offices of Fan & Brinson, is English secretary; and Tai Chen Ho, the
organization's former chapter president, former president of Chinese Association
of Greater New Orleans and former principal of the Academy of Chinese Studies,
is Chinese secretary.

   "The chapter will continue to pursue the goals and to increase networking
with the Asian-American communities as well as the mainstream society," Chung
said.

   The Organization of Chinese American Women was created to advance their cause
and foster public awareness of their accomplishments, special needs and
concerns, Chung said.

   The officers were installed by Charleen Desplaus, local governor of
Toastmaster International. Claudia Calvert of Kitty's Karaoke entertained at the
installation and Chinese New Year celebration dinner. The installation program
was headed by Phenix Cheuk.

   For information on the Organization of Chinese American Women, call Chung at
455-4103.

   . . . . . . .

Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to send news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2002


                             1382 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                 April 10, 2002 Wednesday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: GENOMICS GROUP'S FOCUS WOULD BE BASIC RESEARCH

BYLINE: By Kerry Fehr-Snyder, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Arizona's plan to land the headquarters of the International
GenomicsConsortium has been detailed, but the types of research opportunities
that mayfollow are far less understood.

   "I'm not sure anyone knows for sure," said longtime Scottsdale
venturecapitalist Terry Winters, who believes that the state would be better
offinvesting in a medical school in Phoenix.

   The project won't involve such lofty goals as cures and treatments forcancer
but will focus instead on basic research of human diseases. Agovernor-appointed
group will deliver Arizona's proposal to the consortiumtoday.

   But as with any economic-development project, the ultimate prizes are jobsand
an industry that attracts capital investment.

   "With the growth potential of the biotech industry, it's foolish to
ignoreit," said Mike Berens, director of the division of neurology research
atBarrow Neurological Institute in Phoenix and a member of the task force.
"It'sone of the fastest-growing segments of the economy."

   For years, Arizona has been a virtual amoeba in biotech, while the rest ofthe
country charges into the Genetics Age with sequencing projects,
cloningtechnology, gene-targeting drugs and less-successful gene therapies.

   The completion last year of the government-funded Human Genome Project anda
similar privately funded commercial effort by Celera Corp. led to a rush
tounderstand the blueprint for human beings. Above all, the research showed
verylittle variation between humans, animals and even plants in the sequence
thatrepresent various proteins coded by the genome. There was even less
variationbetween individual humans.

   But the so-called book of life is virtually unreadable for the purposes
ofunderstanding and treating disease.

   Eric Lander, an MIT researcher involved in the public sequencing
project,likened the human genome to a parts list for a Boeing 737 jetliner
withoutinstructions on how they go together.

   Or as Berens put it, "While we have the book of life, we don't have it
incontext for diseases of cardiovascular systems or diseases of cancer."

   The International Genomics Consortium hopes to glimpse key phrases invarious
chapters by first analyzing 10,000 cancer tumor samples.

   As part of that effort, the consortium already has begun a pilot programwith
Scottsdale Healthcare, which has provided temporary lab space to profilegene
expression for brain and colon cancer. In layman's terms, gene expressionis
another way of describing which genes are turned on during a specificdisease
process.

   Because cancer is not considered a single disease, the project will profile25
to 30 samples of each type of tumor using specially designed computer chipsknown
as microarrays. The outcome: faster diagnostic tests and, ultimately,better
treatment.

   Arizona may have an advantage in the competition for the
consortium'sheadquarters because three other medical centers in the state are
involved inproject.

   Future consortium projects are expected to provide genetic markers forvarious
stages of cardiovascular ailments, diabetes, even Parkinson's disease.

   "It's a very long-term investment, and no (immediate) jobs will come fromit,"
explained Charlie Arntzen, founding director of the newly formed
ArizonaBiomedical Institute at Arizona State University.

   But the investment, he said, is needed now if Arizona is ever to become
aplayer in comparative genomics and bioinformatics, which is the use
ofhigh-powered computers to sort through massive amounts of biological data.
Thestate group trying to lure the consortium's headquarters has decided to bid
onthe project's bioinformatics piece by piggybacking off the strength of
ASU'scomputer sciences and engineering departments.

   For his part, Arntzen is using the study of genetics to develop targets
fornew antibiotics and is considered a national leader in plant-based, or
edible,vaccines. Although he is busy with his work and with establishing the
ArizonaBiomedical Institute, he believes landing the consortium would
createopportunities for businesses and researchers alike.

   "Genomics, per se, is like the advent of computers in business severalyears
ago," Arntzen said. "It will quickly become an all-inclusive part ofwhat we do
in medical research and treatment."

GRAPHIC: ASU researcher Charlie Arntzen has genetically engineered tomatoes and
potatoes (below) that contain vaccines for human illnesses. He supports efforts
to bring the International Genomics Consortium to Arizona.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2005


                             1383 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    April 10, 2002, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
ARIAD SAYS ITS PRODUCT STARVES TUMOR CELLS

BYLINE: BY JEFFREY KRASNER and GLOBE WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. yesterday said that early studies on animals
showed its cancer drug candidate AP23573 helped shrink tumors an average of 46
percent. Ariad says the drug interferes with tumor metabolism, preventing tumor
cells from taking in nutrients. The cells die of starvation. The tumors in mice
not given the drug increased an average of 150 percent.

   The findings were presented at the annual meeting of the American Association
of Cancer Research in San Francisco.

      "Eradicating tumors through metabolic starvation makes AP23573 an
especially promising drug candidate for the treatment of many of the most common
and difficult-to-treat cancers," Dr. Harvey J. Berger, chairman and chief
executive of Ariad, said in a statement.

   The Cambridge company said AP23573 could be useful in treating prostate,
uterine, pancreatic, and ovarian cancers.

   Ariad's shares jumped on the news, gaining 86 cents to close at $5.66 on
volume of almost 2 million shares, about eight times the stock's average trading
volume.

   The drug candidate must still complete a variety of studies before the
company can apply to begin human clinical trials, but "We will be in the clinic
by the end of the year," said Tim Clackson, Ariad's vice president of gene
therapy and genomics.  MILLENNIUM SEES DRUG PROGRESS

   Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Cambridge, announced preclinical progress
with one of its cancer drug candidates. The company, also at the AACR meeting,
said that when used with different chemotherapies, its investigational drug
MLN341 was able to help shrink tumors in mice more than would occur with either
treatment given alone.

   The company said the drug works on enzymes controlling tumor cell growth,
ultimately encouraging the cells to reach the end of their life spans.

   "MLN341 may be a promising therapy for a variety of cancers because its
unique mechanism of action . . . affects molecular pathways important to the
survival of many different tumor types," Julian Adams, a senior vice president,
said in a statement.

   In the study, researchers grafted human tumors onto mice and tested MLN341 in
combination with standard chemotherapy.  DNA FIRMS LAND NEW CUSTOMERS

   Two privately held companies that are each building libraries of human DNA
and tissue have announced major deals with new customers.

   Genomics Collaborative Inc. of Cambridge said the National Cancer Institute
will use its samples in a study examining the connection between a particular
gene and high blood pressure.

   Separately, Ardais Corp., of Lexington, said it has licensed samples to
companies including Abgenix Inc., Aventis SA, and CuraGen Corp.  GENZYME EXPANDS
VACCINE STUDY

   Genzyme Molecular Oncology is expanding its study of a vaccine for skin
cancer because of high interest among doctors and patients. The study will
evaluate how the immune systems of patients with advanced melanoma respond to
various vaccination approaches. As many as 44 patients in five treatment centers
will take part, including at Massachusetts General Hospital and Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, both in Boston.

   Researchers will put antigens (proteins that are present in cancer cells)
between the layers of patients' skin. The antigens are intended to stimulate the
immune system to destroy cancer cells with the same protein, thus mobilizing the
body's defenses to fight the cancer.  MILLIPORE INVESTS IN PUREPULSE

   Millipore Corp., of Bedford, said it will invest in PurePulse Technologies
Inc. and collaborate to sell a system for removing viruses from biotechnology
production processes. Millipore will combine its virus-removal filter technology
with PurePulse's virus-killing system, which uses flashes of intense light.

   Millipore owns the rights to sell the light system to biotechnology and
pharmaceutical customers.

   PurePulse is a subsidiary of Maxwell Technolgies Inc. of San Diego. PurePulse
and Millipore plan to test the combined system with customers this year.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2002


                             1384 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2002 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 9, 2002 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 962 words

HEADLINE: County profiles may help  with health-care planning

BODY:

   The booklets are crammed with numbers. But for people in the business of
medicine, the latest county health profiles are real page turners.

   The New Jersey Hospital Association has just finished its third collection of
county health profiles. They look at factors such as cancer, alcoholism,
domestic violence, poverty, cancer and infectious disease.

   The association compiled a profile for each of New Jersey's 21 counties. The
profiles examine drug use, smoking, heart disease and teen pregnancy. The
profiles compare each health indicator with the state average, all in the hope
of helping local governments, hospitals and health organizations plan for the
future.

    Some of the data has been surprising. For instance, experts long have known
that infant mortality among blacks is higher than that among whites. In
Burlington County, however, statistics show that infant mortality is actually
highest among Hispanics.

   "Sometimes the information raises a red flag for a community," said Firoozeh
Vali, director of research for the association.

   Researchers spent a year collecting information from the U.S. Census Bureau,
as well as from state sources such as the New Jersey Department of Health and
Senior Services.

   "We wanted to show the landscape of each county's health status," Vali said.
Most of the health numbers come from 1998.

   Vali said she can make some generalizations from the thousands of statistics.
For instance, Essex, Hudson, Passaic and Atlantic counties fared poorly. The
healthier counties were Morris, Bergen and Hunterdon.

   Hunterdon had a significant blip. Its Lyme disease rate is 437 cases for
every 100,000 people - 19 times higher than the state average of 23 cases for
every 100,000 people.

   The reports also look at racial differences among disease. Statewide, for
instance, black men have higher rates of prostate cancer than white men, 213 per
100,000 vs. 144 per 100,000.

   White women have higher rates of breast cancer than black women, 121 per
100,000 vs. 99 per 100,000. Blacks have far lower rates of melanoma, a deadly
skin cancer, than whites, 0.80 vs. 14.47. The profiles break the racial
differences down county by county.

   The county profiles also provide information about the market share of HMO
plans in 2000.

   Aetna US Healthcare, for instance, is by far the leading managed care
provider in Middlesex County. It is followed by Physicians Health Services of
NJ. In Morris County, Aetna is also the largest managed care provider, but it is
followed by Horizon Healthcare.

   The hospital association will give two free copies of the county health
profiles to members of its association. Others can buy the reports for $150 for
each county, or buy all 21 counties for $2,750. - Carol Ann Campbell

   $100K for research   on brain injuries

     Brain injury research in New Jersey received a boost last week when a
$100,000 gift was presented to the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey for the purpose of establishing a brain cell regeneration program.

   The gift came from the Coalition for Brain Injury Research, a nonprofit
started in 1996 by Dennis and Rosalind Benigno, a Clifton couple who are
themselves the parents of a 33-year-old brain-injured son who was left totally
disabled after being struck by a car 18 years ago.

   The program will be housed at the university's Neurological Institute of New
Jersey, based at the UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School in Newark. Research will
focus on nerve regeneration as a potential treatment for brain injuries. Current
areas of brain repair research include cell transplantation, stem cell research
and gene therapy.

   The money will also be used to fund an annual lecture on the latest
developments in brain cell research.

   According to Dennis Benigno, president of the coalition, between 12,000 and
15,000 New Jersey residents experience moderate to severe brain injury each
year. Most are caused by auto accidents; others are the result of strokes,
sports accidents or violence.

   Of the 5.3 million people each year who suffer brain injury in the United
States, about 100,000 live in New Jersey. - Angela Stewart

   BURNING QUESTION

    Greg Scandlen, senior fellow in health policy for the National Center for
Policy Analysis, a nonprofit public-policy organization in Dallas.

    Q. We are hearing more about "consumer-driven" health plans these days. What
are they?

   A. These plans basically give individual consumers more control over their
health-care spending. Most programs involve the employer making a sum of money
available to the worker for health care to spend at his or her own discretion.

   Q. Does this mean there will be no out-of-pocket costs for the employee if
they sign up for such a plan?

   A. No. Along with the cash account, there is also an insurance plan that
carries a deductible the employee must meet before receiving benefits. The cash
account will not fully cover the deductible, but if a worker spends his or her
money cautiously, they will have money left over that can be added to the
account the next year.

   Q. So there might be drawbacks to being in one of these plans?

   A. With more choice and flexibility, consumers have more responsibility for
making smart decisions and may have to pay more of the cost of their health
care.

   Q. How many people are in such plans?

   A. It's a very small number. There are a lot of companies that are trying it
out for the first time. Among them are Medtronic Inc., a leading medical
technology company based in Minneapolis and Pharmacia Inc., one of the world's
leading drug-makers, headquartered in Peapack.

   Q. You've talked about benefits to the workers. Why would an employer want to
offer this health-care option?

   A. It makes their costs more predictable and should also result in increased
morale for their workforce as employees gain more control. - Angela Stewart

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             1385 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 9, 2002 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 1362 words

HEADLINE: A Year's Advances Bring Convenience, Little More;
A Year's Progress Against Multiple Sclerosis Leaves One Patient Unmoved

BYLINE: Jennifer L. Huget, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:

   In the 12 months and one week since I learned I had multiple sclerosis, I've
kept a folder marked "MS" in my file cabinet, filling it with news clippings
about advances in MS research. It's a pretty thick file, and well it should be:
The National MS Society alone spends $ 30 million a year on about 300 ongoing
research projects, while the National Institutes of Health spends more than
twice that amount annually on MS research.

    Sticking stuff in the file feels like progress. But progress is relative:
For all those hundreds of projects involving thousands of people and millions of
dollars, we're really no closer today to curing MS than we were a year ago. In
fact, as Stephen Reingold, vice president of research programs for the National
MS Society, puts it, we're still at the most primitive levels of understanding
the disease, which turns out to be almost infinitely complex, involving
complicated interactions among some of the body's most mysterious systems.

    MS is commonly known as an autoimmune disease, meaning that in people who
have it, the immune system attacks things in the body (in MS, that thing is the
protective myelin that coats the nerves in the brain and spinal column) as if
they were foreign intruders. But researchers are still teasing out the
interrelationships -- involving the immune system, the central nervous system,
genes, gender and hormones -- that may contribute to the disease.

    These complexities make nearly every aspect of one's life suspect. A study
last year showed that teachers, for reasons unknown, develop MS at a higher rate
than the general population. Another seemed to confirm the long-standing
suspicion that the Epstein-Barr virus, best known as the cause of mononucleosis,
may be an MS trigger. We've learned that hormones associated with pregnancy may
temporarily suppress MS symptoms. Despite a dearth of scientific evidence, a lot
of people maintain that mercury-amalgam fillings cause MS. But nobody has a clue
how all of these pieces fit together, or indeed whether they are even part of
the puzzle.

   MS's complexity makes it hard for researchers to figure out how to stop or
prevent it. So while talk of a cure is muted these days, research tends to focus
on therapy -- drugs and other treatments that might slow or alter the disease's
progress in the 250,000 to 350,000 Americans estimated to have it. As a sign of
just how important drug therapy is in the MS universe, one of the biggest
developments of the past year was the introduction of new diagnostic criteria
designed to identify the disease in its earliest stages, using high-tech tools
such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and lumbar puncture (spinal tap) to
detect the disease rather than waiting around for definitive symptoms to show
up. The rationale behind this consensus opinion is that MS is, since the
introduction of the interferon drug Betaseron nearly 20 years ago, treatable,
and that drug therapies administered early can actually slow its progression.

    I benefited from this new policy when I was diagnosed last April; my
neurologist caught my disease early and put me right on a course of daily
injections of Copaxone, one of four disease-modifying MS drugs now available in
the United States for treating the most common form of MS, called
relapsing/remitting MS. I'm grateful for the swift action, and doubly grateful
that, either because of the daily shots or the unknowable natural course of my
disease, I'm really no worse off now than I was a year ago. A recent MRI image
showed no evidence of new lesions on my brain, and while my toes tingle all the
time and I'm incessantly tired, I'm still walking, seeing and writing.

    But who knows if my luck will hold? Reingold calls the current drug
therapies -- the interferons Avonex, Betaseron and Rebif (the last of which was
approved for use in the United States in March) and Copaxone (the brand name for
glatiramer acetate) -- only modestly effective, even though Copaxone and Avonex
have been recently proven to prevent accumulation of "black holes," or areas of
severe damage, in the brain.

    Okay, so the best treatments we have are only modestly effective. Great.
What's next?

    All eyes are on the new drug Antegren, a monoclonal antibody that approaches
MS in a whole different way. While the four other drugs try to intercept
damage-causing immune cells before they reach the myelin but after they've
entered the central nervous system, Antegren -- in animal studies, anyway --
stops errant immune cells from passing from the blood to the brain in the first
place. Large-scale human trials are underway. Watch this space for jubilant
celebration if the stuff ends up working. (Antegren is also being tested as a
treatment for Crohn's disease, an autoimmune disease affecting the bowel, and it
may prove useful in treating other autoimmune diseases.)

    In the meantime, many researchers have come to believe that no single drug
will be the magic bullet; for them, combination therapies -- pairings of two or
more drugs in hopes of maximizing benefits -- offer the greatest hope. Reingold
calls this "an evolution in thinking" about treating the disease. Trials testing
the safety and efficacy of Avonex and Antegren administered together started in
December at sites throughout the country, including George Washington University
Medical Center, and a small study pairing Avonex and Copaxone last year showed
the combination was safe and a larger trial was warranted.

    Some people are putting a lot of stock in things like gene therapy and stem
cell research as eventual keys to solving the MS riddle, but that's looking
pretty far down the road. Likewise, a team at Yale this year experimented with
taking myelin-producing cells from an MS patient's ankle and sticking them in
her brain, to see whether they could produce myelin there. That work is ongoing,
and its implications won't be fully understood for years.

    I've got all this stuff in my MS file. But more tantalizing to me are
articles like the one about a study in which Viagra seemed to help restore nerve
function in the brains of rats in whom stroke-like damage -- comparable to that
caused by MS -- had been induced. You go, rats! But it is the unwise patient --
not to mention the imprudent journalist -- who puts too much stock in rat
studies, which might never translate into benefits for humans.

    So I like to stick to concrete, real-time advances. Like, for instance, the
fact that, while a pill version of Copaxone failed its trials last year, the
drug will soon be available in pre-filled syringes. Doesn't sound like much, but
it'll save me a good hour every week that I'd otherwise spend mixing my own.
Maybe I'll finally finish reading "The Corrections."

    Truth told, the development that likely has had the most payoff for me came
not in the field of MS studies but in the realm of breast cancer. Researchers
last year determined that participation in a support group, for all its probable
social, psychological and practical benefits, didn't translate to higher
survival rates for breast cancer patients. For people like me who have opted out
of the support group movement, this news came as comfort: Instead of feeling
guilty that by staying home I'm not taking enough responsibility for my own
healing, I'm happy to know that at least I'm not digging my own grave by doing
so.

    Mankind has come up with cures for lots of diseases, and you never know when
one of those great "Eureka!" moments might happen with MS. So for the
foreseeable future, I guess I'll be clipping my articles, stuffing my file and
squirting my daily 1.1 ml of Copaxone into one of seven well-bruised injection
sites on my body. (Imagine how I look forward to bathing suit season.)

    And I'll continue to be optimistic. Things are better now than they were
before, and they'll continue to improve, if even in small ways. I'm convinced
that a good attitude helps. Plus, it makes it easier for others to put up with
me.

    So I guess you can say I'm hopeful but not getting my hopes up. Given the
past 12 months, it looks like I'm in it for the long haul.

   Jennifer Huget is a regular contributor to the Health section.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2002


                             1386 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                April 08, 2002, Monday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; COVER STORY; Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 918 words

HEADLINE: Clinical trials aren't risk free

BYLINE: KRIS HUNDLEY

BODY:


   Alisa Lazaro figured it would be an easy way to earn $ 1,000.

   Last spring, the 34-year-old medical technician and her sister were among
nearly 60 healthy women who volunteered for an early stage drug trial at
Northside Hospital and Heart Institute in St. Petersburg. The trial was to study
side effects of a new antibiotic which had been tested on 8,000 patients.

   Several of the women got skin rashes or stomach aches from the drug, side
effects about which they had been forewarned in the consent form. Lazaro, who
had been given a thorough medical screening before being accepted for the trial,
complained of chest pains. On June 6, Lazaro, a mother of two girls ages 2 and
4, died.

   The Pinellas County medical examiner determined that Lazaro died a natural
death from a coronary artery dissection, which occurs when an artery suddenly
bursts like a worn garden hose.

   According to Dr. Vibhuti Singh, a St. Petersburg cardiologist and teacher at
the University of South Florida Medical School, spontaneous artery dissections
are rare, even more so in young people unless there is some congenital disease
or traumatic experience such as a car accident. Singh also said such problems
are very hard to detect in advance.

   The organization sponsoring the trial, Discovery Alliance Inc. of Mobile,
Ala., and hospital officials said the autopsy proved that Lazaro's sudden death
was unrelated to her participation in the clinical trial. Dr. Bruce Lynn, the
St. Petersburg dermatologist who was the principal investigator on the study,
declined to comment on the incident. Betsy Bomar, chief operating officer at
Northside, said Lazaro was not even on the investigational drug.

   "She was on another antibiotic that was not under investigation," Bomar said.

   Eileen Myers of Discovery Alliance, which is currently conducting two other
clinical studies at Northside Hospital, said the six-week trial was not
interrupted because of Lazaro's death.

   "We did everything that's required by the hospital, the FDA and the
pharmaceutical company in that case," she said of the reporting process, which
is confidential. "But the trial was not halted because it had nothing to do with
the situation. It went to completion."

   Lazaro's cause of death remains a mystery. But critics contend the drug
testing industry needs tougher guidelines given recent deaths.

   Just four days before Lazaro died, a healthy young woman died during an
asthma study at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The FDA cited university
researchers for several violations, including failure to get agency approval to
use an unlicensed drug that was involved in the experiment.

   In 1999, an 18-year-old boy died in a gene therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania. In 1996, a healthy college student died shortly after an
examination of the breathing tubes in her lungs during a clinical trial at the
University of Rochester in New York. And in 1993, five of 15 participants died
in a drug trial at the National Institutes of Health that was testing a drug for
hepatitis B.

   Clinical researchers, who see thousands of subjects complete drug trials with
few if any side effects, say it distorts the picture to focus on a handful of
deaths.

   "Clinical trials are a must for the world," said Dennis DeRosia, chairman of
the Association of Clinical Research Professionals. "If there are no human
trials, there are no new products and we all suffer."

   Citing concerns for patient privacy and competitive pressures among the
pharmaceutical manufacturers, the clinical trial industry keeps a tight lid on
information about adverse events. No registries are kept on the number of people
involved in drug trials. And though the FDA is notified when an adverse event or
death occurs, that information is not made public.

   That is a mistake, said Dr. Sidney Wolfe, director of Public Citizen's Health
Research Group. "All adverse events should be made public when they occur," he
said. "And you can't rely on the drug companies to do so."

   But clinical researchers say the existing system has adequate oversight. An
Institutional Review Board has to approve the study protocol and subject
recruiting process. Monitors from the pharmaceutical company or the sponsoring
organization often visit the sites during the trial. And occasionally an auditor
from the Food and Drug Administration drops by.

   But monitoring is becoming more difficult as the number of clinical trials
increases exponentially, with more of those studies being done abroad. In 2000,
the FDA said there were 30,000 investigators conducting drug trials. The agency
visited 736 sites. The FDA hopes to increase that number to 780 in 2002.

   No one is suggesting increased external monitoring would have changed Alisa
Lazaro's fate. But no one is answering her mother's questions about why the
woman's repeated complaints about chest pains went unheeded.

   "They gave her muscle relaxers and treated her like a hypochondriac," said
Patricia Salomone, who said her daughter continued the study despite her pains.

   Lazaro's husband, Dana, referred all questions to his lawyer, Justin Johnson,
who said through an assistant that he had no comment.

   Salomone said she does not know if her son-in-law intends to sue or who the
target of such a lawsuit might be. In Alisa Lazaro's probate file, however, the
listing of assets includes "possible proceeds resulting from a medical
negligence action to be filed."

   - Times researcher Kitty Bennett contributed to this report.


LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2002


                             1387 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       April 5, 2002 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 841 words

HEADLINE: Cells primed to carry relief to brain tumors

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Bethesda, Md. -- Scientists at the National Institutes of Health for the
first time have engineered a type of immature human brain cell to carry potent
anti-cancer substances directly to malignant brain tumors in animals.

   The potential therapy represents a promising new avenue for dealing with one
of the most intractable problems in medicine -- effectively seeking out and
killing tumors in the human brain.

   Far from being a cure, the technique so far has been used only in mice that
have human tumor cells in their brains. But the mice live up to three times
longer than mice that do not get the therapy, said Howard Fine, the NIH
scientist who developed the technique.

   Fine said he now is working to move the therapy from mice to people. That
could be a matter of months or longer, he said.

   The concept adds a new twist to the dynamic field of stem cell research. Stem
cells are master cells that can become other types of cells, such as those that
make various tissues, including blood, muscle and brain.

   When it comes to treating neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease,
Alzheimer's disease and stroke, stem cells generally are thought of as potential
replacement cells for damaged or diseased brain cells.

   However, Fine's idea is to use them as vehicles that make and deliver potent
cancer drugs to tumors in parts of the brain that are hard to reach.

   "It is like a Trojan horse," said Fine, chief of the neuro-oncology branch at
the institute.

   The approach uses a type of neural stem cell, immature cells that have been
genetically manipulated to produce anti-cancer substances.

   Fine's technique takes advantage of a unique characteristic of neural stem
cells. When transplanted into the brain, they migrate to areas where tumors,
known as gliomas, have formed.

   "They tend to surround tumors," said Arlene Chiu, a scientist with the
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

   Hard to treat

   That's important because cancer cells often are dispersed throughout the
brain and are not always confined to one self-contained tumor.

   In addition, brain disorders can be especially hard to treat because of the
blood-brain barrier, a layer of cells in cerebral blood vessels that allows only
certain substances to pass into the brain. While the barrier helps keep diseases
out of the brain, it also can block the action of many drugs on brain cells.

   Traditional therapies -- chemotherapy, radiation and surgery -- all have
disadvantages. Overall survival rates for the 17,000 people who are diagnosed
with a brain tumor each year have not improved much.

   In recent years, gene therapy has raised hopes but has yet to produce much
success. In typical gene therapy, a virus is genetically engineered to produce a
protein that is toxic to cancer cells.

   However, Fine's concept of using neural stem cells is an entirely new
approach.

   The cells are obtained from adult human bone marrow, not embryonic stem
cells. Embryonic stem cells, such as those that were first isolated by
researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, come from the inner cell
mass of human embryos obtained from fertility clinics.

   Known as bone marrow-derived neural component cells, they have the ability to
become different types of brain cells. In other research, neural stem cells have
been obtained from fetal or embryonic tissue.

   By using cells derived from a patient's own bone marrow, problems with immune
system rejection of the cells could be avoided, Fine said.

   Using genetically engineered viruses, Fine has manipulated the cells to
produce two substances that are toxic to brain tumors.

   The cells are injected into the brains of mice that previously had been
injected with human brain tumor cells. Fine said he already has tried his
technique on about 100 mice.

   In general, the treated mice live 40 to 60 days, compared with 19 to 21 days
in the untreated mice, he said.

   One of the two substances produced by Fine's engineered neural cells
interferes with a tumor's ability to form the blood vessels that are needed for
the tumor to grow; the other substance triggers so-called cell suicide in
tumors.

   Cutting off a tumor's blood supply, known as anti-angiogenesis, today is one
of the most active areas of cancer research. More than 30 anti-angiogenesis
drugs now are being tested on various kinds of cancer.

   Judah Folkman, the pioneer of anti-angiogenesis cancer therapy, said Fine's
idea is clever and that he is the only one trying it.

   "It is very exciting," said Folkman, an Andrus professor of pediatric surgery
at Harvard Medical School and director of the surgical research laboratory at
Children's Hospital in Boston. "What he is doing is much more elegant (than
other brain tumor therapies)."

   Folkman, who has worked with Fine, said his idea has real potential for
treating brain tumors in people.

   Minesh Mehta, chairman of UW-Madison's department of human oncology, and who
is familiar with Fine's work, said it is very innovative but more testing is
needed.


LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                             1388 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 5, 2002, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 229 words

HEADLINE: GenStar Therapeutics posts 4th-quarter loss

BYLINE: UNION-TRIBUNE

BODY:
 GenStar Therapeutics reported a loss of $2.6 million in the fourth quarter
ended Dec. 31, compared to a loss of $3 million in the same period a year ago.
Revenues were $139,000, compared to $48,000 in the same period a year ago.

   For the year, the San Diego biotechnology company, which is developing a gene
therapy to treat hemophilia, reported a loss of $11.1 million, compared to a
loss of $9.6 million in 2000. Revenues were $301,000, compared to $162,000 in
the previous year.

   GenStar had $16.4 million in cash and short-term investments at the end of
December.

   Other local earnings

   Immune Response Corp. reported a loss of $7.6 million in the fourth quarter
ended Dec. 31, compared to a loss of $2.5 million in the same quarter of 2000.
Revenues were $98,000, compared to $1.1 million for the same period a year ago.

   For the year, the Carlsbad biotechnology company reported a loss of $16.3
million, compared to a loss of $24.5 million in 2000. Revenues were $10 million,
compared to $7.4 million for 2000.

   Immune Response said that due to the termination of a research agreement with
Pfizer, deferred revenue of $7.7 million was recognized as revenue during the
third quarter of 2001.

   The company had cash and short-term investments of $2.7 million at the end of
December.


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2002


                             1389 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              April 5, 2002 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: GenStar Therapeutics posts 4th-quarter loss

BYLINE: UNION-TRIBUNE

BODY:

   GenStar Therapeutics reported a loss of $2.6 million in the fourth quarter
ended Dec. 31, compared to a loss of $3 million in the same period a year ago.

   Revenues were $139,000, compared to $48,000 in the same period a year ago.
For the year, the San Diego biotechnology company, which is developing a gene
therapy to treat hemophilia, reported a loss of $11.1 million, compared to a
loss of $9.6 million in 2000. Revenues were $301,000, compared to $162,000 in
the previous year. GenStar had $16.4 million in cash and short-term investments
at the end of December. Other local earnings Immune Response Corp. reported a
loss of $7.6 million in the fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, compared to a loss of
$2.5 million in the same quarter of 2000. Revenues were $98,000, compared to
$1.1 million for the same period a year ago. For the year, the Carlsbad
biotechnology company reported a loss of $16.3 million, compared to a loss of
$24.5 million in 2000. Revenues were $10 million, compared to $7.4 million for
2000. Immune Response said that due to the termination of a research agreement
with Pfizer, deferred revenue of $7.7 million was recognized as revenue during
the third quarter of 2001. The company had cash and short-term investments of
$2.7 million at the end of December.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1390 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      April 2, 2002 Tuesday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1225 words

HEADLINE: Biotech industry in race for space;
 Shortage: The most critical issue facing those who create and test cutting-edge
drugs is finding adequate space to manufacture them.

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Maryland's biotechnology industry, flush with cash and riding a wave of new
drug discoveries, is in the middle of a manufacturing-space building boom.

   But as the earth is churned and blueprints drawn for projects ranging from a
new Human Genome Sciences Inc. plant in Rockville to more drug-manufacturing
space at Baltimore's Cambrex Bio Science Inc., the industry's success has given
rise to a new worry: Will there be enough manufacturing capacity to make all the
new drugs headed for larger phases of human testing - and even the market?

   The question looms nationally over a maturing industry that has seemed
recession-proof over the last year. Biotech companies collectively raised at
least $43 billion in the last two years, according to San Francisco-based
merchant bank Burrill & Co., allowing them to hire while others industries laid
off.

   But if there's anything that could slow biotech's charge - an estimated 1,000
drugs now in development and 400 in mid- and late-stage human testing - some
experts say it's the lack of space to make all the drugs - at least in the near
term.

   The shortage, say analysts such as Stefan Loren of Legg Mason Wood Walker,
temporarily could deprive some patients of helpful drugs, cost companies
millions in lost revenue and hurt investors as stock-market values suffer. In
some cases, it could even drive small companies out of business or into the arms
of acquirers.

   "These are severe issues," Loren said about the income companies stand to
lose if they can't make enough of a drug. "We're talking about hundreds of
millions lost a year because of this."

   His views are echoed in a recent report by HighTech Business Decisions, a
Moraga, Calif., consulting firm, which said "a lack of sufficient capacity seems
inevitable." The report - based on spring 2001 surveys of contract manufacturers
and pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies - said that "almost all current
capacity is being utilized" at the contract manufacturing plants on which many
drug companies rely. The additional capacity now under construction, the report
predicts, will not be enough.

   To be sure, the crunch is mostly a matter of projection, dependent on such
wild cards as how many of the experimental drugs will warrant continued
production and how much manufacturing processes will improve.
Therapeutic proteins
Not all biotech drugs - those made from living systems - face the same potential
shortage of manufacturing space. Primarily, say analysts such as Loren and Peter
L. Ginsberg of US Bancorp Piper Jaffray, the shortfall appears to lie with
therapeutic proteins, which grow in living soups nourished in a succession of
ever-larger vats. Other kinds of drugs may be less likely to be affected.

   At GenVec Inc. in Gaithersburg, for example, executives expect few near-term
problems finding contract manufacturers to make two experimental gene-therapy
drugs, TNFerade for cancer and BioBypass for vascular problems. Both involve
genes that are injected directly at the site of the problem, where they produce
proteins that go to work. In contrast, intravenously delivered proteins require
much larger amounts of a drug, meaning larger production runs and bigger plants.

   Ginsberg's January report projects that, after interim shortages, there will
be more than enough capacity by 2005 or 2006. But he also estimates just four
biotech companies - Amgen, Biogen, Boehringer-Ingelheim and Genentech - will
control more than half of the world's biologics production capacity by then.

   "As a result," his report said, "biotech companies that do not have either
in-house manufacturing capacity or long-term contracts/partnerships with those
that do will be in a difficult position."

   Some hints of impending shortage already have popped up locally. Cambrex Bio
Science Inc., a Baltimore contract manufacturer owned by East Rutherford,
N.J.-based Cambrex Corp., has seen demand for its services increase so much that
it rented a nearby building for expansion and is now looking for equipment,
Cambrex Corp. President Claes Glassell said. It also is beginning to plan
another building for large-scale manufacturing adjacent to its Lombard Street
plant, though a final decision hasn't been made.
Idle capacity

   Despite the demand, Cambrex is keeping some of its Baltimore manufacturing
capacity idle as it negotiates with companies that can book it for a year or
more, Glassell said. Like a homeowner showered with multiple offers, Cambrex is
keeping its options open to get the best deal.

   "From our point of view, it's preferable to have customers with longer-term
commitments," Glassell said. "We'll keep them open in hopes of getting a
longer-term commitment."

   Nationally, the highest-profile example of the shortage is Immunex, which has
been unable to make enough of its approved rheumatoid arthritis drug Enbrel to
meet demand. On the flip side are companies such as Gaithersburg-based MedImmune
Inc., which hired a contract manufacturer to make its big seller Synagis while
also building its own plant in Frederick. Improvements in the amount of Synagis
MedImmune could make per batch have made it unnecessary to go ahead with a
planned $80 million expansion in Frederick.

   MedImmune's careful planning also allowed it to strike an agreement to sell
contract manufacturing space it no longer needs, analysts said.

   "Under this agreement, Med- Immune will receive payments from Immunex to
release Synagis manufacturing slots at contract manufacturer
Boehringer-Ingelheim for the production of Immunex's Enbrel," Ginsberg wrote.

   MedImmune spokeswoman Lori Weiman didn't comment directly on whether any such
agreement existed but said, "When it comes to Boehringer-Ingelheim's capacity,
it's up to Boehringer-Ingelheim" what to do with it.

   Other innovative deals to line up manufacturing space are being struck
elsewhere.

   In February, Brisbane, Calif.-based VaxGen Inc. announced that it was forming
a joint venture to manufacture its experimental AIDS vaccine in South Korea and
at a smaller pilot plant in South San Francisco. VaxGen said it wouldn't
contribute any cash, just know-how, in exchange for a 44 percent stake in the
joint venture and a cut of profits from other drugs produced there.

   In Maryland, contract manufacturers BioReliance Corp. of Rockville and
Chesapeake Biological Laboratories Inc. of Baltimore, as well as drug developer
Human Genome Sciences, have built multimillion-dollar plants in the past two
years.
Aberdeen plant

   Human Genome's current project is a $200 million plant capable of making
enough of its drugs for late-stage clinical trials or the market.

   In Aberdeen, Columbus, Ohio-based Battelle is building a $20 million research
facility, in part for biopharmaceutical testing.

   Meanwhile, companies such as GenVec and Rockville-based drug developer
EntreMed Inc. carefully are weighing their options, meticulously planning
whether - and when - to build their own plants.

   With manufacturing space at a premium, investors should watch such decisions
carefully at all companies, said Loren of Legg Mason.

   The days when a company's prospects could be evaluated almost solely on the
basis of whether its drugs worked and how far along they are in development are
gone, he explained.

   "Production," Loren said, "can no longer be taken for granted."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Manufacturer: Gaithersburg-based MedImmune Inc., which
makes Synagis, a drug that prevents respiratory tract disease, built its own
plant in Frederick.; 2. Demand grows: Cambrex Bio Science, a contract
manufacturer, has outgrown its Lombard Street plant.; 3. BioReliance, which
tests smallpox vaccines, recently built a multimillion-dollar plant.; 1. SUN
STAFF : 2000; 3. SUN STAFF : 2002

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1391 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              April 1, 2002 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 251 words

HEADLINE: In Profile

BODY:

   Name: Intradigm Inc.

   Location: Rockville

   Launch: July 2000

   Who's in charge: Martin Woodle, president and chief executive; Patrick Lu,
vice president of genomics; Puthupparampil Scaria, vice president of synthetic
vectors; Casimir Eitner, vice president of business development; David Stricker,
vice president of operations and finance.

    Previous jobs: Woodle previously worked as the director of synthetic gene
vectors at Genetic Therapy Inc., a subsidiary of Novartis AG. Before that he
worked as the director of drug delivery and formulations at Genta Inc. Lu was a
senior scientist and project leader at Digene Corp. Scaria was a senior
scientist at Genetic Therapy.

    Employees: 11

    Funding: The company raised more than $ 1.5 million in seed funding from
Novartis Venture Partners, Maryland's Department of Business and Economic
Development, and Emerging Technology Partners.

    Big plans: The company is working on identifying receptive genes for cancer
treatments and plans to work on finding genes for arthritis treatments.

    Origin of the name: The founders came up with the name Intradigm by
combining the words intracellular and paradigm.

    Key process: Intradigm uses animal disease models in its gene testing, a
process the company's executives said is "very powerful, essentially a rite of
passage for all drug models."

    First customer: DirectGene Inc. In February, Intradigm signed a multiyear
agreement with the Annapolis company to develop new treatments for several
different types of cancer.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2002


                             1392 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 31, 2002, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: Injecting genes into rat brains shows promise for Parkinson's

SOURCE: Orlando Sentinel

BYLINE: ROBYN SURIANO

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   ORLANDO, Fla. - University of Florida scientists say they successfully have
injected genes into rats' brains to reduce or even reverse symptoms of
Parkinson's disease in the animals.

   Although it's still years away from testing in humans, the approach someday
may help Parkinson's patients who no longer respond to available medications.
The genes stimulate the brain to make dopamine, a chemical that is deficient in
people who suffer from the debilitating condition.

   "This is not a cure, but I would expect this treatment to allow somebody to
have a good quality of life for one to five more years than what they can
expect" with current drugs, Ronald Mandel, a Florida neuroscience professor and
researcher, said Wednesday.

   Researchers say there is a tremendous need for more treatment options.
Parkinson's disease affects about 1 million Americans, progressively killing the
cells in their brains that produce dopamine. Without the chemical, the person's
movements become slowed, choppy or unpredictable.

   Nothing can stop the destruction of the brain cells as yet, but medications
can slow down the process. The medicine tends to work for three to five years,
then symptoms become more severe.

   In the experiments, researchers treated the rats with chemicals to kill the
dopamine-producing cells in their brains. Afterward, the rats moved differently
from normal animals, tending to favor one of their front paws over the other
while exploring a container.

   Researchers then injected three genetic components into the animals' brains:
two genes that increase dopamine production and a so-called promoter - a section
of DNA that enhances the expression of the genes.

   Animals that received the gene treatment were observed again while exploring
a container. Mandel said the animals either stopped favoring one paw entirely or
cut back on it. In subsequent autopsies, researchers also found an increase in
dopamine in the animals' brains.

   "It's a very big step in the sense that this has been a considered a possible
theory for a long time, but there was serious debate as to whether we could ever
get it to work, and finally everything came into place," said Nicholas Muzyczka
with University of Florida's Genetics Institute.

   Muzyczka helped develop the virus that was used to deliver the genetic
components into the brain cells. Mandel carried out the work with rats in Sweden
in 1998 along with colleagues at Lund University.

   One large hurdle remains, however, before the treatment can be tested in
people. The gene therapy increases dopamine production continuously, which can
cause side effects.

   "Basically we've turned the control switch on, and it's on at a very high
level," Muzyczka said. "When we get into humans, we need to be able to turn it
off and on."

   The research will be published in The Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.


LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2002


                             1393 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       March 31, 2002 Sunday, Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1588 words

HEADLINE: Thinking small may pay off big 'Compacted DNA' gene therapy test to
begin

BYLINE: John Mangels, Plain Dealer Science Writer

BODY:

   On Tuesday morning, if all goes well, a lanky 33-year-old medical pioneer
named Robert Calhoun will walk down a pastel hallway and into an isolation room
on the seventh floor of Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital.

   He will lie down on his right side and settle in. Dr. Michael Konstan will
start up a bedside pump primed with half a teaspoonful of a clear, watery
liquid.

   Slowly, over the next 40 minutes, the results of a decade of academic
research, the future of a small Cleveland biotech company and the hopes of
thousands of cystic fibrosis patients will drip, drip, drip through a plastic
tube into Calhoun's nose.

   The experiment marks the Cleveland debut of gene therapy meant to correct a
genetic disease, in this case cystic fibrosis. And it will be the first time any
human has tested a clever new delivery method that local researchers came up
with to slip the gene fix past the body's formidable defenses.

   The fluid trickling into Calhoun's nostrils will carry working versions of
the faulty genes he was born with - genes that are supposed to prevent the
buildup of the thick, sticky mucus that clogs his lungs and threatens to kill
him.

   The experiment is not intended as a treatment for Calhoun and the 11 other
participants. At this early stage, the small doses they receive are intended
only to help researchers judge whether the new gene-transport technique is safe
in humans, whether it puts the genes where they're needed, and whether they work
once in place.

   "Nobody in this trial will be cured," said Dr. Pamela Davis. She is chief of
Rainbow's division of pediatric pulmonary disease and director of the Cystic
Fibrosis Research Center at University Hospitals and Case Western Reserve
University. "We'll learn a great deal. It's essential, but it's a baby step."

   Success could mean a giant leap for tiny 11-employee Copernicus Therapeutics
Inc., which makes gene therapy products. It could also help Cleveland's
fledgling biotechnology industry, which badly needs to expand its single-digit
roster of winners.

   If the new gene therapy approach proves itself over several years of human
testing and refinement, it should attract more investors and allow the privately
held Copernicus to tap the $1 billion-plus potential market for cystic fibrosis
drugs. Failure would force the company to rethink its business strategy and
could be a crippling blow.

   "We're nervous," said Dr. Mark Cooper, Copernicus' senior vice president of
science and medical affairs, "but we've got a feeling of confidence."

   Those with the most at stake are cystic fibrosis patients. With the advent of
new drug treatments, CF was no longer a childhood killer. Most now survive into
their 30s and beyond.

   But the upward curve of progress has flattened into a frustrating plateau of
late. The bacteria that thrive in patients' mucus-choked airways have a knack
for developing resistance to antibiotics. And the best of the existing therapies
still treat only CF's symptoms, not its cause.

   "I'm at the point in my life where I'm starting to run out of drugs that
work," said Calhoun, a married metallurgist and software entrepreneur from
Oberlin. "I'm pretty sure I can keep my health on track for another five years.
It's hard to see me being alive in 20 years with no change in treatment."

   Gene therapy sounded like that breakthrough when it burst onto the medical
scene in 1990, helped along by a huge amount of media hype. Its concept was
alluringly simple. Genes are the software in each cell that dictate the
production of proteins, the workhorses of the body. If a gene is missing or
broken, dropping in a new one should solve the problem, like replacing a light
bulb.

   Researchers cringe at such analogies, because they grossly understate how
complicated it is to make genetic fixes. Getting genes where they need to be, in
the fortified nucleus of each of millions of malfunctioning cells, is hard
enough. The corrected genes have to be plugged into the right place in the
chromosomes, and turn on and off at the right times.

   A single gene is faulty in CF, and it resides in the epithelial cells that
line the breathing passages and digestive tract.

   The flawed CF gene is supposed to control a biological conveyor belt that
moves vital chemicals in and out of epithelial cells. In CF patients, the
conveyer belt is either missing or broken, allowing chloride to build up instead
of being shipped out.

   When the backlog of chloride inevitably mixes with sodium to form salt, the
thirsty cells try to compensate by pulling in water from their surroundings.
It's sucked from the protective mucus that lines airways and intestines, leaving
it thickened and sticky. In the airways, the mucus makes it hard to breathe and
traps bacteria that cause repeated infections, damaging the lungs with friendly
fire as the immune system fights back.

   Soon after researchers found and decoded the CF gene in 1989, they began to
look at ways it might be fixed. But how to get the correction into the airway
cells? The scientists needed what they call a vector. It had to be a perfect cat
burglar - brawny, to lug the bulky corrected gene; stealthy, to sneak it past
the cell's security fences; and with a good sense of direction to get the gene
to the right spot.

   The first attempts, beginning in 1993, harnessed natural cell-invaders called
adenoviruses, the villains behind the common cold. Even though the adenoviruses
had been engineered to blunt harmful effects, human testing showed they still
tripped the body's alarms, launching an inflammatory response that was the last
thing CF patients needed, since their lungs were already seared by infections.

   Researchers tried more benign vectors called adeno-associated viruses (AAVs),
but they posed their own problems. Although stealthier, AAVs were wimpy; they
could barely carry the corrected CF gene, much less the biological equipment
needed to get it up and running.

   Scientists at the Rainbow Cystic Fibrosis Center, where children and adults
are treated, have been skeptical of the viral approach. "We've always taken the
stance that viral vectors in general are not suitable for the lungs of CF
patients," said Konstan, the center's director.

   A discovery by CWRU biochemist Richard Hanson showed great promise. Hanson
figured how to reduce the size of DNA, the twisting, ladderlike strands of
chemicals that make up genes. By neutralizing the negative electrical charge DNA
carries, Hanson could squeeze together a segment whose components otherwise
would repel each other. It was like coiling a spring.

   Using "DNA compaction," as the method is called, the corrected CF gene could
be made small enough to get into a cell and its nucleus without the help of a
virus. Where viruses picked the cell's locks, compacted DNA could slip through a
hole.

   "This is one very exciting approach," said Robert Beall, president of the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "This is early science. [But] the whole area of gene
therapy is not whether it works, but when."

   Copernicus, whose co-founders include Hanson and Davis, licensed the
technology and set about to improve it in hopes of making a commercial CF gene
therapy drug. Led by Cooper, the biotech firm improved the compaction technique,
and came up with the right combination of shielding to protect the gene on its
journey and supporters to help it work properly.

   To avoid a conflict of interest, Davis and others who have a stake in
Copernicus won't be involved in the human testing; Konstan will direct it.

   Several monitoring groups - from the hospitals, the CF Foundation and the
government - will watch for any unexpected or harmful effects, which could halt
the trial. Calhoun will stay in the hospital overnight, then return regularly
for follow-up tests.

   Davis, who has done testing of the compacted DNA method on mice, said it
seems to barely tickle the immune system - it's not invisible, but appears to
provoke much less reaction than other methods. Its efficiency at getting the
gene fix in place should allow a smaller dose.

   "We should be working under the radar screen here," she said. "But a mouse is
not a man. People may have evolved another defense mechanism." That's the point
of human testing.

   Limiting the first round of testing to small doses delivered only to cells in
the nose should further reduce risks, Konstan said. Also, since epithelial cells
in the airways slough off and die in a week, any unintended harm from the gene
fix won't be permanent. But that also means that if the fix works, it will have
to be regularly reapplied. An aerosol inhaler like those asthma patients use
might do the trick, Cooper said.

   But all that must wait for the outcome of the tests. Results won't be
revealed until the trial ends this summer.

   Researchers like Konstan and test subjects like Calhoun, who have been
through clinical trials before, know the drill: some risk, and no immediate
benefit.

   "This is not going to be a therapy in two years," Konstan said. "We're
hopeful it will happen in the lifetime of some of our patients."

   That payoff makes the gamble worthwhile, Calhoun said.

   "There's a huge number of doctors who work on CF," he said. "A huge number of
people raise money. You really couldn't ask for more. All these smart people are
working to make me better, to make me live longer. Taking some risks, signing up
for a study - it's the least I can do."

   GRAPHIC by STEPHEN J. BEARD / THE PLAIN DEALER

   Gene therapy technique tested

   (SOURCE:  Copernicus Therapeutics Inc.)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2002


                             1394 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     March 27, 2002 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS in Brief

BODY:

   Investors punish

   MRO Software

   Shares of MRO Software Inc., of Bedford, fell 43 percent after it lowered its
forecast for fiscal 2002 earnings yesterday, saying sales of its management
software were weaker than expected in the second quarter. MRO fell $ 9.20, to $
11.98, in trading of 8.6 million, more than 24 times the three -month daily
average. They have risen 42 percent in the past year.  - BLOOMBERG

   No raise for Reebok chief

   Paul B. Fireman, chairman and chief executive at Reebok International Ltd.,
received a salary and bonus of $ 3.08 million in 2001, unchanged from 2000,
according to a government filing yesterday. Reebok didn't grant Fireman any
stock options in 2001, after granting him 2million stock options in 2000. - DOW

   Enron teaches lesson

   NEW YORK  - Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said that corporate
behavior has improved since the Enron Corp. scandal broke and warned against
looking to excessive regulation for answers, in a speech yesterday at New York
University. - REUTERS

   Nstar's rate cut approved

   The Department of Telecommunications and Engergy approved Nstar's request for
an electricity cut for its 760,000 standard offer customers, those who haven't
switched to another provider since the market was deregulated. A typical
residential customer will see a $ 7 -a -month drop in their bills. - STAFF

   FDA OKs repair patch

   Organogenesis Inc. announced yesterday that the Food and Drug Administration
approved its rotator cuff repair patch. The product, a bioengineered collagen
matrix, will be sold by Biomet Inc. - STAFF

   TKT can sell Dynepo

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. announced yesterday that it won approval to sell
its Dynepo anemia treatment in Europe. Plans to market the product will be
blocked, however, by the Cambridge company's patent dispute with Amgen Inc.

   - STAFF

   Hub index increases

   Job increases in higher education and health care helped boost the Greater
Boston Chamber of Commerce leading indicators index in February, the group said
yesterday. The index, which tracks job growth in five key industries, inccreased
to 107, compared with 106.3 in January and 106.8 in December. - STAFF

   Consumers gain confidence

   NEW YORK  - Consumer confidence surged in March to its highest level since
Sept. 11, and orders to U.S. factories for big -ticket goods rose for the third
straight month, offering more evidence that the economy is bouncing back. - AP

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2002


                             1395 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 27, 2002, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: IN THE PIPELINE;
MEDICINES CO. SAYS IT WILL STOP DEVELOPMENT OF ITS CTV-05

BYLINE: BY NAOMI AOKI AND GLOBE WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   The Medicines Co. said its drug, CTV-05, didn't improve treatment of
bacterial vaginosis in a study of 400 women with the common vaginal infection.
The drug boosted levels of so-called good bacteria in about 62 percent of women
in the study.

   But the higher levels of helpful bacteria did not improve the chance of
curing the infection. The Cambridge company said it plans to stop development of
the drug. The news was released after the close of trading and had little effect
on the company's stock price, which yesterday fell 1 cent to $13.20 on the
Nasdaq Stock Market.

    TKT ANEMIA DRUG OK'D IN EUROPE BUT PATENT DISPUTE BLOCKS SALES

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said its anemia drug, Dynepo, has been approved
in Europe, though a patent dispute with California's Amgen Inc. effectively
blocks any plans to begin selling the drug.

   US and UK courts last year ruled that the Cambridge-based Transkaryotic
Therapies and its French partner Aventis SA infringed on Amgen's patents for its
multibillion-dollar anemia drug, Epogen. TKT and Aventis are appealing the
rulings and expect decisions by next year.

   If the legal dispute is resolved in TKT's favor, the approval would allow the
company to sell Dynepo in the 15 countries of the European Union. Shares of TKT
fell 16 cents yesterday to $42.56 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.  ORGANOGENESIS
GETS APPROVAL ON ROTATOR CUFF REPAIR PATCH

   Organogenesis Inc. said its rotator cuff repair patch was approved by US
regulators to help surgeons repair and reinforce damaged tissues. The product is
the first the Canton company has developed under its collaboration with
Indiana-based Biomet Inc., which will begin marketing the product later this
year.

   Under the terms of the agreement, Organogenesis will receive a transfer price
based on a percentage of the product's selling price. Shares of the Canton
company rose 7 cents to $1.64 on the American Stock Exchange.  GENOME
THERAPEUTICS CITES PROGESS ON ANTI-ULCER DRUGS

   Genome Therapeutics Corp. said it has identified a set of chemical compounds
with the potential to become anti-ulcer drugs. The research is part of a $23
million alliance with Swiss drugmaker AstraZeneca struck in 1995 to develop
drugs to prevent and treat ulcers based on insights gained from sequencing the
genome of H. pylori, a bacteria associated with ulcers and certain stomach
cancers. Worldwide, $7 billion is spent each year on treating ulcers.

   Under the terms of the alliance, Genome Therapeutics has received $14 million
to date in funding and payments. Shares of the Waltham company rose 5 cents to
$5.80 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.  GENAISSANCE IDS GENETIC MARKERS IN
CHOLESTEROL-DRUG STUDY

   Genaissance Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it has identified certain genetic
markers that influence a person's response to cholesterol-lowering drugs such as
Lipitor, Zocor, and Pravachol.

   The findings come from a preliminary analysis of the Connecticut company's
STRENGTH I study, in which 100 genes were studied to discover whether they could
be used to predict how effective the cholesterol-lowering drugs would be in
individual patients.

   The hope is that by understanding how genetic variations affect a person's
response to the drugs, doctors will be able to better identify which drugs to
subscribe to which patients and improve treatment.  DYAX LICENSES PROTEIN
TECHNOLOGY FROM CENTER FOR BLOOD RESEARCH

   The Center for Blood Research said it has licensed a new protein technology
to Dyax Corp. as part of an alliance to develop treatments for autoimmune and
inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and irritable
bowel syndrome.

   The Boston research organization and the Cambridge company said the
collaboration would allow them to translate the promise of basic research into
therapies for patients.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2002


                             1396 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 26, 2002, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1548 words

HEADLINE: Dream lives despite disease

BYLINE: Harry Blauvelt

DATELINE: BRANSON, Mo.

BODY:
BRANSON, Mo. -- Golfer Jeff Julian sits at the kitchen table in his red brick
house, watching a clear liquid drip into his arm from an IV bag hanging on an
overhead light. It's treatment for the deadly disease attacking his body.

   Julian's yellow Labrador retrievers, Max and Peyton, race through the house
vying for attention while the journeyman pro discusses his battle for survival.

   He finds refuge on the course. He feels normal there.


   "I want to play golf as well as I can for as long as I can," says Julian, who
will tee it up in the PGA Tour's BellSouth Classic starting April 4. "I can
still play good for stretches."

   Julian, 40, is stricken with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's
disease, named for the Yankees Hall of Fame first baseman who died from ALS in
1941. Julian was diagnosed with the fatal neurodegenerative disease Oct. 8 at
Johns Hopkins in Baltimore. There is no cure.

   "I feel lucky," says Julian, whose speech is slurred by the disease affecting
muscles in his tongue, jaw and neck. "I envision good things from this. I enjoy
every day more. We have bad days, sure, but you see the good in people."

   Julian has to pace himself. If he overexerts, his muscles can fatigue, and
sometimes they'll twitch.

   On the golf course, he tires more easily at the end of rounds and the
conclusion of tournaments. He's not as strong coming out of the rough. He has an
endorsement deal with Callaway, which made him clubs with lighter shafts.

   "I can hit a ball as far as ever," he says. "But I can't pound balls and hit
and hit. I get arm weary. I'm just trying to stay within myself."

   Julian attracted national attention when he played the AT&T Pebble Beach
National Pro-Am in February on a sponsor's exemption.

   Pard Erdman, a cattle rancher and oilman who lives on Maui, was Julian's
amateur playing partner at Pebble Beach. Erdman asked to play with Julian. "He
wanted to be treated just as a golfer," Erdman recalls. "He knew I knew, but we
talked about golf, not ALS. You take away a real appreciation for how lucky you
are getting to know someone like Jeff."

   When they didn't make the cut, Erdman invited Julian to play storied Cypress
Point. Says Erdman: "You realize how important it is to play it as a game and
play the shots as they come and take what life gives you."

   Julian's caddie that week was longtime pal Scott Peters of Hanover, N.H. "You
can't help but be moved," Peters says. "Jeff has been courageous in coping with
the hand dealt."

   Julian has three exemptions in April, BellSouth, WorldCom Classic and Greater
Greensboro Chrysler Classic, and one in June, the Canon Greater Hartford Open.

   "You don't know how many more chances Jeff is going to have," Greater
Greensboro director Mark Brazil says. "We can all learn something from the way
he's conducting his life."

   Julian can accept up to two more Tour exemptions in 2002. It's not difficult
to tell when he gets one: It's like a shot of adrenaline. "Jeffrey can't speak
when he gets emotional," says his wife, Kimberly, 31. "When I see him coming
with the phone, I know it's something good."

   Playing for the card

   Julian has two full PGA Tour seasons to his credit. He didn't earn enough
money either year to keep his playing card. In 2001, he earned $ 55,132 to rank
211th on the money list. In 1996, he earned $ 55,602 (193rd).

   He talks about going back to Qualifying School to try and earn his PGA Tour
playing card for 2003, "Unless we win a few. I need to get my butt in gear and
avoid Q School with these chances I have. My game feels good."

   His resume includes the Nike Tour, where he won the 1997 Dominion Open. He's
played the Buy.com Tour. He's been an assistant pro, anything to stay in golf.
He helped support himself as a bartender in the '80s.

   "I was great," he says. Quips Kimberly, "Like Tom Cruise in Cocktail, right?"


   The two hold hands, touch and kiss constantly, underscoring this isn't only a
battle for survival, it's an uplifting love story.

   They met Aug. 12, 2000, at a party in Springfield, Mo., the Saturday of the
Ozarks Open, a Buy.com Tour event. Julian learned that day his mother had died
of a heart attack. He couldn't get a flight to the family home in Norwich, Vt.,
until the next day. So he went to the party.

   "It was instant attraction," she says. "I had my guard up, but it was hard to
resist him."

   They got engaged Oct. 27, 2000, in Norwich. Jeff proposed in the hayloft of
the barn at the family farm. They had wine, cheese and a spectacular sunset as
backdrop. "It was a proposal every girl dreams of," Kimberly says.

   That November, as they stood beside a waterfall near her hometown of Branson,
Kimberly gave Jeff a ring engraved in Hebrew: "I am to my beloved as my beloved
is to me."

   They were married Feb. 15, 2001, by a justice of the peace beside his
mother's grave.

   Getting on with life

   Each has a young son from a previous marriage. Kim's is Tyler, 9, who lives
with the couple in Branson. Jeff's son, Keegan, 11, lives with his mother in
Vermont.

   "We're so in love," Kimberly says.

   Despite their misfortune with ALS, Kimberly won't ask "why us?"

   "There are so many horrible people in the world," she says. "But if I say
'why us?' then I'm wishing this on someone else. And I wouldn't wish this on
anyone." Well-wishers the world over have responded to Julian's plight.

   Arizona Diamondbacks pitcher Curt Schilling, a national spokesman for ALS,
sent Julian two e-mails. He told Julian he was in his thoughts and prayers. "I'm
beside myself at the thought of some day meeting Jeff and playing a round of
golf with him," Schilling says.

   Schilling and his wife, Shonda, raise money for The ALS Association and
donate money, too. They named their first child Gehrig. "That Jeff is playing on
the Tour is nothing short of mind-boggling," Schilling says. "Fine motor skills
are as important in golf as any sport."

   The first symptoms Julian had last June were difficulty swallowing and a
hacking cough. He noticed a lot of saliva settling in his mouth. He thought he
might have a sinus condition. As symptoms progressed, he worried his problem
might be a brain tumor.

   "The disease slowly progresses to cause loss of strength, impairing the
ability to locomote, swallow and breathe," Jeffrey Rothstein of Johns Hopkins
says. "Eventually, respiratory failure and death."

   To keep himself as healthy as possible, Julian pursues chelation therapy, an
alternative treatment to mainstream medicine. That's when he sits at the kitchen
table and watches as either vitamin C or glutathione flows into his arm.

   Kimberly administers the therapy designed to eliminate toxic metals,
especially mercury, from his tissues. The idea is the intravenous fluids will
bind with the toxic metals, which are eliminated through the kidneys. Kimberly
says mercury toxicity can mimic ALS symptoms.

   Julian also takes 42 pills a day, vitamins and minerals, that Kimberly has
arranged in small, labeled compartments in what looks like a fisherman's tackle
box -- but the size of a briefcase. The anti-inflammatory Celebrex is the only
prescription drug Julian takes. He doesn't use Rilutek, the one FDA-approved
medication for ALS.

   "Rilutek is not natural, and there are side effects," says Kimberly, adding
"you don't want to fix one problem and create another."

   Julian works diligently with chiropractor Joe Lennon once a week when he's at
home in Branson. "I try to make sure his muscles are as balanced as possible,"
Lennon says.

   The sessions temporarily can help Julian's speech improve, sometimes for two
or three days. Julian will hum, sing and make chewing motions to work specific
muscles.

   If he reaches the point he can't play golf, Julian says his next endeavor
might be to open a restaurant in Branson, a tourist town near the Arkansas
border. "We'll call it 'Julian's,' " he says, grinning. "How's that for
originality?"

   For now, golf is his elixir.

   "I'm playing PGA Tour events," he says. "I can't wait to get my game ready
and go play again. I feel good. I'm still living my dream."


   Facts on Lou Gehrig's disease

   Lou Gehrig's disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal,
neurodegenerative disease attacking nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord.
Patients lose voluntary muscle control and the ability to move, swallow and
breathe. Patients in later stages are totally paralyzed, yet in most cases their
minds are unaffected.

   Cause: Unknown. Cure: None.

   Life expectancy: Average 2-5 years from diagnosis. Half live at least three
years; 20% live five years or more; up to 10% live more than 10 years.

   New cases: An average of 15 people a day and more than 5,600 a year. As many
as 30,000 Americans have ALS.

   Treatment: Rilutek, which can slow the progression of the disease, is the
only drug approved by the Federal Drug Administration.

   Prospects: Eleven clinical trials are ongoing involving drugs and/or
compounds to slow ALS progression; stem cell research offers long-term hope; new
pharmaceutical cocktails might help; gene therapy could slow progression.

   Website: www.alsa.org

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Nick Wass, AP; PHOTO, B/W, Ryan Hasler for USA TODAY;
Still in there swinging: Jeff Julian has ALS but says, I can still play good for
stretches." Love: "I had my guard up at first, but it was hard to resist him,"
Kimberly Julian says.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2002


                             1397 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 25, 2002, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 532 words

HEADLINE: ADVANCES IN SCIENCE BENEFITING PETS VETS DISCUSS BREAKTHROUGHS

BYLINE: By Peter DeMarco, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   You can, indeed, teach an old dog new tricks - so long as he chomps down some
antioxidant dog food first.

   That's one message hundreds of veterinarians from across the country are
hearing this week in Boston at seminars ranging from reptile anesthesia to
doggie anxiety to cat diabetes. The just-for-vets convention sponsored by the
American Animal Hospital Association is at the Hynes Veterans Memorial
Convention Center.

      As with their human owners, pets are living longer and healthier lives
because of new drugs, medical procedures, and high-tech tools, said doctors at
the show. In fact, as Toronto veterinarian Dr. Walter Ingwersen put it, "There
has never been a better time to be an animal."

   Some of the best news for dog owners concerns a new treatment for pet
senility that comes in the form of dog food high in anti oxidants.

   According to research by Hill's Pet Nutrition Inc., the company that is
marketing the dog food "B.D." (the letters stand for "brain diet"), dogs
suffering from "senior moments" who eat the product develop better recall skills
within weeks. For example, older dogs who have forgotten their house-training
skills have rediscovered them, according to studies.

   Improved diets, specialists said, are the key to solving several pet
ailments, particularly kidney disease, and may even help pets better recover
from cancer treatments. Local veterinarians probably don't yet use gene therapy,
i.e. genetically-altering tissues, as a treatment now but they might within
several years, some predicted.

   "There will come a time when if a veterinarian does not have a laser for
surgery in his practice, he will not be doing his best to treat his patients.
And that time's not a huge way off," said Colorado veterinarian Dr. Robin
Downing, author of "Pets Living with Cancer."

   Veterinarians have also been making great strides in treating arthritic pain
common in many larger dogs with drug cocktails, such as a combination of Rimadyl
or Etogesic and glucosamine to reduce inflammation and rebuild cartilage. And
painkillers are being administered through patches, much like the ones people
trying to quit smoking wear, affixed after surgery to dogs and cats' shaved
skin.

   Veterinarian Dr. Hazel Holman, who owns a private practice in Blandford, said
she learned for the first time yesterday that she can send her patients' MRI
images over the Internet for specialists to read.

   Supporters of even less mainstream treatments such as homeopathy,
acupuncture, and chiropractic care, which fall under the category Integrative
Care, were also at the show.

   "These are areas of patient care that we're engaging in because people have
asked for them," said Downing. "People who have had their spines adjusted at the
chiropractor have naturally asked, 'Can my pet benefit from this as well?' "

   Downing said they can, although veterinary schools rarely, if ever, offer
courses in such treatments.

   For pet owners concerned with paying for more advanced care, health insurance
programs for pets, with monthly fees of $10 to $50, could become more of a
necessity than a curious fad. But, doctors joked, don't expect the plans to
cover eyeglasses.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Rosie the terrier tries an air muzzle restraint at the
veterinarians' convention at the Hynes Convention Center. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO /
CHITOSE SUZUKI

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2002


                             1398 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 24, 2002, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1704 words

HEADLINE: PROFITS AND COSTS LUCRATIVE LICENSING DEALS WITH DRUG, BIOTECH FIRMS
ARE RAISING ETHICS ISSUES FOR HOSPITALS

BYLINE: By Liz Kowalczyk, Globe Staff

BODY:

   When Amgen, the world's largest biotechnology company, recently promised to
triple sales of a top-selling arthritis drug called Enbrel, there was a
little-known beneficiary: Massachusetts General Hospital.

   Mass. General AIDS researcher Brian Seed helped discover Enbrel in the late
1980s, and over the next several years the hospital patented and licensed the
drug. It turned out to be a lucrative move: Seed and Mass. General saw more than
$16 million in royalties last year. If sales of the $800 million-a-year
injectable medication rise, so will their share of the profits.

      A decade ago, many academic medical centers shunned profit-making deals
with industry. But Harvard Medical School's major teaching hospitals, hoping to
replicate deals like Enbrel, are aggressively licensing discoveries by their
physicians and researchers to biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies. And
they are grappling with a host of business and ethics issues, including how to
protect patients when hospitals and doctors have a financial stake in the
outcome of their treatment.

   Children's Hospital last year closed 33 deals, up from 13 three years ago,
while royalties and fees doubled from $2.7 million to nearly $6 million.
Partners HealthCare, the parent organization of Mass. General and Brigham and
Women's Hospital, earned $31 million in royalties last year, half from Enbrel, a
sixfold increase since 1998.

   Dr. Edward Benz, president of Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, where the number
of deals has grown 60 percent in the last three years, said "there's been a sea
change nationally" at academic medical centers, in part because of a 1980 law
allowing universities and hospitals to profit from research.

   But at Harvard's teaching hospitals, the shift also has been fueled by
concern that they are not doing enough to leverage the enormous amount of
research money flowing annually into Boston - $1 billion in federal grants.

   Sloan-Kettering Cancer Institute in New York City has one-fifth the research
funding of Partners. But it earned $46 million in licensing fees and royalties
in 2000, mostly from Neupogen, a $1.3 billion-a-year drug licensed to Amgen that
reduces infections caused by chemotherapy.

   The five independent hospitals that receive the most money from the National
Institutes of Health are all Harvard teaching hospitals. Children's Hospital,
which received $110 million in research money last year, is the largest
pediatric scientific enterprise in the world. "We don't want our researchers'
ideas sitting on the shelf," said Bruce Zetter, interim vice president of
research at Children's.

   The push for "technology transfer" at the Harvard hospitals - and at many
academic medical centers - has significant implications for patients, who
benefit from the discovery of more effective medications. Enbrel, for example,
has proved highly effective in helping control pain and limiting damage to
joints in people with rheumatoid arthritis.

   While universities and hospitals have the most extensive basic research
enterprises in the country, they need pharmaceutical companies with deep pockets
to develop and market their discoveries. But in some cases questions have been
raised about whether these relationships have hurt patient care.

   One prominent case was the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old who
was enrolled in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. The
family's lawsuit against the university, which was settled in 2000, alleged that
researchers lost focus on safety partly because the university held equity in
the company developing the drug and the lead doctor held one-third of its
shares. The doctor, James Wilson, eventually cashed in his shares for $13
million, according to the Gelsinger family attorney, Alan Milstein.  The
university said it did not neglect patient safety, but could not comment on
specifics.

   "The rewards in some of these relationships are too great," Milstein said.
"The money from industry is too great. The researcher is supposed to be this
objective, unbiased observer with no interest in the outcome of the experiment."

   Harvard Medical School has some of the strictest conflict-of-interest rules
in the country for individual researchers, forbidding them to hold more than
$20,000 worth of stock in a company for which they perform research. But there
are no systemwide rules for when a hospital holds equity.

   Dana-Farber, Partners and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center do not conduct
clinical trials for companies in which they hold equity, executives said.
Children's Hospital does allow the hospital to participate in clinical trials
under those circumstances, but requires that the hospital's financial stake be
disclosed to patients in the trials. There are no such trials underway at
Children's now.

   Still, the hospitals are debating policies to cover a range of other
situations that could create a conflict of interest or harm patients or the
hospitals' reputations.

   Immunex, which announced in December it was being bought by Amgen, is
aggressively testing Enbrel for a range of other illnesses, including psoriasis.
Mass. General must decide what to do if Amgen asks it to participate in the
clinical trials.

   Since the hospital stands to gain more royalties from the success of such
clinical trials, should it take part?

   Seed began working on methods to fool the HIV virus in the late 1980s at
Mass. General, an investigation that eventually led to Enbrel. He declined to be
interviewed for this story. But hospital executives said his idea was to create
decoy proteins to which the virus would bind, rather than to vital cells in the
body. It quickly became clear that this type of fusion would work across a range
of proteins, and Mass. General licensed the idea of protein fusion in 1997.
Immunex applied the concept to block a protein that causes destruction of the
joints.

   After Immunex and Amgen announced their deal, Amgen chief executive Kevin
Sharer promised to triple the drug's sales, which will mean increasing the sales
force and putting testing in patients with other illnesses on the fast track. So
far, Mass. General has earned $25 million in Enbrel royalties, a quarter of
which goes to Seed.

   Frances Toneguzzo, Mass. General's director for corporate-sponsored research
and licensing, said she believes the hospital could participate in clinical
trials with extra oversight, such as a second investigator to monitor the lead
investigator.

   Children's is discussing whether to sell its equity in 14 companies, worth an
estimated $5 million to $10 million. One of these companies is Entremed, which
paid for experiments in which Dr. Judah Folkman of Children's discovered
Angiostatin - a protein drug designed to cut off the blood supply to malignant
tumors.

   Small biotech companies often are cash poor and can't offer upfront fees to
hospitals in return for intellectual property, so they offer equity instead.
Harvard University has a policy of selling equity at a fixed, predetermined
point - when the company goes public, for example - to avoid the appearance of
playing the market. But Children's did not want to appear to be profiting when
Entremed went public in 1996, Zetter said, so it held onto its stock.

   "We wanted to make sure the research was judged on its own merits and there
was no possibility of someone saying, 'Children's is in this just to make
money,' " Zetter said. "It seemed at the time the simplest thing to do was to
not do anything."

   These quandaries have grown more common since 1980, when Congress passed the
Bayh-Doyle Act, allowing universities and hospitals to patent federally funded
research and license inventions to private companies. The law blurred the line
between academic research and business. Some nonprofit institutions and
companies have benefited enormously from the law. Columbia University, for
example, patented a gene-transfer process in 1983 that 28 companies have used to
make new drugs. It was a significant contributor to the university's $143
million in licensing royalties last year.

   At first, universities with strong engineering programs patented their
discoveries most aggressively. But hospitals have become increasingly
interested, particularly since managed care restricted their income during the
1990s and heated competition for patients fostered a more entrepreneurial
attitude.

   In recent years, the Harvard hospitals have significantly expanded their
technology transfer staffs and their outreach to doctors and researchers who
might have profitable ideas. Children's doubled its staff in the last two years,
recruiting seven PhDs, two MBAs, and three lawyers. Partners doubled its staff
working with industry to 30 since the late 1990s. Tufts-New England Medical
Center, which has 30 active licenses and $1.1 million in annual royalties, also
plans to expand.

   Dr. David Blumenthal, a Harvard professor and director of Mass. General's
Institute for Health Policy, said that even though hospitals have had a growing
interest in licensing discoveries, most do not make money. Successful
universities and academic medical centers usually stumbled upon a single
blockbuster, such as Sloan-Kettering's Neupogen.

   "Mostly this has not paid off in a big way," he said. "This is a risky
business and a low probability activity. Most patents aren't licensed and most
licensed patents don't make much money. A university will be very lucky if they
have a big hit. Nevertheless, they continue to pursue it avidly."

   Even if the revenue remains modest, Toneguzzo said that the money is
important to the hospital's research mission. At Mass. General, royalties are
divided into four equal parts - 25 percent each for the inventor, his or her
lab, the department, and the hospital.

   "I don't see this as a revenue stream that will keep the hospital afloat,"
she said. "Having said that, it's very important money because it comes with no
strings attached. So it lets our researchers try out new things that they
normally can't get funding for."

   Liz Kowalczyk can be reached by e-mail at kowalczyk@globe.com.  SIDEBAR:
PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, CORBIS

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2002


                             1399 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                   March 24, 2002 Sunday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS - INSIGHT; Pg. 04D

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: DON'T EXPECT GENETIC MIRACLES, VETERAN SCHOLAR SAYS

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:

   "Oh, you're a biologist," bubbled the 7year-old upon meeting Ruth Hubbard.
"Do you clone?"

   Out of the mouths of babes comes evidence of our utter preoccupation with
genetics, says Hubbard. It's a condition one of her colleagues calls
"gene-o-mania."

   As might be expected from the author of Exploding the Gene Myth, Hubbard is a
skeptic when it comes to the promise of all things gene: gene therapy, genetic
engineering, the Human Genome project. Interviewed after an appearance at Ohio
State University last week, the professor emerita from Harvard University
dismissed most of this excitement as hype.

   "We're a society who wants to try this and that until something goes wrong,
and then we sue," she said. "And with this, a lot of things will go wrong."

   Hubbard, 78, for two decades has been a warrior in the fight against
discrimination against women on the basis of their biology. Her visit was
sponsored by the Association for Women in Science in Central Ohio.

   As a board member of the Massachusetts-based Council for Responsible Genetics
(www.gene-watch.org), she also has lectured widely on the need for a balanced
view of the science.

   Scientists are promoting genetics because that's where the money is, in terms
of research grants and business opportunities, she said. The multibillion-dollar
Human Genome Project could produce useful information, she said, but the public
would benefit more if that money went instead to improving underfunded
public-health programs.

   People need to understand that genes are just part of a complex biological
system that determines our attributes and health, she said. "Genes don't
function one by one. It's the interaction of genes and proteins and water and
salts and all sorts of hormones, vitamins and molecules" that make things
happen.

   Gene therapy is probably the most contentious issue she addresses, because
the hope is that genetic repair or replacement will correct many conditions or
head off hereditary diseases in the womb.

   "We need to learn to accept diversity and do the best we can with what we've
got in terms of making peoples' lives better," she said. "We are not going to
eliminate disabilities and disease. But now, if (gene therapy) can be done
without too profound an intervention, then yes, do it. But the question is what
are you ready to do? The problem is that if you try and change genes, you never
know what exactly you're doing."

   This sort of argument ignores reality, said OSU embryologist Michael
Weinstein, who joined Hubbard during a Tuesday- evening panel discussion on the
campus.

   "There are cases where families are destroyed by having children with
horrible diseases, and if we can avoid that, we should," he said. "Anybody, if
they have a choice between a healthy baby and a baby with a genetic disease,
would want the healthy baby."

   Weinstein, an assistant professor in the Division of Human Cancer Genetics,
said he sees no point in human cloning or trying to genetically design perfect
people.

   Using a person's own cells to clone specific replacement organs might be
useful some day, he said, but that technology doesn't yet exist.

   Gene therapy as practiced today, however, isn't engineering a new human being
but simply using gene-based drugs to correct genetic deficiencies that
contribute to disease.

   "If you have a child that is going to suffer from genetic disease, there will
be a cost, you can't get around it," he said. "But as a society, it will cost us
less to diagnose these things in fetuses than to treat them in adults."

   Weinstein, 39, thinks Hubbard's aversion to the business side of genetics
reflects the outdated views of her generation of scientists.

   "If an inventor can invent something, I don't see why the inventor shouldn't
gain," he said. "We should reward creativity and invention and success. It used
to be the only reward (in science) was recognition by one's peers."

   dlore@dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: Photo, Tom Dodge / Dispatch,, Ruth Hubbard, at Ohio State University's
Fawcett Center

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2002


                             1400 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             March 24, 2002 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1506 words

HEADLINE: Sam Waksal's Other Biotech Imbroglio;
Research: A legal battle pits the chief executive of ImClone against the founder
of a firm he took over four years ago.

BYLINE: DENISE GELLENE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Prototek Corp. was on the brink of insolvency when businessman Samuel D.
Waksal scooped it up it in a 1998 stock swap. The tiny biotechnology company had
a stockpile of molecules that showed promise against malaria and other diseases,
but no approved drugs.

   Four years later, the deal that gave Waksal control of Prototek is a bust.
The company's most advanced project, a malaria treatment developed with an
$822,000 government grant, cured the disease in mice but also caused them to
bleed to death.

   "It was a toxic product," said Dr. Sidney L. Goldfischer, a retired academic
and consultant who oversees the company on Waksal's behalf. Other compounds
developed under the grant face years of testing, he said.

   Goldfischer said Prototek "was a terrible investment, an unwise investment."

   Waksal's problems at Prototek, based in Dublin, Calif., are minor compared
with the blowup at ImClone Systems Inc., where he is chief executive. ImClone is
under congressional investigation for allegedly misleading investors about a
cancer drug that has run into costly delays. Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., a large
ImClone shareholder, briefly tried to force Waksal out while the companies work
out problems with the drug. This month, Bristol-Myers received more favorable
terms on its $1.9-billion commitment to ImClone.

   The Prototek saga, unfolding in lawsuits in Alameda County Superior Court,
pits Waksal against the enigmatic scientist who founded the company. In the
middle are investors, among them wealthy members of a Menlo Park country club
who acted on a tip from a former golf pro.

   Months after the National Institutes of Health's malaria grant ended,
Prototek dismissed Robert E. Smith, the scientist who started the company and
sold out to Waksal. Smith claims in a lawsuit that the company fired him rather
than honor promises Waksal made to him, including a commitment to fund a
pathology chair in Smith's name at UC San Francisco.

   Prototek, in a countersuit, has accused Smith, 71, of stealing secrets from
the company.

   Prototek and Smith deny the allegations against them.

   Shareholders say they haven't received a financial statement since Waksal
took over, a possible breach of California securities laws. Two investment funds
are suing Prototek, accusing the company of stiffing them on unspecified royalty
payments and a loan balance of less than $5,000. Frank Kohles, a general partner
of the funds, said Prototek is offering stock, which he believes is of little
value.

   "I won't live long enough to see a return on this," said Kohles, a retired
real estate investor in Roseville, Calif. In a separate suit, Kohles is trying
to recover an $85,000 consulting fee.

   In 1989 Prototek Was Poised for Success

   In court documents, Prototek claims it owes the investment funds and Kohles
nothing, but Goldfischer confirmed that the company is in settlement talks with
the parties.

   Waksal didn't respond to a request for comment.

   No one seems to have made money on Prototek, which at its height in 1990 had
36 employees. Under Smith, a talented biologist with admittedly weak management
skills, the company built a portfolio of 11 patents and isolated a trove of
protease inhibitors, enzymes that block cell growth. As of mid-2000, six of the
inhibitors showed promise in the laboratory against malaria. Among them was the
inhibitor that induced a kind of hemophilia, causing mice to bleed, Smth said.

   Prototek appeared poised for success in 1989, when, according to company
documents, it entered a collaboration with Marion Laboratories, now part of
Aventis. Marion invested $5.25 million in Prototek and a protease inhibitor
targeting rheumatoid arthritis. The experimental drug showed "astonishing
efficacy" in rats, according to a recent article in the chemistry journal Acta
Histochemica.

   Marion gave the drug to four arthritic dogs with disastrous results. Two dogs
died within 18 hours; tests showed the chemical caused heart, liver and kidney
damage. Marion withdrew funding, and by 1991 Prototek was down to four
employees.

   Such setbacks aren't unusual in the biotech industry, but they are a
challenge for small companies funded by private individuals.

   By 1996, shareholders had lost patience with losses at Prototek. A group of
them, including golfers from the Sharon Heights Country Club, lent Prototek
$100,000 and told Smith to find a buyer, said Ken Anderson, a retired dentist.
The lenders took Prototek's patents as collateral, he said.

   The investors' frustration subsequently rose when a prospective buyer they
had recruited walked away. Biotechnology entrepreneur Robert F. Butz, intrigued
by Prototek's research, had lined up investors willing to put $5 million into
the company. But his group insisted that Smith, then president, leave the
company.

   Butz said Prototek had isolated as many as 100 protease inhibitors that were
protected by company patents, but the company functioned as little more than a
scientific boutique. Smith had "lots and lots of molecules, but not a clue on
how to take them into the clinic," Butz said.

   Smith retorts that Butz, who went on to launch a gene therapy company,
"didn't have the cash" to bail out Prototek.

   Shareholders privately became concerned that Smith wouldn't step aside. A
1990 report on Prototek by consulting firm Sage Group called Smith an
"instinctive scientist ... ineffective in business affairs" who "should be
insulated from business activities."

   But Smith, who with his wife held a 52% stake in Prototek, controlled the
firm.

   Meanwhile, the company's finances continued to deteriorate. According to an
internal memo, Prototek had "no funds to pay overdue accounts payable [and] to
fully fund continuing operations."

   Behind the scenes, Goldfischer, a scientific advisor to Smith at Prototek,
told Waksal about the company. Goldfischer had Waksal's ear; his son, Dr. Carl
Goldfischer, worked for Waksal as ImClone's chief financial officer.

   "I told him the science was interesting," said Sidney Goldfischer, professor
emeritus at New York's Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

   Waksal negotiated a deal that, on the surface, gave everyone what they
wanted. The company got new management--Waksal became chief executive--and an
infusion of cash to pay some bills.

   Smith gave up a management title, but received $200,000 a year in consulting
fees and an invitation to stick around as an advisor. Waksal told Smith in a
1997 letter that his continued involvement in the company was "a major
requirement" to the deal.

   "It is important that you, Robert, stay involved as a member of both the
scientific advisory board and a close consultant to the company in order for us
to feel comfortable about moving forward," Waksal wrote.

   Smith said he regrets listening to Goldfischer--"a friend of 30 years"--about
Waksal. "It is loyalty versus money," he said.

   During negotiations, Smith said, Waksal promised him "more money than you'll
ever need.... You'll never want for research funds again." Instead, "he has not
paid Prototek's [pre-acquisition] bills," Smith said.

   Smith shouldn't complain, Goldfischer said. For years, a second company owned
by Smith and his wife, Judith Kinder Smith, sold a product under license from
Prototek. Enzyme Systems Products posts about $1.2 million in annual sales on a
chemical product used in laboratory research while Prototek receives royalties
of $60,000, Goldfischer said. (Enzyme Systems and Judith Smith are named as
defendants in Prototek's countersuit against Smith.)

   Prototek Acquisition Gave Waksal Control

   Waksal also structured a deal between companies he controls. As part of the
Prototek transaction, a second company controlled by Waksal licensed a Prototek
patent--the one that covered the failed arthritis drug--in return for stock that
was paid to Prototek shareholders.

   The value of those shares is a mystery to shareholders.

   "We haven't received one iota of information" since Waksal took control of
Prototek, said Anderson, the retired dentist. "I got the feeling it was the
patents he wanted, nothing else."

   California law requires companies with more than 100 shareholders--Prototek
had 113 at the time of the stock swap--to issue annual reports. But stockholders
must sue to enforce the law and violators face a maximum fine of just $1,500.

   Terms of the Prototek acquisition gave Waksal almost complete control of the
company.

   According to a 1998 offering memorandum, Waksal and his investment partner,
New York financier Arthur G. Altschul, control Prototek through a special class
of voting stock.

   When the deal closed, their combined 12.4% of common equity controlled 77.9%
of the votes.

   Other shareholders ended up with less power than before.

   Pistachio grower Samuel Webster, whose family sank $140,000 into Prototek,
isn't happy but he's holding his fire.

   "I'd like to have more information about what is going on.... I want to be
careful about what I say," he said. "I don't count it as an asset on my
financial statement. But, as far as I am concerned, [Waksal] is the last chance
of getting my money back."

GRAPHIC:  ImClone Chief Executive Samuel D. Waksal acquired Prototek in 1998,
becoming CEO of the struggling biotechnology firm. PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated
Press

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2002
