
                             601 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              October 11, 1994, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: Megan O'Connell, 30, Model in TV Commercials, Magazines

BODY:


   Megan O'Connell, 30, who entered an active worldwide modeling career despite
being diagnosed with brain cancer shortly after graduating from college, died
Sunday in her Barrington home.

   Miss O'Connell had been near the top of the waiting list and was scheduled to
enter an experimental brain cancer gene therapy program in a few weeks at Case
Western Research University in Cleveland.

   "She was doing everything possible to hang in there and make it to Case
Western," said her father, Richard O'Connell.

   A film and communications graduate of St. Mary's College of California, Miss
O'Connell's modeling career took her from Chicago to New York, San Francisco and
Milan, Italy. Despite suffering with cancer, her image appeared in national
television commercials and magazines.

   She had appeared in fashion segments of television programs including
ABC-TV's "Good Morning America" and CBS' "This Morning." This year, she had
begun studying acting again at Evanston's Piven Theater.

   Miss O'Connell recently had to stop chemotherapy treatment because it was
beginning to affect her bone marrow adversely, her father said. She had been on
the waiting list for the gene therapy program at Case Western for 18 months. The
program was scheduled to begin in November.

   "She was at the top of the list," her father said.

   Other survivors include her mother, Rita; two sisters, Kate Bozarth and
Tracey Whiting; a brother, Kevin, and grandmother, Eileen O'Connell.

   A mass will be offered at 7 p.m. today in St. Anne's Catholic Church, 120 N.
Ela, Barrington. A private burial service will held in St. Michael the Archangel
Cemetery, Palatine.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1994


                             602 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  October 11, 1994 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCI; Pg. 7F

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: DRUG MAY ALTER BIOCHEMICAL CHANGES CAUSED BY BRAIN INJURY

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Free Press Medical Writer;, The Medical Tribune
contributed to this article.

BODY:

   An experimental drug shows promise in treating some people with the worst
types of closed head injuries, an often devastating condition for which other
treatments have failed to help.

   Of the patients getting the drug in a large study, 55 percent had favorable
outcomes three months later, says Dr. J. Paul Muizelaar, professor of
neurosurgery at the Wayne State University School of Medicine. These people were
able to live independently or return to work and, at most, experienced only
moderate disabilities, such as a limp or diminished vision, he says.

   The patients had entered hospitals in a coma.

   Muizelaar presented the latest findings on the drug last week at the Congress
of Neurological Surgeons in Chicago.

   The drug, a so-called free radical scavenger, was tested at 29 sites,
including WSU, the University of Michigan Medical Center and Butterworth
Hospital in Grand Rapids. WSU and other sites are conducting another, larger
phase of the study.

   The drug appears to alter biochemical changes triggered by brain injury,
Muizelaar says. In these events, toxic molecules called free radicals that
damage brain cells are released, possibly causing long-term behavioral and
learning problems common in head injury victims.

   The drug is given as a single shot within eight hours of an injury.

   The drug didn't work for everyone, Muizelaar says. But there were fewer
deaths, comas and severe disabilities compared to a group receiving only a
placebo, he says.

   Muizelaar says patients have not developed side effects so far. "The drug is
extremely safe," he says. Until it's approved for general use, people can obtain
it only at a site like WSU studying it, he says.

   In the United States, traumatic brain injury is the leading cause of death
and disability in children and young adults. Each year more than 2 million
people experience a head injury. Half the injuries are caused by driving
accidents. Many people can't work or resume normal activities for long periods,
if at all.

   $9.1 million in AIDS grants awarded locally

   Two Detroit hospitals have been awarded major five-year federal AIDS
grants.Henry Ford Hospital will receive $5.2 million, and Wayne State University
and Harper Hospital will receive $3.9 million.

   Their studies were cited for strong emphasis on reaching minority people,
women and intravenous drug users, all of whom increasingly account for greater
numbers HIV and AIDS cases and who have been underrepresented in past studies.

   Dr. Louis Saravolatz at Ford and Dr. Lawrence Crane at Harper are principal
investigators.

   Both medical centers serve large African-American populations. Forty percent
of Ford's AIDS population is African Americans; at WSU, the African- American
enrollment is 55 percent.

   The centers were awarded funds in 1989 from the National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, a leading federal AIDS research agency. The money
provides basic care for AIDS patients and funds key studies to determine if
drugs are safe and effective. One study funded was the federal government's
first study of AIDS-related infections in women, said Constance Rowley, the
registered nurse who directs the WSU project.

   Study holds promise for lung cancer patients

   A study in mice shows that gene therapy can prevent and possibly cure a type
of lung cancer, Texas researchers have found.

   Based on those results, a study to test the therapy in humans has been
approved by a key committee of the National Cancer Institute, but is awaiting
approval by the institute's director.

   Researchers at University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston
zeroed in on a single gene, known as the p53 tumor-suppressor gene, which
normally prevents cells from becoming cancerous. In people who develop lung
cancer, the gene has usually mutated so that it can no longer hold back the
flood of cancerous growth.

   Doctors in Dallas said the study offers "rays of hope" for the more than
100,000 people who die of lung cancer in the United States each year. Another
gene therapy expert, Dr. Kenneth Culver of Iowa Methodist Medical Center in Des
Moines, called the work "encouraging, but not convincing" that a gene therapy
might be developed for lung cancer.

   ***

NOTES: BODY & MIND: YOUR HEALTH

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             603 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     October 11, 1994 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 9E

LENGTH: 475 words

HEADLINE: RUN ON THE DNA BANK

BYLINE: By ROBIN MCKIE and ADAM SAGE; LONDON OBSERVER

DATELINE: PARIS

BODY:

   An international row has broken out over the ownership of a DNA data bank
that could hold the secret for developing treatments for conditions such as
diabetes and obesity.

   The battle - between French and American scientists - has highlighted a
growing international problem: deciding the ownership of DNA.

   Scientists fear private companies are buying the results of publicly funded
research and are privatizing a fundamental feature of the human species.

   "This whole business is going in the wrong direction," said Richard Roberts,
the British geneticist who won last year's Nobel prize for medicine.

   Other recent rows over DNA privatization have included an attempt by American
researchers to place a patent protecting the use of hundreds of pieces of DNA
extracted from brain cells.

   The latest furor concerns a bank of DNA, the molecule from which our genes
are made, that had been established by the private French foundation, the Center
for the Study of Human Polymorphisms.

   The foundation collected samples from more than 5,000 diabetics to find a
common genetic component. However, a few months ago, the center's director,
Daniel Cohen, decided to join an American company, Millennium, and began
negotiations on its part to buy the center's DNA bank for $1 million.

   The plan caused consternation when it was uncovered by Philippe Froguel,
director of the center's diabetes and obesity program.

   The outcry led the government to block the sale pending an inquiry by a
commission of scientists who have to determine to whom the DNA bank belongs, the
families who donated their genes, the institutions, the researchers or the
state?

   Most of those involved believe it would be wrong to sell the bank.

   It's a view shared by scientists and lawyers throughout the world, although
many point out that pharmaceutical companies need protection for ideas and
processes they develop. The difficulty comes in balancing that need with the
free exchange of information and materials between scientists.

   "To get patent protection nowadays, you have to show that your discovery has
novelty, has utility and has involved an inventive step that only you have
made," said Dr. Nicholas Scott-Ram of British Biotechnology.

   By that definition, basic DNA sequences cannot be patented or owned.
However, variations upon these sections can be legally protected. Frequently,
the patenting and licensing involved has outraged other researchers.

   "The problem is that a net of exclusivity has been thrown over some
discoveries, and this has prevented other researchers from carrying out
medically important work," said Roberts, who works for New England Biolabs.

   The ultimate fear is that genes or copies of genes may become so wrapped in
legal constraints that scientists may be seriously restricted in using them in
gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1994


                             604 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 11, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z7

LENGTH: 1305 words

HEADLINE: The Good, the Bad and the Unknown;
Scientists Find That Some Genes Aren't Evil, They're Just Misunderstood

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Two middle-aged women are eating ice cream sundaes, looking puzzled, in a New
Yorker cartoon that ran last year. Says one: "If homosexuality is inherited,
shouldn't it have died out by now?"

   Variations of that simple but baffling question have arisen repeatedly, not
only for the gene that may predispose men to homosexuality but for other genes
that would similarly seem to get in the way of their own survival -- such as
disease genes that are likely to kill a person in childhood, before the victim
has a chance to pass the gene on to a new generation.

   Now researchers appear to have answered the question of how two seemingly
"dead end" genes have managed to persist through human history. What they've
found suggests that doctors and scientists may have to rethink simple
distinctions between good genes and bad. In fact, some "bad" genes may be good
to inherit, offering hidden advantages to those few who manage to live with them
and pass them on.

   The concept is not entirely new. The classic example is the hemoglobin S
gene: Inherited from both parents, it causes sickle cell anemia. The gene
remains common in the African population despite its ill effects, because
children who inherit just one copy of the gene are resistant to malaria, a
parasitic disease that is the world's number one infectious killer; only those
unlucky children who inherit duplicate genes, from both parents, risk death from
anemia. The bottom line: Children with a single copy of the sickle cell gene are
more likely to live to adulthood and reproduce than are their peers with
"normal" hemoglobin genes, and the gene persists.

   Now researchers have found a similar rationale for why cystic fibrosis, which
typically kills its victims before they reach 30, has managed not only to
survive through evolutionary history but to thrive as the most common fatal
inherited disease among whites.

   Cystic fibrosis occurs when a person inherits mutated versions of a gene
called CFTR from both parents. But despite its lethality in double dose, the
gene mutation remains surprisingly common; one in 20 Caucasians harbors a
mutated CFTR gene. Researchers began to wonder: Might there be some advantage to
having that single gene?

   It looks that way, said Sherif E. Gabriel, a physiologist at the University
of North Carolina in Chapel Hill. In experiments with mice, reported in last
week's issue of Science, Gabriel and his colleagues found evidence that a single
mutated CFTR gene confers protection against cholera, a bacterial disease that
causes massive diarrhea and potentially fatal dehydration.

   Cholera has posed a serious threat throughout much of history, Gabriel said,
and any gene that protected against the disease would be likely to endure --
even if it killed those occasional unfortunates who inherited two copies.
Moreover, researchers have known for several years that the CFTR gene, when
normal, regulates salt and water secretion in the body. Since cholera kills its
victims by diarrhea-induced salt and water depletion, it makes sense that people
with one bad copy of the gene -- and thus a slightly hobbled ability to secrete
salt and water -- might have a survival advantage when infected with the cholera
bacterium.

   A similar report in last week's Nature suggests that a gene that can fatally
exacerbate the symptoms of malaria may also have the hidden benefit of boosting
the immune response against other diseases. Researchers led by William McGuire
of the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, England, found that among Gambian
children with malaria, those who have a gene called TNF2 are seven times more
likely to have their malaria progress into a fatal brain disorder. In an African
country where malaria remains quite common, it seemed strange that such a
troublesome gene would persist in fully 16 percent of the population, as it
does.

   The Oxford team suggests that as with the genes for sickle cell anemia and
cystic fibrosis, the gene for TNF2 is bad news only when present in a double
dose. It turns out that TNF2 is an immune system supercharger, which in double
dose responds to malaria with an inflammatory reaction so intense that it can
fatally interfere with brain function. But a single copy of the gene, the
researchers propose, offers just enough extra immune system octane to give
carriers a survival advantage over those who don't carry the gene at all. Thus
the gene lives on, despite the toll it takes on those who inherit it from both
parents.

   Scientists suspect that other dangerous genes that remain surprisingly
commonplace may have similar hidden advantages. One candidate is the gene that,
when inherited in duplicate, causes Tay-Sachs disease -- a fatal metabolic
disease that is especially common in Ashkenazi Jews. Some scientists suggest
that those who inherit just a single copy of the gene are better able to survive
tuberculosis. Although there is no direct scientific evidence for the
connection, these scientists note that Jews are among the world's oldest
urban-dwelling people, having lived through much of their history in crowded
ghettos where respiratory illnesses present a particular risk. Any gene capable
of protecting against such diseases, even one that is deadly when inherited in
tandem, might have a net evolutionary advantage.


   An intriguing but equally hypothetical case is that of bipolar disorder, or
manic depression. No gene for this disease has been discovered, but there is
indirect evidence that a gene plays at least some role in the mood disorder.
Although a full-blown case can be a severe handicap, the trait is often
associated with intense creativity and imaginative thinking. That has led some
to propose that the trait remains as common as it is (about 1 percent of the
population suffers from the disorder) because when inherited in non-debilitating
dosages, it can inspire innovative ways of seeing and coping with the world.

   And what about the elusive gene -- or genes -- for homosexuality? If such a
gene exists, might it have some secret function that ensures it will be passed
down from one generation to the next? That gene may not need one, researchers
said; since sexual orientation is determined at least in part by social
influences, some men with the gene probably end up in heterosexual relationships
anyway and pass the gene to their children.

   But according to Dean Hamer, a National Cancer Institute researcher who
pioneered in the field of genetics and homosexuality and wrote "The Science of
Desire" (Simon & Schuster, 1994), there is an easy explanation for how a gene
that causes homosexuality in men might survive the centuries: Perhaps the gene
simply programs an attraction to men, Hamer said, and so is present in most
women too, who can pass it on. "The gene may do the same thing in men and women,
so if you're a man you'll be gay but in a woman she'll be attracted to men --
perhaps more so than usual -- and she'll have enough children to make up for
those that gay men won't have."

   Nobody knows how many other genes may have multiple functions that change
depending on how many copies of the gene are present or, perhaps, on whether the
gene is in a man or a woman. But given the latest findings, some scientists are
beginning to rethink the wisdom of tinkering haphazardly with so-called disease
genes. If some genes that have been considered unwanted have an evolutionary
advantage under certain conditions, then gene therapy -- in which "bad" genes
are to be replaced with "good" ones -- may in some cases prove misguided.

   "I think it's an important issue," said Gabriel, the cystic fibrosis
researcher. "Before we start changing everything around, we probably ought to
consider the complete function of all the gene's products, and the different
functions they may have at different levels of production."

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, IGOR KOPELNITSKY FOR TWP

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1994


                             605 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     October 9, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 454 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY ADAPTED INTO WEAPON AGAINST HEART DISEASE

BYLINE: By RICHARD SALTUS, Boston Globe

BODY:

    Viewed for much of its short history as a means to correct rare inherited
diseases, gene therapy is moving into the limelight as a novel and potentially
valuable weapon against heart and blood vessel disease, the leading killer of
Americans.

   Instead of replacing faulty genes that cause disease, however, scientists are
harnessing gene therapy as a way of turning a patient's own cells into tiny
factories that can churn out drugs and deliver them at a desired spot in a
diseased artery.

   Scientists at a number of medical centers and biotech companies have been
testing such schemes in animals, and a team at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston became the first to win clearance from a key federal panel to try a gene
therapy experiment for cardiovascular disease in patients.

   The team, headed by cardiologist Jeffrey Isner, plans to insert genes into
the blood vessel walls of 12 patients with blockages in leg arteries. The genes,
they hope, will produce a protein that causes new arteries to sprout and grow
into a bypass, rerouting blood flow around the obstruction.

   If successful, the maneuver may ease the pain in the patients' blood-starved
leg tissue, allow chronic skin ulcers to heal and perhaps avert amputation. It
could lead to a similar strategy for bypassing blocked arteries to the heart --
the cause of heart attacks.

   The experiment may begin this month, following expected approval by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration.

   The Boston team, which includes molecular biologist Kenneth Walsh and James
Symons, a surgeon, is expected to be the first to try this approach in humans,
but other experiments using gene therapy to attack blood vessel disease may not
be far behind.

   "This is an extraordinarily exciting time," says Dr. Stephen Epstein, chief
of the cardiology branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   "Gene therapy is potentially very powerful in cardiovascular disease," he
adds, with the goal of implanting genes to create new blood vessel growth or to
prevent blocked arteries from clogging up again after they've been cleared by
the frequently performed procedure known as balloon angioplasty.

GRAPHIC: Chart-Bypassing Leg Clots

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1994


                             606 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        October 8, 1994 Saturday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: MARILYN QUAYLE: BREAST CANCER FIGHT ADVANCES

BYLINE: By JOAN TREADWAY Staff writer

BODY:

   Marilyn Tucker Quayle handled with ease the crowd of several hundred women
who turned out to see her Friday in New Orleans.

   Quayle shook hands with everyone she met and posed for pictures as the main
speaker at a luncheon at the Westin Canal Place Hotel sponsored by the Christian
Health Ministries League, the Junior League of New Orleans and the local chapter
of the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation.

   Because of her leadership in the fight against breast cancer, Quayle was
invited to talk on the subject of early detection and prompt treatment.

   But questions inevitably turned to the political future of her husband,
former Vice President Dan Quayle. She said they are watching various benchmarks
as they consider whether he should run for president in 1996.

   "The support and the money are there (for him to run)," Quayle said. But
another key consideration is the impact his candidacy would have on the family:
"We were not treated very kindly before," she said.

   Her husband began confronting the subject of breast cancer about six years
ago, Quayle said.

   Afterward, many men came to her and said that his public discussion of the
subject had freed them to talk about it as well, since the disease had affected
their wives, mothers or sisters, she said.

   Her own mother died of breast cancer about 20 years ago, spurring her to
speak out on the disease.

   Her husband, she said, "went through it (the progression from illness to
death) with me, and his grandmother had breast cancer after that."

   Many advances have been made since then, she said. For example, tissue can be
taken from the breast through needle aspiration biopsy, instead of through
surgery.

   "We are seeing more women survive the disease," she said.

   The survival rate is more than 90 percent if it is detected early, Quayle
said. Early detection also means that the chances are better that the woman will
not need radiation or chemotherapy treatments, or if she does, chances are the
treatments will not continue as long as they would have otherwise, Quayle said.

   She is especially encouraged by two new developments, Quayle said:

   First, research being done by the National Cancer Institute on the
possibility of using magnetic resonance imaging for detection. Mammograms are 80
percent effective, she said, but MRIs are almost 100 percent effective.

   Secondly, a University of Utah team's discovery last month of a gene that
causes inherited breast cancer. This could lead to gene therapy, she said.

   Yet much remains unknown about breast cancer, Quayle said, including why a
woman can be free of cancer in her breasts for as long as four years, and then
develop cancer in other parts of her body.

   Much more work on the disease remains to be done, Quayle said.

GRAPHIC: Marilyn Quayle takes the elevator on her way to a luncheon at the
Westin Canal Place Hotel in New Orleans, where she spoke about breast cancer.
STAFF PHOTO BY MATT ROSE

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994


                             607 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 October 7, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 711 words

HEADLINE: PRO FOOTBALL: JETS NOTEBOOK;
Esiason's Status Goes From Start to Stopped

BYLINE: By FRANK LITSKY,   Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: HEMPSTEAD, L.I., Oct. 6

BODY:

   Will he or won't he? Will Boomer Esiason's sprained left ankle allow him to
start on Sunday against the Indianapolis Colts or will he be sidelined again?

   It appeared today that Jack Trudeau would start, as he did last week against
the Browns, with Esiason ready to play if needed. Esiason said he thought that
would be the scenario and suspected Coach Pete Carroll had already made the
decision. Carroll said he was not sure what would happen, that it depended on
how Esiason felt.

    In Wednesday's practice, Esiason took 40 percent of the snaps with the first
team. But in an 11-on-11 drill today, he took only a handful and Trudeau took
the rest. After practice, Esiason walked to the locker room like a man with a
gimpy ankle.

   "It feels lousy," he said, "not much better than yesterday. I don't know if
yesterday hurt me. I'll be ready to play, but I won't be 100 percent. If the
decision is made that Jack starts, that's why we got him. I'm disappointed, but
I'll be ready."

   Carroll said the decision on who will start was a day-to-day thing.

   "We're taking it easy on Boomer," he said. "The picture is a little fuzzier
than it was yesterday. But he has a feel for what we're doing, and we haven't
ruled him out."

   The problem is lateral mobility.

   "We have to make sure he can protect himself with movement," Carroll said.

   Esiason understood that. "It would be like Brian Leetch skating backward for
the Rangers," he said. "The point is moving laterally, and I'm not able to do
that the way I'd like."

   The Jets list Esiason as questionable, which means they give him a 50-50
chance to play.

   "That's probably about right," Carroll said. "It could go either way. If he's
ready, he'll go. If not, if we need him, we will call on him."

New Names in Lineup

    The Jets (2-3) have lost their last three games, and Coach Pete Carroll has
promised subtle but unspecified lineup changes. Two possibilities, involving
backups Ryan Yarborough and James Brown, have become apparent.

   When the Jets go to three wide receivers, Yarborough, a second-round draft
choice, will join Rob Moore and Art Monk, the regulars. Stevie Anderson had been
the third receiver, but Ray Sherman, the offensive coordinator, said Yarborough
did good things in last Sunday's loss to Cleveland and merited more playing
time.

   "Ryan has tremendous speed," Sherman said. "We've just go to get the ball
downfield. Stevie fits in, but at the other receiving positions."

   Brown is a 6-foot-6-inch, 321-pound offensive tackle who had been Jeff
Criswell's backup at left tackle. Now he is backing up Siupeli Malamala at right
tackle, and in today's practice he took 40 percent of the snaps.

   Malamala sprained his left knee in the season opener and has not been at full
strength. Larry Beightol, the Jets' offensive line coach, said there were no
immediate plans to bench him.

   "It's an opportunity to show what I've got," Brown said. "Teams don't sub
much in the offensive line, so if you're not a starter you're not going to play
unless someone gets hurt. But I'm frustrated that I'm not playing. Maybe this
will do me some good."

A Wish Come True

    Nathan Smith's favorite football player is Boomer Esiason. Smith has cystic
fibrosis and so does Esiason's 3-year-old son, Gunnar. Today, as part of a trip
arranged by the Make-a-Wish Foundation, the 12-year-old eighth-grader from
Cleveland, Tenn., met his hero at the Jets' complex here. He also wore Esiason's
helmet for a few moments, relayed a play to him via helmet radio and left with
game tickets, autographed footballs, photographs, posters and programs.

   "He's really a nice guy," Smith said. "He's fun to be around."

   The Make-a-Wish Foundation grants wishes to children with life-threatening
and terminal illnesses. Willa Smith, Nathan's mother, said the oldest person
with cystic fibrosis she knows of is a 35-year-old Florida woman. But she said
Nathan, who contracted the pulmonary disease when he was 14 months old, was
breathing much better because of a newly approved nasal spray. And she said gene
therapy was close to realization.

   "He said, 'Mom, am I going to die from this?' " she said. "I don't expect him
to die. He plans to go to medical school. He wants to be a doctor and be part of
the cure."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nathan Smith talking with his favorite football player, Boomer
Esiason, yesterday on a visit arranged by the Make-a-Wish Foundation. (Steve
Berman for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1994


                             608 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           October 5, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 4

LENGTH: 260 words

HEADLINE: Injected gene reduces cancer in mice

BYLINE: By Anne Rochell STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   First step: Experiments with restoring missing or defective cellular material
could lead to new therapy for a deadly disease.

   Researchers have stopped the development of lung cancer in mice by correcting
a defect in a gene, a new study reports.

   At the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, scientists injected m
ice with human lung cancer cells known to have a mutation in the so-called p53
gene. P53, when normal, suppresses the development of many cancers, including
lung cancer.

   Three days later, some mice were treated with p53. Fewer than 40 percent
developed tumors in the treated area, compared with more than 60 percent in the
mice who did not receive the corrected gene. And tumors that grew in the treated
mice were significantly smaller than those in the untreated mice, researchers
said.

   The study appeared in today's Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

   For some time, scientists have been studying ways to put back into cancer
cells a gene that is missing or defective, and thereby stop uncontrolled cell
growth. But they run into myriad problems when trying to translate laboratory
work into human, or "in vivo," studies. The therapies may be toxic, and it would
be extremely difficult to correct the gene in every cancer cell present in a
patient.

   Still, this study is "an interesting first step in the in vivo gene therapy
of cancer," said the authors of an accompanying editorial.

   More than 150,000 people die of lung cancer every year in the United States,
and the five-year survival rate is around 10 percent.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1994


                             609 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    October 5, 1994, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 14; Column 4; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 360 words

HEADLINE: DENNIS WOLFBERG; GIFTED STAND-UP COMIC WAS 48

BYLINE: By MYRNA OLIVER, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Dennis Wolfberg, who won an American Comedy Award in 1990 as best male
stand-up comedian and was twice voted America's top male comic, died Monday. He
was 48.

   Wolfberg died of melanoma at his Culver City home, publicist Lori Jonas
announced.

   Ironically, Wolfberg had given benefit performances for the Wellness
Community, which aids cancer patients, after a high school friend developed
cancer.

   Wolfberg was known for his unusual delivery, in which he would squint, then
bulge out his eyes and puff his cheeks, literally squeezing out words as if he
were passing kidney stones. Critics have called him "perhaps the most verbally
adroit comic working today . . . flat-out hilarious" and "one of those rare
comics who can take the simplest moments of life and turn them into the greatest
laughs you'll ever have."

   Noting that he was flattered when other comics attempted to imitate him,
Wolfberg said in a 1991 Times interview that his use of his unusual eyes just
happened.

   "It's in no way calculated," he said. "I am truly not aware of anything I do
with my eyes. It's not an affectation, but it seems to work comedically."

   A native of Long Island, N.Y., Wolfberg attended Queen's College and taught
sixth grade in the South Bronx for 12 years. He also received a master's degree
in clinical psychology.

   Moving into stand-up comedy in the mid-1970s, Wolfberg drew on his teaching
experience for material. Later, when he married former stand-up comic Jeannie
McBride at the age of 39 and fathered three sons, he created routines based on
their activities.

   "Basically," he once said, "the crux of my act is my own life."

   Wolfberg starred in his own half-hour comedy special on HBO in 1990. He also
appeared in a recurring role as a strange scientist on the television series
"Quantum Leap" and was a frequent guest on "The Tonight Show," "The Merv Griffin
Show" and others. He has been profiled by "Entertainment Tonight."

   The family has asked that memorial donations be made to Dennis Wolfberg's
Melanoma Gene Therapy Fund, UCLA Johnson Cancer Center Foundation, 9-667 Louis
Factor Building, 10833 La Conte, Los Angeles, Calif. 90024-1781.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Dennis Wolfberg

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1994


                             610 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                   October 3, 1994 Monday NEW JERSEY EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. S02

LENGTH: 606 words

HEADLINE: BIG STRIDES PLANNED FOR CANCER RESEARCH AND TREATMENT IN N.J. AN
11-YEAR-OLD RESEARCH CENTER IS GETTING A HOME OF ITS OWN. THAT WILL MAKE ROOM
FOR MORE CLINICS, TOO.

BYLINE: Linda A. Johnson, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   After 11 years of cutting-edge research and some major successes, New
Jersey's premier facility for cancer study is getting its own home - and an
expanded mission.

   The Center for Molecular Medicine and Immunology and its patient-treatment
arm, the Garden State Cancer Center, will move from cramped Newark headquarters
into a sprawling building in Belleville. It will be dedicated at a
ribbon-cutting today by scientists, politicians and a few recovered cancer
patients.

   The research portion of the center will widen its research into some
promising new areas, while the treatment side will add clinics and set up
hospital collaborations to serve New Jerseyans with the most intractable
cancers, many of whom now travel to New York or Philadelphia for treatment.

   Both sections now rent office and lab space at the University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey. That severely limits patient services, said David M.
Goldenberg, president and founder of study center and the three-year-old
treatment arm.

   "We need more space for both research laboratories and a very rapidly
expanding clinical program," Goldenberg said last week. "We have to be able to
recruit both clinicians and scientists from elsewhere for our programs."

   A huge new outpatient department will include clinics offering initial
diagnosis, high-tech medical imaging, and experimental treatments for cancers
not cured by standard therapies. There will also be 20 hospital beds devoted to
patients in high-priority clinical trials.

   "I think it will give cancer patients in New Jersey access to the latest in
state-of-the-art therapies, particularly approaches which are experimental today
but which we hope will be the state-of-the-art in five to 10 years," Goldenberg
said.

   Patients diagnosed with more easily treated cancers will be referred to
community hospitals, and the center plans to expand its collaboration with St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center in Paterson to eventually develop a network
including up to 15 hospitals around the state. The treatment center will share
its expertise with staff at those hospitals, which will treat patients in beds
now going empty.

   Meanwhile, the research side will gradually add new laboratories for study in
such areas as tumor vaccines, gene therapy, and delivery of anti-cancer drugs
via injected antibodies.

   Goldenberg and his staff were the first to develop an immunological therapy
in which they made specific antibodies to fight several cancers, joined
radioactive isotopes to the antibodies, and injected them into patients. The
antibodies hunt down specific sites on cancer cells called antigens.

   At low doses of radioactivity, the method lets doctors see through scans
exactly where cancer is located in the body; at higher doses, the radioactivity
kills cancer cells. Such targeting fights tumors better and limits damage to
healthy cells, Goldenberg said.

   The center also combines this immunological therapy with chemotherapy,
linking anti-cancer drugs to antibodies for the same effect.

   The Belleville building, to be renovated over the next 15 months before the
move, has been vacant for several years. It previously housed the Essex County
Geriatric Center.

   Goldenberg and some colleagues established the Center for Molecular Medicine
and Immunology in 1983, with donations from philanthropists and grants from the
National Cancer Institute, which has twice given Goldenberg its Outstanding
Investigator Award. The center operates on grants and donations, and Goldenberg
said that the renovations must be done in stages as the estimated $56 million
cost is raised.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             611 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     October 3, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F33; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 1383 words

HEADLINE: Regional Stocks Reflect Market Fluctuations

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   They're back where they started. That's the story on stocks so far this year.

   Stocks fell sharply during the winter, did little during the spring and rose
vigorously during the summer. By the time the third quarter -- July, August and
September -- ended Friday, stock price averages were back to their levels of
Jan. 1.

   Most of the ups and downs in the market were caused by the turnaround in
interest rates. After several years of allowing rates to fall to help the
economy, the Federal Reserve decided in February that it was time to push rates
back up and head off the inflationary pressures created by a stronger economy.
The change created a vast amount of uncertainty among investors and the
uncertainty created volatility.

   The seesaw patterns in the market could be seen in the major stock averages.

   The Dow Jones industrials gained 6 percent in the third quarter, but showed
only a 2.4 percent gain for the first nine months of the year. The New York
Stock Exchange composite was up 4 percent for the third quarter, but down 1.4
percent for the year. Similarly, Standard & Poor's 500-stock average gained 4.2
percent in the quarter but showed a fractional loss for the year. The Nasdaq
composite gained a solid 8.3 percent in the quarter, but lost 1.6 percent for
the year.

   Washington area stocks, as measured by the Johnston, Lemon & Co. index of 30
local blue chips, turned in a 1.8 percent gain for the third quarter, but the
index has lost 6.5 percent so far this year.

   Of 197 stocks listed in the Washington Business stock table, 91 made money in
the first nine months, 100 lost and six were unchanged. The third-quarter
results were somewhat better. Of 200 stocks listed in the table during that
time, 114 gained while 76 lost and 10 were unchanged.

   The winner's list was dominated by turnaround stories, while the loser's list
featured troubled airlines and out-of-favor biotech companies.

   Here are the regional stocks, selling for $ 2 or more, that did the best and
the worst in the first nine months of this year. The name of each company and
its stock symbol are followed by its stock prices on Dec. 31 and Sept. 30, and
the percentage of gain or loss.

   The top gainers:

   Griffith Consumers Co. (FUEL) of Cheverly; $ 5.63, $ 23, up 308.5 percent.
Griffith's stock has been hot ever since it boosted its home heating fuel sales
by acquiring a division of Steuart Petroleum Co. in June 1993. Griffith's
profits tripled in fiscal 1994, which ended June 30.

   Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc.  (MME) of Rockville; $ 12.81, $ 28.13, up
119.6 percent. The largest managed health care company in the Washington region,
Mid Atlantic now has 1.14 million members and has benefited from the widespread
drive to restrain health care costs.

   Infodata Systems Inc. (INFD) of Fairfax; $ 1.88, $ 3.69, up 96.3 percent. Red
ink has turned to black as the firm refocuses its business on electronic
document management. It recently did a one-for-three reverse stock split. Nasdaq
has moved the stock from the National Market System to the Small-Cap Market.

   GRC International Inc. (GRH) of Vienna; $ 7.38, $ 13.75, up 86.3 percent.
GRC's business is telecommunications and information systems. Improving profits
and a major equipment sale to Bell Atlantic Corp. recently sent GRC shares to
new highs.

   Industrial Training Corp. (ITCC) of Herndon; $ 4.75, $ 8.50, up 78.9 percent.
ITC, which develops multimedia training programs, is beginning to reap the
financial rewards from its acquisition of Comsell Training Inc. last year.

   HomeCall Inc. (HCLL) of Frederick, Md.; $ 1.63, $ 2.81, up 72.4 percent.
HomeCall's shares rose sharply in mid-May when Mid Atlantic Medical said it
would buy the company for $ 11 million or $ 3.10 a share. HomeCall provides home
health services in Maryland and Virginia. The deal is expected to close shortly.

   CACI International Inc. (CACI) of Arlington; $ 5.88, $ 10.13, up 72.3
percent. The government contractor has come out of its financial tailspin and is
reporting higher sales and profits. The firm designs computer systems that help
federal offices operate more efficiently.

   PHP Healthcare Corp. (PPH) of Reston; $ 6.75, $ 11, up 63 percent. A health
services company, PHP is moving from government work to providing managed care
programs for businesses. The firm's sales and profit picture seems to be
brightening.

   American Woodmark Corp. (AMWD) of Winchester, Va.; $ 3.75, $ 5.88, up 56.8
percent. A manufacturer of kitchen cabinets and vanities, the company's sales
and profits have picked up as home building and home remodeling markets have
improved.

   Ameribanc Investors Group. (AINVS) of Annandale; $ 1.44, $ 2.25, up 56.3
percent. Prospects for Ameribanc Savings Bank have improved slowly as it sells
off foreclosed properties and reduces its real estate loan problems. The owners
want to sell the institution. Analysts estimate a buyout price of $ 3.25 a
share.

   First Citizens Financial Corp. (FCIT) of Silver Spring; $ 11.42, $ 17.50, up
53.2 percent. Parent of Citizens Savings Bank, the company has been freed from
its "supervisory agreement" with regulators. In the last three years, troubled
loans have dropped from 12.2 percent to 5.2 percent of assets.

   Hechinger Co. (HECHB) of Landover; $ 9.50, $ 14.50, up 52.6 percent. Shares
of the venerable do-it-yourself home improvement chain have started to recover
after a downturn caused by the recession and competitive battles.

   The big losers:

   Atlantic Coast Airlines Inc. (ACAI) of Sterling; $ 8.13, $ 2.63, down 67.7
percent. Atlantic, which operates as a United Express carrier at Dulles, has
been taking steps to stem its heavy losses. It recently withdrew from Florida's
intrastate market.

   USAir Group Inc. (U) of Arlington; $ 12.88, $ 4.63, down 64.1 percent. The
airline's decision to defer about $ 19 million in preferred stock dividends last
week sent USAir common shares into a tailspin. The airline already has been hurt
by $ 2.6 billion in losses in the last four years and by a recent crash in
Pittsburgh.

   Allied Research Corp. (ALR) of Vienna; $ 8.38, $ 3.25, down 61.2 percent.
Business hasn't been very good recently for this military ammunition company.
Sales have been sliding and the firm reported a $ 2.4 million loss in the second
quarter.

   FastComm Communications Corp. (FSCX) of Sterling; $ 12.38, $ 5.06, down 59.1
percent. The company said it has now moved from making analog modems to digital
network access devices, but it continues to report losses.

   MedImmune Inc. (MEDI) of Gaithersburg; $ 11, $ 4.63, down 57.9 percent. Ouch!
is the appropriate word for MedImmune shareholders, whose stock was worth $ 32 a
year ago. That was before the firm ran into problems with a drug intended to
battle a respiratory virus that kills infants.

   S&K Famous Brands Inc. (SKFB) of Glen Allen, Va.; $ 20, $ 8.50, down 57.5
percent. Sales of menswear have been sluggish, causing a sharp downturn in S&K
profits.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. (GTII) of Gaithersburg; $ 16.25, $ 7.75, down 52.3
percent. A developer of human gene therapy products, the firm is making
progress, but has yet to produce steady profit growth.

   Oncor Inc. (ONCR) Gaithersburg; $ 10.38, $ 5.38, down 48.2 percent. An Oncor
subsidiary, OncorMed Inc., went public; Oncor acquired a French company; Oncor's
research is moving ahead. In short, everything looks good but its profits.

   Washington Homes Inc. (WHI) of Landover; $ 9.88, $ 5.25, down 46.9 percent.
Sales for fiscal 1994 rose but profits fell because of higher land and
construction costs and the costs of opening new communities.

   ICF Kaiser International Inc. (ICF) of Fairfax; $ 4.88, $ 2.75, down 43.6
percent. An environmental and engineering firm, ICF has had a rough time
financially in the last few years. The firm is reorganizing.

   Survival Technology Inc. (STIQ) of Rockville; $ 12.88, $ 7.75, down 39.8
percent. The firm makes syringes that allow individuals to give themselves
injections for allergic reactions or heart attacks. Survival Tech recently sold
the division that makes heart monitoring devices for $ 2 million.

   NVR Inc. (NVR) of McLean; $ 9.75, $ 5.88, down 39.7 percent. NVR is the
holding company for Ryan Homes and NVHomes. It recently bought back 2 million
shares and plans to buy 1 million more.  ?


GRAPHIC: CHART, WASHINGTON BUSINESS SELECTED AREA STOCK INDEX (CHART NOT
AVAILABLE.), TWP

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1994


                             612 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                  September 28, 1994, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A18

LENGTH: 819 words

HEADLINE: TODAY IN CONGRESS

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From Legi-Slate Inc.

BODY:

   SENATE

   Meets at 10 a.m.

   Committees:

   Armed Services -- 1 p.m. Situation in Haiti. 222 Russell Office Bldg.

   Banking, Housing & Urban Affairs -- 10 a.m. U.S. capital markets &
globalization of world capital markets. 538 Dirksen Office Bldg.

   Energy & Natural Resources -- 9:30 a.m. Hearing & vote on nomination of Rhea
Graham to be Director of Bureau of Mines, Dept. of Interior. 366 DOB.

   Finance -- 10 a.m. Mark up reauth. of Superfund. 215 DOB.

   Foreign Relations -- 9:30 a.m. Nomination of David Newton to be ambassador to
Yemen. S-116 Capitol.

   Foreign Relations -- 10:30 a.m. Convention on Conservation & Management of
Pollock Resources in Central Bering Sea. 419 DOB.

   Foreign Relations -- 2 p.m. Pending nominations: Geraldine Ferraro to be U.S.
Representative, Human Rights Commission, Economic and Social Council, United
Nations; Thomas McNamara to be Assistant Sec. of State, Politico-Military
Affairs; Robert Fulton to be Associate Director, Information, United States
Information Agency; & Vonya McCann to be Deputy Sec. of State, International
Communications and Information Policy. 419 DOB.

   Foreign Relations -- 2 p.m. African affairs subc. African conflict
resolution. 430 DOB.

   Judiciary -- 9:30 a.m. Mark up pending legislation & nominations: David Tatel
to be U.S. Circuit Judge for District of Columbia Circuit, Robert Cindrich to be
U.S. District Judge for Western District of Pennsylvania, David Coar to be U.S.
District Judge for Northern District of Illinois, David Hamilton to be U.S.
District Judge for Southern District of Indiana, Catherine Perry to be U.S.
District Judge for Eastern District of Missouri & Paul Riley to be U.S. District
Judge for Southern District of Illinois. 226 DOB.

   Judiciary -- 10:30 a.m. Pending nominations. 216 Hart Office Bldg.

   Judiciary -- 2 p.m. Pending nominations: Fred Parker to be U.S. Circuit
Judge, 2nd Circuit; Helen Gillmor to be U.S. District Judge, District of Hawaii;
David Katz to be U.S. District Judge, Northern District of Ohio; Sean McLaughlin
to be U.S. District Judge, Western District of Pennsylvania; William Moore to be
U.S. District Judge, Southern District of Georgia; Roslyn Moore-Silver to be
U.S. District Judge, District of Arizona; & Alvin Thompson to be U.S. District
Judge, District of Connecticut. 226 DOB.

   Labor & Human Resources -- 10 a.m. Federal job training programs. 430 DOB.


   HOUSE

   Meets at 10 a.m.

   Committees:

   Agriculture -- 10 a.m. Mark up pending legislation. 1300 Longworth House
Office Bldg.

   Agriculture -- 1 p.m. Livestock subc. Pending legislation. 1302 LHOB.

   Appropriations -- 10 a.m. Treasury, postal service & general government subc.
Postal service operations. 2358 Rayburn House Office Bldg.

   Armed Services -- 9:30 a.m. Closed. Situation in Haiti. 2318 RHOB.

   Banking, Finance & Urban Affairs -- 10 a.m. Consumer credit & insurance subc.
Community investment practices. 2128 RHOB.

   Conferees -- Time TBA. Mark up reauth. of Elementary & Secondary Education
Act. Room TBA.

   Energy & Commerce -- 10 a.m. Mark up implementation of Uruguay Round of
General Agreement on Tariffs & Trade. 2123 RHOB.

   Foreign Affairs -- 2 p.m. Africa subc. Recent developments in North Africa.
2200 RHOB.

   Government Operations -- 9:45 a.m. Human resources & intergovernmental
relations subc. Chemical residues & contaminants in food. 2247 RHOB.

   Government Operations -- 10 a.m. Legislation & national security subc. Cold
War era human subject experimentation. 2154 RHOB.

   Judiciary -- 10 a.m. Civil & constitutional rights subc. Fair housing. 2237
RHOB.

   Merchant Marine & Fisheries -- 10 a.m. Coast guard & navigation subc.,
Merchant Marine subc. Cruise ship health & safety. 1334 LHOB.

   Natural Resources -- 9:15 a.m. Mark up amending Reclamation States Emergency
Drought Relief Act of '91 to provide a loan to Madera-Chowchilla Water
Authority, amending Pennsylvania Avenue Development Act of 1972 & pending
legislation. 1324 LHOB.

   Natural Resources -- 2 p.m. Oversight & investigation subc. Fort Peck Indian
Tribes-Montana Compact Act of '94. 1324 LHOB.

   Post Office & Civil Service -- 9:15 a.m. Census, statistics & postal
personnel subc. Mark up Census Address List Replacement Act of '94. 311 Cannon
House Office Bldg.

   Post Office & Civil Service -- 3 p.m. Compensation & employee benefits subc.
Mark up Federal Workforce Restructuring Act of '94. 311 CHOB.

   Public Works & Transportation -- 10 a.m. Mark up pending legislation. 2167
RHOB.

   Rules -- 1 p.m. Dept. of Defense appropriations. H-315 Cap.

   Science, Space & Technology -- 1:30 p.m. Technology, environment & aviation
subc. Gene therapy status. 2318 RHOB.

   Small Business -- 10 a.m. Telemarketing fraud. 2359 RHOB.

   Veterans' Affairs -- 9 a.m. Oversight & investigations subc. Benefits for
Hispanic veterans. 334 CHOB.

   Ways & Means -- 10 a.m. Mark up Uruguay Round Implementation of General
Agreement on Tariffs & Trade. 1100 LHOB.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1994


                             613 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 27, 1994, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 18C, BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: McDonnell Douglas names CEO

BODY:


   McDonnell Douglas Corp. named Harry C. Stonecipher as chief executive and
president yesterday, ending 102 years of family leadership and capping a
five-year restructuring that has restored the St. Louis-based aerospace company
to health.

   Mr. Stonecipher, 58, was chairman and chief executive of the Sundstrand
Corp., a maker of aircraft components and industrial power systems in Rockford,
Ill., that has come back under his leadership from a devastating military
overbilling-fraud scandal in the late 1980s.

   Mr. Stonecipher replaces John F. McDonnell, the son of James McDonnell, the
founder of McDonnell Aircraft, who will remain as chairman.

Lehman lays off third of staff

   Lehman Bros. Inc., struggling against sharply lower profits, laid off
one-third of its retail brokerage work force yesterday and said it would
eliminate free lunches for its traders and salespeople.

   A Lehman spokesman refused to comment on the layoff of 100 brokers, which
reduces the company's domestic brokerage force to about 200.

   But a source close to the Wall Street investment bank said the reductions
were part of a restructuring aimed at refocusing its brokerage business on its
strengths.

DavCo buys franchisee's stock

   DavCo Restaurants Inc. said yesterday it acquired all stock of Southern
Hospitality Corp., a Wendy's International Inc. franchisee with 34 restaurants
in the Nashville, Tenn. area, for an undisclosed amount of cash, plus assumed
liabilities.

   For the year ended September 1993, Crofton-based DavCo, the world's largest
franchisee of Wendy's International, had restaurant sales of $ 153 million,
while Southern Hospitality had sales for the year that ended May 31 of $ 32.4
million.

   DavCo currently operates 174 restaurants in Maryland, northern Virginia,
Washington, St. Louis and central Illinois.

Coca-Cola ups Russia investment

   Furthering an aggressive push into a market long dominated by Pepsi, the
Coca-Cola Co. announced plans yesterday for more investment in Russia.

   Coke and two international bottling partners plan to put an additional $ 100
million into the Russian market during the next three years, the Atlanta-based
soft drink giant said.

   The additional money will bring Coca-Cola's total investment in Russia to
about $ 240 million.

Company plans gene therapy trials

   Genetic Therapy Inc. has initiated a Phase I/II clinical trial using gene
therapy to treat cystic fibrosis, the Gaithersburg company said yesterday.

   Genetic Therapy's stock closed at $ 8.125 yesterday, down 62.5 cents.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994


                             614 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

               September 27, 1994, Tuesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 1

LENGTH: 197 words

HEADLINE: ORANGE COUNTY ALMANAC

BODY:

   More than 4,200 volunteers saved the city of Anaheim more than $1.5 million
in labor costs last year, according to a new city study released this month.

   About 50 city programs rely on volunteers regularly to complement community
services, according to the study.

   Parks, Recreation and Community Services uses 850 volunteers, more than any
other department, the study said.

   Paint Your Heart Out Anaheim ranks second, benefiting from some 750
volunteers. The group renovates houses of residents who are physically or
financially unable to do the work.

Today

   Paul J. Cimoch, a physician who presented research at the recent
International AIDS Conference in Japan, will update the community on the subject
at 7 p.m. at South Coast Medical Center in Laguna Beach.

   Cimoch, director of medical services for the Center of Special Immunology in
Irvine, and Daniel Haspert, a physician at the Laguna Beach hospital, will
discuss topics related to HIV and AIDS, including new drug therapies, gene
therapy and vaccines.

   The free lecture will be in the auditorium, at 31872 Coast Highway. For more
information, call the hospital's Health Resource Center at (714) 499-7202.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1994


                             615 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 26, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F8; APPOINTMENTS

LENGTH: 738 words

HEADLINE: APPOINTMENTS

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Associations/Nonprofit


   John T. Wilcox was appointed inspector general at Walter Reed Army Medical
Center in the District and Thomas M. Kullman was appointed center judge
advocate.

   Karen Shoos Lipton was named chief executive of the American Association of
Blood Banks in Bethesda.

   The World Resources Institute in Washington named Robert N. Burt, Florence
Taylor Robinson and Pieter Winsemius to its board of directors.

   The Alexandria-based American Physical Therapy Association appointed John J.
Bennett general counsel.

   The Employee Assistance Professionals Association in Arlington named Sylvia
A. Straub chief operating officer.

   James R. Meenan was appointed to the U.S. Industry Sector Advisory Committee
for Trade Policy.

   District-based Leadership Washington elected Beverly R. Silverberg board
chair.

   The Washington-based Academy for Educational Development appointed Bonnie J.
Barhyte vice president and director of international training services of the
human resources and institutional development division.


   Companies


   Gerald H. Taylor was elected to the board of directors of MCI Communications
Corp. in Washington.

   Peter S. Knight was named to the board of directors of Comsat Corp. in
Bethesda.

   New Options Group/Outplacement International in Bethesda named Gina M.
Willoughby vice president.

   Bruce Kudeviz joined Stephenson Printing of Alexandria as financial manager.

   National Grass Roots and Communications Inc. in Alexandria named Jeff Finger
vice president and Chip Griffin junior account executive.

   William R. Kirk Jr. was named to the board of directors of the Chesapeake
Bank and Trust Co. in Chestertown, Md.

   Martin O'Brien was promoted to hotel manager at the Carlton Hotel in
Washington.

   Kenneth J. Ayres rejoined the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
as partner in the financial institutions institutional lending section of the
corporate group.

   J. Kenneth Ackerman Jr. joined McManis Associates Inc. in Washington as
principal associate.

   Univax Biologics Inc. in Rockville named Judith A. Hautala vice president for
corporate communications and planning.

   KCI Technologies Inc. in Manassas appointed Carroll R. Brown director of
construction services, David L. Weaver senior structural engineer and Robert J.
Niber senior geotechnical engineer.

   Timothy M. Labus was named senior vice president and client services director
of Abramson Ehrlich Manes in Washington.

   The EPI Cos in Rockville appointed Joseph E. Criscuoli corporate director of
marketing for communications and systems operations.

   Allegiance Bank N.A. appointed Thomas D. Murphy senior vice president and
chief retail officer.

   Vienna-based William Corroon Corp. of Virginia named Christopher R. Saul
surety bond manager.

   Arthur Andersen & Co. in Washington named Francis K. Vita international
corporate finance executive.

   The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. in McLean named Margaret Colon assistant
to the company's president and chief operating officer.

   The Federal National Mortgage Association in Washington named Jeffrey L.
Arpin vice president for multifamily credit policy.

   The Crystal Gateway Marriott Hotel in Arlington appointed Marian Goetzman
director of group sales, Meg Bobinski resident manager and Sally Park front
officer manager.

   Don Hill was named director of the Maritime Prepositioning Forces program
with the Marine Corps for AlliedSignal Technical Services Corp. in Columbia.

   Eagle Research Group Inc. in Arlington appointed Richard L. Donovan corporate
vice president.

   Central Travel Inc. in Columbia named George M. Davie Jr. president.

   The Aker Partners in Washington named Pamela D. Pryor partner.

   GenVec Inc. in Rockville named Mark Roffman vice president of development.

   Applied Bioscience International Inc. in Arlington named Stephen L. Waechter
senior vice president and chief financial officer.

   The Adams National Bank in Washington elected Susan Williams to the board of
directors.

   LCI International in McLean named George Perrin to its board of directors.

   TCI East Inc. in Bethesda appointed Katie Miles-Ley director of employee
relations and development.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg named Victor G. Santamarina vice
president of operations.  ?

   Send information about promotions, appointments and personnel moves to
Appointments, Business News Department, The Washington Post, 1150 15th St. NW,
Washington, D.C. 20071-5302.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, WILLIAM R. KIRK JR.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1994


                             616 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

            September 22, 1994, THURSDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. 57

LENGTH: 454 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough DNA Technology Sold By Argonne Lab

BYLINE: By Jim Ritter

BODY:


   Argonne National Laboratory announced Wednesday it has sold technology that
could dramatically reduce the amount of time and money it takes to decipher
genes.

   The technology could speed development of drugs and treatment of diseases,
and lead to more accurate DNA fingerprinting techniques than those now used --
as in the O.J. Simpson case -- scientists said.

   The patent rights were sold to Hyseq Inc. of Sunnyvale, Calif. Hyseq
President Lewis Gruber predicts sales of "billions of dollars by the year 2000."

   Financial terms of the patent agreement weren't disclosed.

   "We are proud to have played a pivotal role in fulfilling our mission of
transferring fundamental technology," said Argonne associate director Harvey
Drucker.

   Genes are the basic units of heredity. They are made up of DNA, the genetic
molecule in the nucleus of each cell. DNA consists of chemical building blocks
called base pairs. A gene can be compared to a sentence; the base pairs are the
letters.

   A worldwide effort called the Humane Genome Project is under way to decipher
human DNA. The project is expected to involve 350 laboratories and cost $ 3
billion over 15 years. It's such a huge job because human DNA has 100,000 genes
and 3 billion base pairs.

   Current techniques can read a few thousand DNA base pairs per day, at a cost
of $ 1 or more per base pair. Hyseq says the new technique can read 10 million
base pairs per day for only 10 cents per base pair.

   There are many applications for the technology. Drug companies could develop
drugs that treat the cause of a disease, not just the symptoms. Genetic tests
could spot people susceptible to hereditary diseases and several types of
cancer. Gene therapy could cure birth defects and genetic diseases by replacing
flawed genes with healthy genes.

   The privately held Hyseq plans to sell products and services to laboratories,
hospitals and drug companies. The technology also will have applications outside
of medicine, such as manipulating genes in crops and livestock to improve
productivity and disease resistance, Hyseq said.

   The new technology is called sequencing-by-hybridization. It was invented by
researchers Radoje Drmanac and Radomir Crkvenjakov, who recently left Argonne to
join Hyseq, which was founded last year.

   Hyseq signed a patent agree

   ment with ARCH Development Corp., a subsidiary of the University of Chicago
that commercializes technology. ARCH is at the forefront of a national effort by
government labs and universities to find commercial applica

   tions for research. Licensing fees are used to fund additional research.

   The U. of C. operates Argonne for the federal government. Argonne is located
about 25 miles southwest of Chicago.

GRAPHIC: A scientist at Hyseq Inc. prepares DNA samples for decoding using
technology developed at Argonne National Laboratory.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1994


                             617 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 22, 1994 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3:7,8; B-5:1; B-6:6; B-8:3,5

LENGTH: 333 words

HEADLINE: UCSD hires director, looks for early '95 opening of gene-therapy
development lab

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   As part of UCSD's expanding research using human genes to treat disease, the
university has hired a director for a new laboratory that will prepare the
sensitive genetic treatments. Pharmacologist Charles Prussak will direct the
UCSD Medical School's gene therapy development laboratory, where genes will be
packaged for delivery into patients.

   Prussak is leaving Viagene Inc., a San Diego biotech company, where he did
the same work. University of California San Diego scientists are developing gene
therapies they hope will be effective in treating AIDS, some cancers and a form
of heart disease.

   Many researchers believe the transfer of genes to produce substances that
could attack disease will become a powerful form of medicine in coming years.
"Dr. Prussak comes to UCSD with years of experience in preparing clinical-grade
material for gene therapy," said Dr. John Alksne, dean of the UCSD Medical
School.

   "He also has valuable experience in interacting with federal regulatory
bodies that oversee human gene-therapy trials." Once researchers devise a
gene-therapy strategy and test it in animals, the genes must be packaged under
meticulous conditions before they are used in trials on people.

   Prussak and the lab, which opens early in 1995, will be available to do that
work for the UCSD researchers. The new lab could accelerate the development of
new treatments and save costs, officials said.

   Without it, work would have to be contracted out to biotech companies that
could manufacture the genes to specification for human use and comply with
extensive federal regulations. As an example of the new lab's benefit, one gene
therapy developed at UCSD and nearing trials is designed to interrupt the action
of the AIDS virus. Use of the therapy was delayed for many months as researchers
sought a company that could mass-produce it for the trials, said a UCSD
spokeswoman. "We hope to be a pipeline for bringing promising gene-therapy
treatments from the laboratory to the clinic," Prussak said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             618 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                  September 20, 1994, Tuesday, S-tier Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL ETHICIST TO SPEAK AT ALFRED

DATELINE: ALFRED

BODY:

    Jeffrey Spike, a medical ethicist and the director of the ethics
consultation service at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester, will deliver the
Jo Ann Miller Memorial Lecture in Ethical Issues at 8 p.m. Thursday in Nevins
Theater in the Powell Campus Center at Alfred University.

   His lecture will be on "Advances in Human Genetic Therapy: Medical
Possibilities and Ethical Problems." It is free and open to the public.

   Spike, also an assistant professor of philosophy in the Division of the
Medical Humanities at the University of Rochester School of Medicine, will
discuss "Humanities Education in the Health Care Professions" at Alfred's
Freshman Forum earlier in the day.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1994


                             619 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 20, 1994 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: TIME TO 'SHOO THE FLU'

BYLINE: Staff and wire reports

BODY:

   After last week's heat wave, it may be hard to think about taking precautions
against the flu. But think of last winter and how long it hung around.

   The Visiting Nurse Association of Cleveland and the American Lung Association
chapter are launching a public service program today to nip the flu before it
gets you. The program, "Shoo the Flu," involves vaccination clinics at certain
Finast supermarkets in Northeast Ohio. The cost is $10, which goes toward VNA
charity care. The program runs through Nov. 10. For locations and information,
call 694-4188.

   Cheaper vitamins best buy

   Don't be dazzled by fancy claims and high prices when it comes to buying
vitamins, warns Consumer Reports. Instead, go for the lower prices. After
testing 86 nutritional supplements, Consumer Reports concluded that the
advantages touted in high-priced brands are generally meaningless. Claims of
"natural" brands being better than synthetic ones are not necessarily true.
There's also no benefit in products that are starch- or sugar-free, the magazine
said.

   Fruits, veggies for smokers

   If you must smoke, load up on beta carotene, a nutrient found in fruits and
vegetables such as broccoli, carrots and cantaloupe. A study in the journal
Circulation finds an association between low blood levels of beta carotene and
increased risk of heart attack among smokers. Smokers with the lowest level of
beta carotene have about 3 times the risk of heart attack.

   The study, conducted by researchers at the Johns Hopkins University School of
Hygiene and Public Health, also showed that smokers with the highest level of
the nutrient still have a risk of heart attack twice that of nonsmokers.
Researchers recommend that people stop smoking and eat a well-balanced diet with
plenty of fruits and vegetables. They do not recommend taking beta carotene
supplements to counter the damage of smoking. The study says more research must
be done to determine the effects of beta carotene supplements and other
antioxidants.

   Speak softly to save voice

   Take it down a few notches - you don't have to scream to prove you are a
Browns fan or any other kind of devotee. As a matter of fact, screaming and
yelling can cause serious damage to the throat and voice. Up to 40% of throat
disorders result from vocal misuse or abuse, according to experts at the Ohio
State University Medical Center's Voice Center.

   Dr. Arick Forrest says extreme yelling can permanently alter the voice if not
treated. To make sound, air passes through the vocal cords, liplike structures
that vibrate by banging together several hundred times per second.  Yelling
increases the impact at which the vocal cords hit one another. This causes
irritation and damage.

   Grief in the workplace

   Dealing with serious illness and death is always stressful, but it can be
particularly difficult when grief and loss enter the workplace.

   The illness or death of a co-worker touches each individual in a personal
way, and many people feel awkward if an office colleague loses a parent, spouse,
close companion or child. The Grief in the Workplace program developed by the
Hospice Council of Metropolitan Washington may help workers and supervisors
understand the grieving process.

   Single copies of the brochures When a Co-Worker Is Ill or Dies, When a Co-
Worker Suffers a Loss, Guide to Grief and Guide for Managers are available by
sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to: Hospice Council of Metropolitan
Washington, 1377 K St. N.W., Washington, D.C., 20005.

   Panel OKs gene therapy

   An advisory committee at the National Institutes of Health recently
recommended approving a proposal to use gene therapy to treat cardiovascular
disease. The treatment would add genes near a clogged artery in the leg to get
new blood vessels to grow around a blockage. One researcher compared the
procedure to a heart bypass without the surgeon. If the Food and Drug
Administration gives its approval, the procedure will be used to treat 12
people.

   The study would bring the beginning of a new era in treating cardiovascular
disease, said Dr. Judith Swain, a professor of medicine and genetics and
director of cardiovascular medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

COLUMN: HEALTH BEAT

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1994


                             620 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 20, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 609 words

HEADLINE: REGULATIONS ARE EASED ON GENETIC EXPERIMENTS

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss

BODY:

   A move to streamline the process by which scientists get permission to insert
new genes into people has reignited a debate about how much genetic tinkering is
acceptable and whether it is ethical to make such decisions behind closed doors.

   A federal advisory board voted last week to allow scientists to apply
directly to the Food and Drug Administration for approval to perform some
genetic experiments on people. Until now, scientists have had to submit such
proposals to a National Institutes of Health committee composed of scientists,
ethicists and community members, where the request is discussed in a public
forum that allows testimony from patient advocates and concerned citizens. In
contrast, the FDA review would be closed to the public.

   The new proposal aims to speed up the review process for scientists and
clinicians, who are designing more and more ways to use genes to treat diseases.
It was inspired in part by AIDS activists who have complained that promising
genetic therapies for the treatment of AIDS have become bogged down in federal
red tape.

   Nearly everybody agrees that the current system is cumbersome. But the
fast-track proposal stirred impassioned opposition last week when it was
discussed at a meeting of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee ("the RAC"),
the NIH review group that would in some cases be bypassed under the new rules.
Scientists and nonscientists alike at that meeting said that many of the gene
therapy protocols they review are poorly designed, have not been sufficiently
tested on animals first and either understate the risks to participating
patients or overstate the potential benefits. Such problems, they said, are more
likely to get resolved in open meetings of the NIH committee than by the FDA,
which mostly focuses on regulatory minutiae. "The reason there is a RAC is
public accountability," said RAC member Abbey S. Meyers, executive director of
the National Organization for Rare Disorders. "If these protocols are not
reviewed in public, there is no one to protect the patient."

   NIH director Harold Varmus and FDA officials emphasized that only relatively
noncontroversial gene therapy proposals would be allowed to move straight to the
FDA; any therapies that break new scientific or ethical ground, such as using a
novel virus to get genes into the body or putting genes into a fetus before
birth, would still have to pass public muster with the full NIH committee. But
some were concerned that the decision about what is novel and what is routine
would be made by a small subcommittee without public debate.

   "Pressure might be brought to bear for a proposal to be dealt with only
administratively," said Robertson Parkman, a RAC member and physician at
Children's Hospital in Los Angeles. "I think it is fair to say that the
committee is ambivalent, at best," about the proposed change.

   Nonetheless, the RAC agreed last week after two days of discussion to
gradually cede more decision-making authority to the FDA, with the understanding
that anything out of the ordinary will still get a public review by the RAC.

   Even under these rules, the RAC will probably have plenty of proposals to
review. Scientists and FDA officials said last week that the government may soon
be willing to consider a new generation of highly controversial genetic
experiments that were previously off-limits on ethical grounds. Among them are
"germ-line" therapies (which alter not only an individual's own genes but also
the genes that would be passed to offspring) and genetic "enhancements" aimed
not at curing disease but at effecting cosmetic changes, such as increased
height.


LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1994


                             621 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    September 19, 1994, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1466 words

HEADLINE: Doctors try gene therapy on clots

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Viewed for much of its short history as a means to correct rare inherited
diseases, gene therapy is moving into the limelight as a novel and potentially
valuable weapon against heart and blood vessel disease, the leading killer of
Americans.

   Instead of replacing faulty genes that cause disease, however, scientists are
harnessing gene therapy as a way of turning a patient's own cells into tiny
factories that can churn out drugs and deliver them at a desired spot in a
diseased artery.

   Scientists at a number of medical centers and biotech companies have been
testing such schemes in animals, and last week a team at St. Elizabeth's
Hospital in Boston became the first to win clearance from a key federal panel to
try a gene therapy experiment for cardiovascular disease in patients.

   The scientists, headed by cardiologist Dr. Jeffrey Isner, plan to insert
genes into the blood vessel walls of 12 patients with painful, limb-threatening
blockages in leg arteries. The genes, they hope, will produce a protein that
causes new arteries to sprout and grow to form a bypass, rerouting blood flow
around the obstruction.

   If successful, the maneuver may ease the pain in the patients' blood-starved
leg tissue, allow chronic skin ulcers to heal and perhaps avert amputation of a
foot or leg. It could also lead to a similar strategy for bypassing blocked
arteries to the heart - the cause of chest pain and heart attacks.

   "Gene therapy represents a potentially powerful addition to the therapies
which are currently available for treating cardiovascular diseases," says Isner,
chief of cardiovascular research at St. Elizabeth's. "After nearly two years'
worth of testing in our research laboratories, we are certainly excited by the
prospect of going into human clinical trials."

   The experiment could begin as early as next month, following expected
approval by the US Food and Drug Administration.

   The Boston team, which includes molecular biologist Kenneth Walsh and Dr.
James Symons, a cardiothoracic surgeon, is expected to be the first to try this
approach in humans, but other experiments using gene therapy to attack blood
vessel disease may not be far behind.

   "This is an extraordinarily exciting time," says Dr. Stephen Epstein, chief
of the cardiology branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   "Gene therapy is potentially very powerful in cardiovascular disease," he
adds, with the goal of implanting genes to create new blood vessel growth - as
the Boston researchers are doing - or to prevent blocked arteries from clogging
up again after they've been cleared by the frequently performed procedure known
as balloon angioplasty. "It's allowing drugs to be made where the action is,"
Epstein says.

Keeping expectations in line

    Despite the excitement over the role gene therapy could play in combatting
the No. 1 killer, some warn against overly high expectations.

   "These are very difficult diseases to treat," says Dr. Gary Nabel, a gene
therapy expert at the University of Michigan School of Medicine. "They are
caused by complex biological processes, and we are dealing with the most
challenging problems."

   Even though surgeons and cardiologists using existing surgical techniques can
unblock arteries or create detours for blood, many patients with atherosclerosis
continue to suffer disability, pain and death because the problems recur.

   For the patients with obstructed leg arteries who will be treated by the St.
Elizabeth's researchers, surgery isn't an option, because the obstructions
caused by long-standing atherosclerosis are too widespread.

   In some individuals with blocked arteries, says Isner, a natural process
called angiogenesis induces dozens of new, small blood vessels to grow and
bypass the obstruction, forming "collateral circulation" to nourish the tissue.
Others, for unknown reasons, don't form collateral vessels readily.

   Isner and others have shown that it is a substance called vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) that stimulates the growth of new vessels. The
scientists will deliver the gene containing the DNA blueprint for VEGF to leg
arteries in patients with severe blockages, in hopes that the gene will take up
residence in cells of the artery wall and churn out large amounts of VEGF.

   As with most gene therapy experiments, the critical step is getting enough of
the genes into the body's cells. Scientists commonly load a gene into a crippled
virus that can infect the cells but not spread beyond them, but Isner,
encouraged by experiments in animals, believes the artery cells will take up
genes without such a carrier - so-called naked DNA - which avoids the potential
risks of using viruses.

   The St. Elizabeth's researchers will apply a film of solution containing VEGF
genes to the outside of a small, spongy balloon on the tip of a long wire, or
catheter. With the patient on an operating table, they will insert the catheter
into the leg artery at the groin, push the balloon along until it nears the
blocked section of artery, and inflate the balloon. Pressed against the cells,
some of the VEGF genes will make their way inside and become part of the cells'
genetic information.

   When the cells make their normal biochemical products, the researchers hope
they'll also manufacture VEGF, enough to stimulate the growth of collateral
vessels that will bypass the blockage and reconnect to the artery in the lower
leg.

   "What we'll be looking for is whether leg ulcers that haven't healed over a
period of a month will now heal, and whether pain that the patients have at rest
will diminish," says Isner, adding that results should be seen in two or three
weeks after treatment begins.

Experiment wins approval

    The success of experiments in rabbits helped persuade the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health to approve the human
trial.

   While there are some risk in putting the catheter into the patient's diseased
vessels, "I don't think it poses any undue risk because these patients are poor
risks anyway," says Nelson Wivel, chairman of the NIH committee. "Dr. Isner's
approach is a very reasonable one, and it seems a very interesting way" to try
to deliver the gene to the artery cells.

   Gene therapy is also being harnessed to attack a stubborn and vexing
complication of heart disease treatment: restenosis. Doctors often open blocked
arteries in the heart or elsewhere with balloon-tipped catheters. But the
treatment injures the vessel lining, and smooth muscle cells in the artery wall
often regrow so vigorously that the blockage recurs.

   "More than 400,000 angioplasties are done each year, and the restenosis rate
is anywhere from 25 to 50 percent," says Epstein of the National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute. "It's a major, major dilemma."

   In animals, Epstein and his colleague Dr. Toren Finkel, as well as Drs. Gary
and Elizabeth Nabel at the University of Michigan Medical Center, have already
shown that gene therapy can dampen the excessive regrowth of muscle cells.

   Last month, the Nabels reported in the journal Science that they had
successfully inhibited the healing response of artery smooth muscle cells
following angioplasty in pigs.

   The Nabels inserted so-called suicide genes that they later turned on with a
drug, killing the cells in which the genes had lodged.

   A special double-balloon catheter enabled the researchers to release a
bioengineered virus into just a small portion of the blood vessel at the point
where its lining had been injured by previous angioplasty. The virus, a common
cold virus to which an gene called thymidine kinase had been added, infected the
cells of the vessel wall, causing the cells to begin making a normally harmless
enzyme.

   The gene implant made the pigs' cells vulnerable to a drug called
gancyclovir, so that when the researchers administered that drug, it killed many
of the muscle cells that otherwise would have narrowed the artery again.

   The scientists reported that the two-pronged attack dampened the regrowth of
blood vessel cells by 50 to 90 percent over a three-week period. Although the
strategy has yet to be tried in humans, Gary Nabel says it is "attractive,
because you can get the genes to express turn on transiently" during the short
period of time that the cells tend to regrow, "and you can deliver them locally
with the catheter" just to the desired part of the blood vessel.

   Schemes like this need to be tried first in animals affected by
atherosclerosis, says Epstein of the heart institute, but he is optimistic.

   "It may be that none or only one or two of these approaches will turn out to
be successful," he says. "But we're in a very exciting phase because as yet
there have been no failures" in gene therapy tests on heart disease.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO DRAWING, Dr. Jeffrey Isner leads team that won a key go-ahead
last week to try genetic therapy to treat blockages in arteries.  GLOBE STAFF
PHOTO/WENDY MAEDA

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             622 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    September 18, 1994 Sunday SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 006

LENGTH: 282 words

HEADLINE: Hub docs to try new gene therapy on humans

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   Doctors at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston have won preliminary
government approval to begin the first human trials of cardiovascular gene
therapy.

   A team led by Dr. Jeffrey Isner, chief of cardiovascular research, will use a
novel catheter-based delivery system to perform gene transfer to patients with
blocked arteries.

   The approach delivers the gene via an angioplasty balloon to the arteries of
patients who have pain or ulcers in their legs due to blocked arteries.

   The gene, identified in the late 1980s, makes a protein that causes the cells
that line blood vessels to proliferate and organize into new vessels.

   In this case, the gene is expected to cause new blood vessels to form around
the blockages. It worked in animal experiments, Isner said.

   If the technique works in tests on human leg arteries, the next step will be
to extend it to patients who have similar blockages in their coronary arteries,
he said.

   The National Institutes of Health has approved the experiment for 12 patients
who have been rejected for heart bypass or angioplasty. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration still must approve the trial, but Isner said he hopes to begin
Nov. 1.

   Some subjects have been selected, but the hospital is still seeking more.

   Isner said the procedure may turn out to be an alternative to coronary bypass
or angioplasty.

   "Whether it becomes an alternative to those procedures is anybody's guess,
but we're very excited about the possibility," he said.

   If not, it may end up as a therapy for pain and ulcers related to blocked leg
arteries, for which there is no effective treatment at present, he said.

   The condition sometimes leads to amputation.


LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1994


                             623 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                           September 18, 1994 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 276 words

HEADLINE: Hub docs to try new gene therapy on humans

BYLINE: Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   Doctors at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston have won preliminary
government approval to begin the first human trials of cardiovascular gene
therapy.

   A team led by Dr. Jeffrey Isner, chief of cardiovascular research, will use a
novel catheter-based delivery system to perform gene transfer to patients with
blocked arteries.

   The approach delivers the gene via an angioplasty balloon to the arteries of
patients who have pain or ulcers in their legs due to blocked arteries.

   The gene, identified in the late 1980s, makes a protein that causes the cells
that line blood vessels to proliferate and organize into new vessels.

   In this case, the gene is expected to cause new blood vessels to form around
the blockages. It worked in animal experiments, Isner said.

   If the technique works in tests on human leg arteries, the next step will be
to extend it to patients who have similar blockages in their coronary arteries,
he said.

   The National Institutes of Health has approved the experiment for 12 patients
who have been rejected for heart bypass or angioplasty. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration still must approve the trial, but Isner said he hopes to begin
Nov. 1.

   Some subjects have been selected, but the hospital is still seeking more.

   Isner said the procedure may turn out to be an alternative to coronary bypass
or angioplasty.

   "Whether it becomes an alternative to those procedures is anybody's guess,
but we're very excited about the possibility," he said.

   If not, it may end up as a therapy for pain and ulcers related to blocked leg
arteries, for which there is no effective treatment at present, he said.

   The condition sometimes leads to amputation.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             624 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          September 15, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section B; Page 3

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer discovery elates scientists

BYLINE: By Anne Rochell STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   For scientists, the isolation of a gene critical to the development of breast
cancer marks the end of a decade-long treasure hunt and the beginning of a new
era in cancer research.

   For a woman who fears that she may be the unlucky one in every eight women
who will develop breast cancer, the discovery is, for the moment, pretty
useless. However, the implications of the finding are profound.

   This week, scientists in the United States and Canada announced that they had
found BRCA1, a gene that when lost or damaged may raise to 85 percent a woman's
lifetime risk of contracting breast cancer. The gene probably accounts for at
least half of all familial breast cancer cases, or about 10,000 a year,
researchers estimate.

   "There are so many things to be learned by it, and by the process by which we
found it," said Dr. Lisa Cannon-Albright, a research associate with the
University of Utah and one of the investigators involved in the study.

   In all likelihood, a blood test will be developed within two years to
identify women who carry BRCA1, say researchers, who report their findings in
the Sept. 30 issue of the journal Science.

   A woman who has the mutated gene could take certain precautions, such as
quitting smoking or stopping use of birth control pills.

   But BRCA1 isn't the only breast cancer gene. In a separate study in the same
issue of Science, a second team of researchers say they have determined which
chromosome contains BRCA2, another gene that puts women at risk for breast
cancer. It is only a matter of time before the gene itself is found. What's
more, there is probably a third gene, Cannon- Albright said.

   Only 5 percent to 10 percent of breast cancer cases run in families, which
means the vast majority of cases cannot be predicted. Making a BRCA1 test widely
available, therefore, raises some prickly issues.

   "It would be useful in a family where you have at least one affected member,
where you can test her for the gene and if she has it, test the other women in
the family," said Dr. David Goldgar, who led the University of Utah team's work
on the gene.

   A woman whose mother or sister has breast cancer would then know for certain
whether her risk is higher than normal.

   But Cannon-Albright said, "With the general population, we need to know a lot
more and have the other breast cancer genes in hand before we can do predictive
testing for breast cancer risk."

   There are other ethical considerations as well.

   There is the danger, for instance, that a woman who discovers that she has
the gene might remove her breasts as a precaution, said Dr. William Wood,
director of the Emory University Breast Health Center.

   Scientists worldwide have long known of BRCA1's existence and have been
working furiously to isolate it. The first institutes to reach the goal were the
National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences in North Carolina, Myriad
Genetics Corp. and the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, and McGill
University in Montreal.

   "Scientifically, it's terribly important for our understanding of breast
cancer," Wood said. "Clinically, in terms of taking care of patients, it's
minimal."

   BRCA1 is also responsible for inherited forms of ovarian cancer, a rarer but
deadly form of cancer that strikes about 24,000 women a year.

   The discovery of BRCA1 may make it easier to find genes for other common
cancers, such as prostate, Cannon-Albright said.

   "If we could harness enough information on enough of these genes, people
could be screened for most of the common cancer genes," she said.

   And in the very long term, this information could be used in gene therapy,
Wood said. Knowing exactly what gene puts someone at risk, a doctor could
replace or repair that gene.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994


                             625 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          September 15, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 4

LENGTH: 600 words

HEADLINE: Scientists elated at discovery of breast cancer gene

BYLINE: By Anne Rochell STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   For scientists, the isolation of a gene critical to the development of breast
cancer marks the end of a decade-long treasure hunt and the beginning of a new
era in cancer research.

   For a woman who fears that she may be the unlucky one in every eight women
who will develop breast cancer, the discovery is, for the moment, pretty
useless. However, the implications of the finding are profound.

   This week, scientists in the United States and Canada announced that they had
found BRCA1, a gene that when lost or damaged may raise to 85 percent a woman's
lifetime risk of contracting breast cancer. The gene probably accounts for at
least half of all familial breast cancer cases, or about 10,000 a year,
researchers estimate.

   "There are so many things to be learned by it, and by the process by which we
found it," said Dr. Lisa Cannon-Albright, a research associate with the
University of Utah and one of the investigators involved in the study.

   In all likelihood, a blood test will be developed within two years to
identify women who carry BRCA1, say researchers, who report their findings in
the Sept. 30 issue of the journal Science.

   A woman who has the mutated gene could take certain precautions, such as
quitting smoking or stopping use of birth control pills.

   But BRCA1 isn't the only breast cancer gene. In a separate study in the same
issue of Science, a second team of researchers say they have determined which
chromosome contains BRCA2, another gene that puts women at risk for breast
cancer. It is only a matter of time before the gene itself is found. What's
more, there is probably a third gene, Cannon- Albright said.

   Only 5 percent to 10 percent of breast cancer cases run in families, which
means the vast majority of cases cannot be predicted. Making a BRCA1 test widely
available, therefore, raises some prickly issues.

   "It would be useful in a family where you have at least one affected member,
where you can test her for the gene and if she has it, test the other women in
the family," said Dr. David Goldgar, who led the University of Utah team's work
on the gene.

   A woman whose mother or sister has breast cancer would then know for certain
whether her risk is higher than normal.

   But Cannon-Albright said, "With the general population, we need to know a lot
more and have the other breast cancer genes in hand before we can do predictive
testing for breast cancer risk."

   There are other ethical considerations as well.

   There is the danger, for instance, that a woman who discovers that she has
the gene might remove her breasts as a precaution, said Dr. William Wood,
director of the Emory University Breast Health Center.

   Scientists worldwide have long known of BRCA1's existence and have been
working furiously to isolate it. The first institutes to reach the goal were the
National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences in North Carolina, Myriad
Genetics Corp. and the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, and McGill
University in Montreal.

   "Scientifically, it's terribly important for our understanding of breast
cancer," Wood said. "Clinically, in terms of taking care of patients, it's
minimal."

   BRCA1 is also responsible for inherited forms of ovarian cancer, a rarer but
deadly form of cancer that strikes about 24,000 women a year.

   The discovery of BRCA1 may make it easier to find genes for other common
cancers, such as prostate, Cannon-Albright said.

   And in the very long term, this information could be used in gene therapy,
Wood said. Knowing exactly what gene puts someone at risk, a doctor could
replace or repair that gene.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994


                             626 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 15, 1994, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 10C

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: 2 Md. biotech companies announce collaboration

BYLINE: Patricia Meisol, Sun Staff Writer

BODY:


   Two leading Maryland biotechnology companies announced yesterday that they
would collaborate on human gene therapies and licensing agreements in an
arrangement analysts said could speed the way to product development.

   The pact unites a company that discovers genes, Human Genome Sciences Inc. of
Rockville, and a company in the business of developing gene products to treat
diseases such as cancer, Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg.

   Under the terms of the agreement, the companies will try together to identify
and develop products using Human Genome's gene discovery research and Genetic
Therapy's therapy technology. The companies said that they will offer
pharmaceutical companies rights to develop gene therapy products based on their
combined technology and research, and that they have agreed not to collaborate
with others in the same business.

   Although relatively young companies, Human Genome and Genetic Therapy are
leaders in their respective fields. Genetic Therapy, founded in 1986, currently
is testing genetic therapies in clinical trials for diseases such as cystic
fibrosis, AIDS and cancer. It is believed closest to commercializing the
technology to treat diseases by inserting genes into a patient's cells. The
company reported a $ 3.1 million profit in its second quarter, but said that was
primarily due to a one-time payment.

   Genetic Therapy's chairman and chief executive officer, M. James Barrett,
said the collaboration announced yesterday "offers a range of product
development opportunities that neither of us had separately." This is because
third parties now will have access to Genetic Therapy's extensive gene delivery
technology and human clinical experience, as well as to Human Genome's gene
discovery capabilities, he said.

   William A. Haseltine, chairman and chief executive officer of the 2-year-old
Human Genome, said the agreement allows his company to use "our newly discovered
genes in human gene therapy, opening up a new and exciting field for HGS."

   The company reported a $ 1.8 million profit last year and a $ 7.5 million
profit in the first half of this year.

   Mary Ann Gray, an analyst with Kidder, Peabody in New York, said the
collaboration could be critical to moving products to market.

   Initially there was great interest in companies like HGS that discover genes,
Ms. Gray said, "But the problem I had with them was that while it is exciting to
discover new genes and find applications for them, ultimately the name of the
game in this business is getting products on the market." Genetic Therapy's
asset in the arrangement, she said, is knowledge of developing genes and getting
them to market.

   Genetic Therapy stock closed yesterday at $ 9.75, up 75 cents in trading on
Nasdaq. Human Genome stock closed up $ 1 at $ 16.50.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994


                             627 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  September 15, 1994, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: Prevention message behind new cancer post

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Dr. Bernard Levin says his recent promotion to vice president
of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center sends one
loud message to the public: ""Cancer is preventable. ''

   The reasons the state cancer hospital created a place for a
vice president of cancer prevention are varied, said Levin, who
previously headed the center's department of gastrointestinal
medical oncology and digestive diseases.

   ""Taking care of people with advanced cancer has limitations
-- economically, spiritually and medically,'' he said.

   Scientists are now on the verge of developing the biological
tools, genetic knowledge as well as the behavioral and nutritional
techniques, necessary for stopping cancer before it develops, Levin
said.

   ""That is primary prevention,'' he said.  ""You prevent it
from ever occurring. ''

   He said getting people to stop smoking would be the most
important advance.

   Nutritional studies also will give important information
about cancer prevention, Levin said.

   The future will see genetically based cancer preventives that
will be developed at centers such as Anderson.

   ""Finding out who is susceptible to cancer -- either
genetically or because of metabolic profiles -- will be
important,'' he said.

   Genetic techniques also will allow doctors to find cancers
early with a simple blood or urine test, he said.

   Gene therapy might even have a place in cancer prevention
once the genetic causes of the malignancies are identified.

   Once the breast cancer gene is found, Levin can envision
replacing mutant genes with those that function normally.

   ""You would be literally engineering yourself out of
cancer,'' he said.  ""That will be the prevention of the future. ''

   While Levin sees his center as developing new methods of
cancer prevention, he also hopes to change the institution's image.

   ""We hope that Anderson will no longer be viewed as a last
chance,'' he said.  ""We want it to be seen as a place to go where
there are people who know how to do cancer prevention. ''

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1994


                             628 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                  September 15, 1994, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE B10; DIGEST

LENGTH: 738 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From news services and staff reports

BODY:

   Lawyers for Dart Group President Ronald Haft and the company signed a
"standstill agreement" until a Nov. 2 court hearing. Ronald Haft filed suit
Monday in a Delaware court over Dart's delay in issuing him options to buy stock
that would substantially increase his stake in Dart. Under the agreement, Dart
agreed not to take any major actions, such as changing the composition of its
board of directors, and Ronald Haft agreed not to press to increase his stake
until the court acts.

   Retail sales rose a strong 0.8 percent in August, to a seasonally adjusted $
186.6 billion, after remaining unchanged in July, the Commerce Department said.
The gain, in line with analysts' expectations, was spurred by a recovery in
sales of autos and other durable goods, and perhaps by back-to-school shopping,
analysts said.

   A former Bear Stearns director, Ed Downe Jr., agreed to pay $ 11.2 million to
settle SEC insider trading allegations. Downe, former husband of automobile
heiress Charlotte Ford, is the fourth person in the so-called Society Seven
group to settle a 1992 SEC lawsuit alleging that members illegally profited from
insider stock tips they exchanged.

   CBS's board approved a five-for-one split of its common stock to bring the
shares within reach of smaller investors. Wall Street cheered the move, pushing
CBS stock up $ 5.25 to $ 343 on the New York Stock Exchange.

   Citibank and NationsBank are being investigated over allegations that they
violated federal laws that forbid banks to tie approval of a loan to the
applicant buying securities through the bank, Comptroller of the Currency Eugene
Ludwig said. NationsBank said it was cooperating with the probe of its western
South Carolina community banking group and called it "an isolated situation."
Ludwig said no evidence has been found that Citibank engaged in illegal tying.
Citibank did not return Associated Press calls for comment.

   Foreign firms' share of Japan's semiconductor market rose to a record 21.9
percent in the second quarter, the Japanese government said. Early this year,
the United States called for emergency steps to boost foreign chipmakers' share
of Japan's market after it fell below the 20 percent target set in a 1991 trade
agreement for three straight quarters.

   Copley Pharmaceutical of Canton, Mass., recalled its over-the-counter
antihistamine drug Brompheril because of concerns about whether the pills were
properly coated. The company said the pills' safety or effectiveness is not in
question. The news sent its stock price down $ 3.50 a share, to $ 27, on the
Nasdaq stock market.

   Odessa College, a two-year community college in Texas, sued Gruntal & Co. for
$ 10 million, accusing the Wall Street brokerage of fraud and making false
statements when it sold the institution financial derivatives that later went
sour. A Gruntal lawyer said the lawsuit "is devoid of any merit."


   Chicago Board of Trade officials expect no problems today after a hardware
glitch in the computers responsible for transmitting prices from the exchange's
trading floors halted trading for more than three hours.

   Federal Express's fiscal first-quarter earnings rose 86 percent, to $ 61.1
million, on continued improvement in its overseas business.

   Dell Computer said Joel J. Kocher, its sales and marketing chief, resigned to
become chief operating officer of Artisoft of Tucson. Dell said its vice
chairman, Morton Topfer, will assume Kocher's duties until a replacement is
named.

   LOCAL BUSINESS

   Intersolv, a Rockville-based software company, agreed to acquire Software
Edge, a $ 2.5 million software company in Colorado Springs, Colo., for about $
5.7 million in stock.

   Genetic Therapy of Gaithersburg, which is developing drugs to combat genetic
defects, and Human Genome Sciences of Rockville, which catalogues chemical
sequences of the human genetic code, agreed to collaborate to develop drugs for
gene therapy.

   Merry-Go-Round Enterprises, the Joppa, Md., retailer that has been operating
under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection since the beginning of the year, reported
a $ 37.9 million loss for the second quarter. The loss included reorganization
costs of about $ 20.4 million, the company said.

   Federal Realty Investment Trust of Bethesda increased its quarterly dividend
to 39 1/2 cents a share from 39 cents a share.  Mercantile Bankshares of
Baltimore increased its quarterly dividend 3 cents, to 20 cents a share.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             629 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

HEADLINE: Advisory Panel Clears Way for Trying Genetic Therapy on Cardiovascular
Disease

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   An advisory committee at the National Institutes of Health yesterday
unanimously recommended approval of a proposal in which gene therapy is to be
used for the first time to treat cardiovascular disease.

   The idea is to add genes near a clogged artery in the leg to get new blood
vessels to grow around a blockage. One researcher compared the procedure to a
bypass without the surgeon.

    The 15-member advisory panel, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, whose
approval is required for all proposals involving gene therapy, gave permission
at a meeting in Bethesda, Md., for 12 patients to be treated. The Food and Drug
Administration must also give its consent before the study can begin, but the
F.D.A. says it has never rejected a study approved by the committee.

New Age of Treatment

    The study brings the beginning of a new era in the treatment of
cardiovascular disease, said Dr. Judith Swain, a professor of medicine and
genetics at the University of Pennsylvania and director of cardiovascular
medicine there.

   "With our standard techniques -- with bypass surgery and angioplasty -- we've
gone about as far as we're going to go," Dr. Swain said. But gene therapy, she
said, offers the hope not only of treatments for blocked arteries that resist
available therapies but also of better therapies for conditions that currently
lend themselves to treatment.

   Generating new blood vessels to go around a blockage, she said, is "almost
like a coronary bypass without the cardiac surgeon."

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
cautioned that although this was "a very exciting field that is full of
promises, it is still in an experimental phase." It may take years before the
promises are fulfilled. "We need to be as careful and cautious about what we say
as we are enthusiastic about the process," he said.

Proposal From Boston

    The therapy was proposed by Dr. Jeffrey Isner, a cardiologist; Dr. Kenneth
Walsh, a molecular biologist, and Dr. James Symes, a surgeon, all of St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston and the Tufts University School of
Medicine.

   Dr. Isner said the proposal was to treat people who have a blockage in one of
two major arteries that supply blood to the leg. He estimated that 30,000 to
40,000 people a year have leg-artery atherosclerosis so severe that they have
excruciating pain even when at rest or have sores that cannot heal because so
little blood is getting past the blockage. Those people must have bypass surgery
or balloon angioplasty -- in which a balloon is threaded into the artery on a
catheter and then inflated to widen the constricted area -- or must have the leg
amputated.

   The idea behind the gene therapy is to mimic what naturally occurs in some
people when their arteries are blocked. These people form 10 to 50 extra blood
vessels, called collateral vessels, that wind their way past the blockage and
provide a new pathway for blood.

   The collateral vessels "are sort of like a heat-seeking missile," as they
migrate to and around the blockage, Dr. Isner said. "When you think about it,
it's pretty amazing," he added.

   Many people, however, do not form collateral vessels, or do not form enough.
"Everybody has made the observation that some people are collateral-formers and
others are not," Dr. Isner said.

   But molecular biologists have identified the substance that signals
collaterals to form. The substance, a protein called vascular endothelial growth
factor, or vegf, is secreted by cells lining an artery. Dr. Isner and his
colleagues propose to provide a gene for vegf molecules that will allow
formation of collateral vessels in patients who do not make them on their own.

   The researchers will coat a tiny angioplasty balloon with a polymer that is
impregnated with vegf genes. Then they will inflate the balloon in a region of
the artery adjacent to the blockage. The genes should be taken up by the cells
of the artery wall, and those cells should churn out vegf proteins for the next
couple of weeks. The hope is that vegf proteins, in turn, will coax new blood
vessels to grow around the blockage.

The Study's Subjects

    To be eligible for the study, patients must have leg pain so severe that
they have been taking narcotics for a month, with no improvement in their
condition, or must have a leg ulcer that has persisted for a month despite
treatment. They must also be inappropriate candidates for bypass surgery or
balloon angioplasty, either because of the location of the blockage or because
of their general medical condition. Conventional medicine will have nothing to
offer these people except an amputation, Dr. Isner said.

   If the experiment works, the researchers expect to see increased blood flow
to the leg. And the patients should have fewer symptoms: their sores should
heal, or they should have less pain -- or none at all -- in the leg.

   But there are risks to the treatment.

   "In a patient with marginal circulation to begin with, there is some risk in
putting a catheter in among the few arteries that are working," Dr. Isner said.
A piece of plaque could break off and travel through the bloodstream, causing a
heart attack or a stroke. Or the treatment could damage the fragile artery to
such an extent that the patient's leg would have to be amputated anyway.

   But Dr. Isner said the risk of serious complications was less than 10
percent.

   And if the treatment works, he said, it will open new doors. The next logical
step, he said, would be to use the same method to open blocked arteries leading
to the heart.

   "It could be a totally new way of treating patients," Dr. Isner said.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1994


                             630 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                   September 14, 1994 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: TODAY; Pg. 5E

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: MCCORMACK CRUISING IN FOR CCC TALK

BYLINE: by MARY STRASSMEYER

BODY:

   Some big names are on their way to town ... Mark McCormack, the
internationally known founder, chairman and CEO of the International Management
Group here, will come back to speak at Cuyahoga Community College's Presidential
Scholarship Luncheon at noon Sept. 29 at Stouffer Tower City Plaza Hotel.

   IMG, the sports and entertainment conglomerate, keeps growing under
McCormack's guidance. He revolutionized the sports world by establishing athlete
representation as a distinct business discipline and demonstrating the value of
sports as a cost-effective tool. He is also the author of five books, including
the best seller "What They Don't Teach You at Harvard Business School."

   In June, when last heard about, the New York Times reported that McCormack
ran his empire for 2 1/2 months from a penthouse aboard a luxury ocean liner,
Royal Viking Sun, cruising the South Pacific. Two double cabins were also
reserved for family and employees who boarded and disembarked at various ports,
and a single cabin for his secretary.

   The article said he spent no more than 21 days in Cleveland last year as he
traveled the world negotiating high-level contracts. It also stated that he
hopes to write an autobiography.

   Looks like a sell-out and a real coup for Cuyahoga Community College
President Jerry Sue Thornton and her fund-raiser for scholarship funds.  Hearing
about doing business aboard a cruise ship would be enough for most people.
Tickets are $35 per person. Call 987-4868.

   THERE'S MORE ... George Stephanopoulos, the Cleveland native who's senior
adviser to President Clinton for policy and strategy, will be the keynote
speaker for the second annual Distinction in Media Excellence (DIME) Awards
dinner Oct. 13 at Windows on the River in the Flats.

   The DIME Awards competition is conducted by the March of Dimes Birth Defects
Foundation, Northern Ohio Chapter, to recognize outstanding efforts by the media
that inform the public of infant and maternal health issues such as prenatal
care, childhood immunization and gene therapy.

   Stephanopoulos will join 11 area communications professionals in presenting
the 14 area winners. Tickets are $30 a person. Call 642-0400.

   AND MORE ... Carmel Quinn, the singer on the Arthur Godfrey Show of the
mid-1950s, is alive and well and living in New Jersey. She sings and travels
around the country, too. Quinn will be in Cleveland Oct. 2 for a 3 p.m. concert
at the East Side Irish American Club.

   Plain Dealer library files have nothing on this, but Quinn, who's been here
before, claims to have a maternal Cleveland connection. She wrote that her
mother, Elizabeth McFarland, came here with two brothers from Ireland.
McFarland sang and played in an Irish club here and "almost married a man named
Walgreen of the drugstore family." But she returned to Ireland, met Quinn's
father, Michael, and was born Carmel Quinn instead of Carmel Walgreen. Her
uncles stayed on and sent parcels, wrapped in The Plain Dealer, to Dublin.

   Tickets for the concert are $16 a person. Call 731-4003.

   BOOKISH VISIT ... Art expert, author and columnist Alan Bamberger has been
visiting his parents, Leo and Myrtle Bamberger of Shaker Heights for a
week-and-a-half. Now living in San Francisco, Bamberger is here looking for rare
books pertaining to the fine and decorative arts, which he deals in, along with
art. Bamberger just had his second book, "Art for All: How to Buy Fine Art for
Under $300," published by Wallace-Homestead Co.a division of ABC/Capital Cities
Corp. The book, $14.95, is available in some bookstores.

   AS THE RECORDS SPIN ... Former Clevelander Bill Deutsch is the new director
of artists and repertoire at Hollywood Records in Burbank, Calif. He will find
and develop talent for the new label. Deutsch, who grew up in Beachwood, was
formerly an artists and repertoire representative at Atlantic Records. He is the
son of Roz Deutsch, who lives in the suburb.

COLUMN: MARY, MARY

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             631 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           September 12, 1994, Monday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Section A; Page 10

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH-CARE TRADE-OFFS Loving care vs. life-saving gains in medicine

BYLINE: Martha Ezzard

BODY:

   Americans are schizophrenic about what kind of health care they really want.

   Cost is a primary concern. But as the political debate spurs creation of huge
health-care networks seeking larger market shares, Americans hang on to the
old-fashioned idea that medical care ought not to be driven by the profit
motive.

   Most people also buy off on the argument that if there were more general
practitioners and fewer specialists, health care would be more affordable. But
at the same time, no one wants to stifle the technological breakthroughs - many
of which are the very result of U.S. medical specialization. On a single day
last week, there was news a sickle-cell anemia cure, a novel gene therapy to
treat cystic fibrosis, and a new blood enzyme test by which cardiologists can
detect heart attacks more quickly.

   As the impersonal medical networks mushroom, with or without reform, the main
question is whether the cost-cutting benefits will go to stockholders or
patients.

   I can still recall hearing my mother say it was simply "poor taste" for a
doctor's office to ask for payment at the reception room door. Doctors, she
thought, were supposed to be above that. They should think of healing the sick
and comforting the dying.

   She grew up, of course, in a totally different era, in the small south
Georgia town of Dawson, where my grandfather was a country doctor for more than
50 years. His medical office was above the Dawson Pharmacy in a turn-of-the
century building where a busy '90s-style pharmacy still faces the town's main
intersection.

   Dr. John Henry Lewis, whose clientele was two-thirds black and poor, accepted
watermelons, sweet potatoes, peaches and hams for the babies he delivered, the
appendixes and tonsils he removed. He died when I was 10 years old, but he took
me with him on a few rare occasions as he made house calls on Terrell County's
narrow red clay roads. He checked regularly on new mothers, children with mumps
or chicken pox, and old people with aches and pains he treated mostly with his
keenly attuned listening skills.

   There's a stained glass window to "Doc Lewis" in the Dawson Methodist Church
where he often found prayer the best hope for sufferings he couldn't help. I
stood by his grave in the Dawson cemetery recently and thought a lot about how
he might have reacted to CAT-scans, laser surgery, heart transplants, even
modern-day antibiotics.

   Next to his tombstone is a small monument to his only son who died of lockjaw
because of an infection from a simple barefoot cut that a routine tetanus shot
would prevent today. But in 1909, the train from Atlanta carrying the precious
serum didn't make it to Albany in time to save little Charley Clark Lewis.

   There are a lot of trade-offs in today's health-care evolution. And while
doctors and hospitals would do well not to forget bedside manners, I'm sure both
my mother and my grandfather would gladly trade the romance of the country
doctor for the life-saving advances of modern medicine.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1994


                             632 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   SEPTEMBER 12, 1994, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1598 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS AROUND THE BAY
 Island City Stranded by Base Closure
 Businesses in Alameda fight for su

BYLINE: KENNETH HOWE, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    If you scanned the signs on shop windows, you might think ''For Lease'' was
the name of this town. There's the For Lease pharmacy, the For Lease cocktail
lounge and a lot of shuttered storefronts and empty office buildings in Alameda.

   While the U.S. Navy isn't scheduled to begin shutting down the Alameda Naval
Air Station until next year, this island city of arbored streets and Victorian
homes already is showing signs of decline.

   Since 1991, the Navy has eliminated 2,000 civilian and military jobs in
Alameda. Many business owners -- worried that no amount of economic development
will ever take the Navy's place -- have already closed up shop in search of more
promising locations.

   Along Webster Street, the main business drag next to the Navy base, many bars
are closed for the first time since sailors came to town more than 50 years ago.
In 1937, the city of Alameda sold 1,700 acres at the western edge of the island
to the Navy for $ 1, tying its commercial life to the U.S.  military.

   Three years ago, Kon Pon Saechao bought a small bait shop on Central Avenue
near Webster.

   The previous owner told Saechao he could gross $ 100,000 a year selling
worms, shrimp, anchovies and fishing gear to sailors who fished the rock jetty
next to the base.

   Saechao made nearly that much his first year. But the recession, fears of
pollution in the bay and -- worst of all -- the Navy's closure of most of the
jetty have cut deeply into revenues.

   ''When the carriers come in, we do well,'' he said.

   But what happens in two years, when all four of the Navy ships that home-port
in Alameda have sailed away for good? Saechao shakes his head and shrugs.

   Across the street from the bait shop is the nautically named Neptune Plaza,
where nearly 40 percent of the stores are vacant. Business is also hurting along
Park Street, Alameda's other commercial strip.

   ''Every day, fewer and fewer people are coming into the store,'' said Lester
Crawford, co-owner of Alameda Office Supply on Webster. The bulk of his business
comes from supplying stationery to the base, and he has had to lay off two of
his five full-time employees and reduced the hours of two part-timers.

   ''And it's just going to get worse,'' said Crawford, shaking his head.

   To survive, businesses will have to adapt. Doherty & Dunne, a sporting goods
store on Park Street, responded to declining foot traffic and competition from
discounters by shifting its focus from retail customers to college and
professional teams. Today the store sells socks, adhesive tape and water bottles
to the San Francisco 49ers and uniforms and equipment to the University of
California at Berkeley and San Jose State University.

   ISOLATED ISLAND

   One of Alameda's problems -- and also its charms -- is its isolation. To get
there, you must wind through Oakland's Chinatown, being careful not to miss the
entrance to the Webster Street Tube, an underground tunnel that is the island's
main link to the continental United States.

   As a place to live, Alameda has many attractions. The residential streets
evoke the Midwest of the 1950s. It's a place of tree-enshrouded neighborhoods,
where Good Humor trucks still ply a healthy trade; a town with low crime rates
and high academic scores.

   Despite some shuttered storefronts, its two main commercial streets are still
clean, neat and pleasantly old-fashioned.

   Only Alameda's two big business parks, Marina Village and Harbor Bay,
acknowledge that the second millennium is scarcely a half-dozen years away, with
their austere facades of concrete and smoked glass.

   Marina Village, a combination shopping center/business park, is home to Roche
Diagnostics, a pharmaceutical company; Somatix, a gene therapy firm; and
Glycomed, which makes drugs to fight corneal ulcers and viral infections. The
development has achieved 87 percent occupancy, in part by charging rents in the
range of $ 1.35 to $ 1.60 per square foot a month, compared with $ 2 in nearby
Emeryville.

   The 1.3-million-square-foot Harbor Bay, though it remains 35 percent empty,
managed to gain a few tenants last year. These new businesses were largely
responsible for a 12 percent gain in Alameda's sales tax revenue during the
second quarter of this year, according to Zenda James, the city's finance
director.

   Even with the increased revenue, however, James said the city is $ 600,000
shy of balancing its $ 38 million budget.

   ANCHORS AWEIGH

   The shutdown of the Naval base and the nearby Naval Aviation Depot will
eliminate about 16,000 military and civilian jobs in Alameda, along with a total
annual payroll of about $ 344.5 million and $ 55 million in local purchases by
the military.

   As those losses ripple throughout the community, another 14,000 jobs will be
lost at companies dependent on Navy spending, according to a study done for
Alameda County by Economic Research Associates.

   Altogether, those 30,000 lost jobs -- and $ 729.3 million in lost wages --
represent a huge blow on an island with a population of about 80,000.

   The unemployed will have to compete for jobs with some of the 36,000 other
civilian and military personnel who are expected to be furloughed at four other
nearby Naval facilities that are slated for closure: the Oakland Naval Supply
Center, the Naval Station at Treasure Island, Oakland's Naval Hospital and the
Mare Island Naval Shipyard.

   SOME OPTIMISM

   Not everyone is pessimistic. To hear Chamber of Commerce President Bill
Garvine tell it, the Navy's departure could be a golden opportunity.

   ''The base was a huge provider,'' he said. ''But that game is lost. The
question now is, how are we going to translate a tremendously valuable chunk of
land into something that will benefit us?''

   There are lots of ideas for transforming the base -- nearly as many as there
are for the Presidio Army base in San Francisco. Ideas for Alameda range from a
homeless shelter to a science center to nesting space for the least tern.

   The job of steering Alameda into its post-Naval years falls largely to the
Alameda Reuse Redevelopment Authority. The agency includes the Alameda City
Council; the mayors of Alameda, Oakland and San Leandro; and representatives
from the county board of supervisors and the office of Representative Ron
Dellums, D-Oakland.

   POTENTIAL CONFLICT

   Paul Tuttle, head planner for the Reuse Authority, said a major issue is the
potential conflict between job-generating ideas and public policy uses. But he
thinks the base can accommodate both.

   ''This is a huge piece of property with millions of square feet of
buildings,'' he said.

   Because many projects will take years to develop, the Reuse Authority is
promoting interim uses of the base. Companies that have expressed interest in
locating there for five to 10 years include AEG, a European venture bidding for
the job of rehabilitating BART trains; National Airmotive, a company that
overhauls aircraft engines; and a consortium that plans to build electric cars.

   Alameda Mayor Bill Withrow said that so many companies have expressed
interest in Alameda that transportation could become a problem. Getting people
on and off the island was never a big problem for the Navy, because so many of
its people lived on base or on ships.

   Withrow's first transportation priority is a direct exit off of Interstate
880. Longer term, he dreams of a federally funded gondola system that would
carry passengers from the Oakland West BART station, 200 feet in the air to a
terminus on Alameda.

   ''We're taking a big hit,'' Withrow said, ''but we've got a tremendous
location and a lot of resources.'' Added the former Navy captain with a Harvard
MBA: ''I think there's a lot more upside potential than downside risk.''

   HOW THE BASE COULD BE USED

   These are some of the proposed post-military uses for the Alameda Naval Air
Station:

   * A homeless shelter. A 1987 federal law gives agencies that serve the
homeless first dibs on vacant federal land, and 30 homeless-aid groups are
drafting plans for a comprehensive rehabilitation center.

   * Science City, a 100-acre technology center connected to the University of
California system that would translate academic research into marketable
products. It would include institutes on the environment, transportation and
high-tech communications, as well as an adjacent research and development park.

   * Pan American University, a private institution for the study of East- West
relations, including law and business, on about 90 acres.

   * A ship-recycling business, which would have its main operations at San
Francisco's Hunters Point but some facilities at the base.

   * Coast Guard housing, composed of 580 leased units.

   * A 900-acre nature preserve to be run by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
in part to protect several hundred nesting pairs of least terns, an endangered
species.

   * City and county parks and recreational facilities on an undetermined amount
of land.

   CHART:

   ALAMEDA NAVAL AIR STATION/ AT A GLANCE

   The U.S. Navy will begin shutting down the base next year, finishing in 1997.
Key facts about the base:

   * Size: 1,700 acres

   * Housing: 3,000 units

   * Airfield: 900 acres

   * Port: Deep-water

   * Employment: 10,972 military and 5,062 civilian positions.

   * Home-port ships:

   The Arkansas, a nuclear powered guided missile cruiser with a crew of up to
700, scheduled to depart next year.

   Two nuclear-powered carriers, the Carl Vinson and the Abraham Lincoln, each
with a crew of 3,000, are scheduled to steam away in 1996.

   The Samuel Gompers, an auxiliary repair ship with a crew of 1,300, will
depart at an unscheduled date.

GRAPHIC: MAP, PHOTO (3),(1) Aircraft carriers at the Naval Air Station in
Alameda will soon be just a memory, (2) At the nautically named Neptune Plaza,
across the street from Saechao's bait shop, nearly 40 percent of the stores are
vacant, (3) Sales at Kon Pon Saechao's bait shop on Central Avenue in Alameda
have been hurt by the Naval base's planned closure , PHOTOS BY VINCE MAGGIORA,
THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994


                             633 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 12, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F33; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 1385 words

HEADLINE: A Less-Than-Bionic Mode for Biotech Stocks

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Despite America's love affair with new technology, biotechnology stocks,
especially those of smaller companies, have taken a beating this year.

   Fear of price controls from health care reform and more realistic
expectations of how quickly new products can be brought to market have sobered
investors and caused them to pull back and be more selective about where they
put their money.

   The handful of local biotech firms that are well known nationally have been
no exception for the most part, though several Wall Street analysts say these
firms still hold plenty of promise.

   At the end of August, the stock of Alpha 1 Biomedicals Inc. of Bethesda
closed at $ 1.69, an 88.4 percent drop from the beginning of the year.

   Medimmune Inc. of Gaithersburg ended the month at $ 4.75 a share, down 57
percent from the beginning of the year.

   A share of Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg traded at $ 10.25 Aug. 31,
down 37 percent since Jan. 1.

   The stock of Univax Biologics Inc. of Rockville fell 20.6 percent from the
beginning of the year, ending August at $ 5.75.

   Human Genome Sciences of Rockville ended August with its stock at $ 16.50, a
7 percent decline this year.

   By contrast, the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index gained 1.9 percent from
Jan. 1 to the end of August. Biotech stocks, as measured by an index of 171
companies selected by the investment banking firm of PaineWebber Inc. in New
York, fell 13 percent during the same period.

   Much of the drop in the stocks of Alpha 1 Biomedicals and Medimmune followed
disappointing news. At the end of 1993, Medimmune failed to win Food and Drug
Administration approval of a drug to prevent a common lung infection in
children, but it is working to address the agency's concerns. Alpha 1 has been
embroiled in a dispute with a major licensing partner that was resolved only
three weeks ago.

   Although the per-share price of Genetic Therapy and Univax took steep cuts,
these two companies are generally considered by Wall Street to be proceeding
quietly but steadily on their quests -- Genetic Therapy to insert genes into
cells to counteract faulty genes, and Univax to develop a variety of genetically
engineered vaccines.

   The problem, said PaineWebber biotech analyst Linda Miller, is that the
biggest biotech companies -- those considered the most likely to survive either
alone or by being acquired -- are garnering an increasingly larger share of the
dollars investors are willing to place in biotech. Price control worries as well
as several well-publicized product failures by some biotech firms have made
people skittish about investing in any but the most established companies, she
said.

   Many of biggest biotech firms -- Amgen Inc., Biogen Inc., Genzyme Corp., to
name a few -- have bucked the trend and seen their stocks rise since the
beginning of the year. The big companies in biotech often are defined as those
having a market capitalization -- a company's per-share stock price multiplied
by the number of its shares that are outstanding -- of $ 500 million or more.

   Neither Alpha 1, Medimmune, Genetic Therapy or Univax has a market
capitalization greater than $ 100 million, putting them in the third tier of
companies tracked in any detail by major investment banking firms.

   Human Genome stands apart in that respect, with a market capitalization of
more than $ 233 million. And investors like the company's strong alliance with
pharmaceutical giant SmithKline Beecham PLC.

   But while the company's stock has fared better than the industry average, its
decline reflects investor understanding that the company is not alone in the
quest to decipher the chemicals of the human hereditary code.

   Monarch Avalon Inc., known for complex board games such as D-Day and
Stalingrad, knows boy entertainment. Although founder and chairman Eric Dott is
the first to say the Baltimore company didn't follow that crowd from the living
room floor into computer game land as quickly as it might have, it has developed
several successful electronic adventures.

   So what does Monarch know about girls? Enough, Dott said, to know that there
was no magazine on the newsstand for girls ages 7 to 14 -- none, that is, beyond
teeny-bopper fare centered on makeup and rock stars. Dott's answer is Girls'
Life, a magazine for those too old for Highlights for Children but too young for
the likes of Seventeen or Elle magazines.

   The first issue of Girls' Life went on sale last month. Within three weeks,
all 87,000 printed copies sold out, Dott said.

   More than 6,000 subscribers are signed up; Dott said the company's goal is to
reach 1 million by year's end.

   The first issue featured articles on girls' soccer, on whether "being
popular" really matters, on how to raise grades, survive a road trip with the
family and buy school clothes. And there were extended excerpts from Slata's
Diary, a Bosnian fifth-grader's account of life amid civil war.

   From the response, both in sales and in letters from parents and young women,
Dott thinks he has a winner.

   The company, which employs 130 people, is known among investors for coming
out every few years "with a very creative idea," said Bonnie K. Wachtel of the
investment firm of Wachtel & Co. in Washington.

   In the mid-1980s the company produced the board game called the Dr. Ruth Game
of Good Sex. That helped boost the stock, which generally has traded in the
range of $ 2 to $ 3, to as high as $ 18 a share for a while, Wachtel said. The
craze lasted about two years and then died.

   The question for Monarch is whether Girls' Life can sustain consumer
interest.  Known for management that is great at concocting creative products
but perhaps not as good at the business side of selling them, the company lost $
94,000 on revenue of $ 5.7 million in fiscal 1994, which ended April 30. Still,
that was an improvement over fiscal 1993, when the company lost $ 153,000 on
revenue of $ 6 million.

   Even if the magazine should flop with the Nintendo set, it could succeed
thanks to "parents who are on the lookout for wholesome reading for their kids,"
Wachtel said.

   The professional service industry gets no respect from Wall Street. That's a
constant complaint from executives of the $ 200 billion business that is mostly
headquartered in Northern Virginia, mostly spawned from military or spy work
and, most of all, mostly hard to define.

   Its companies employ an estimated 3 million people and perform a range of
technology-based services, from building state-of-the-art communications systems
for generals to use during war, to computer systems to electronically manage
mountains of fingerprints for the FBI, to 911 systems for state and local
governments.

   Despite this variety of tasks, Wall Street has lumped the industry with
defense manufacturing. So when the military budget falls, so does the stock of
firms identified with defense.

   Two investment houses -- J.P. Morgan & Co. of New York and Ferris Baker Watts
Inc. of Baltimore -- broke ranks two years ago, however, and recognized
professional services as a distinct industry that is growing despite defense
cuts.

   Since May, Morgan analyst Sheryl A. Daniels and Ferris Baker analyst William
Loomis have both picked American Management Systems Inc. of Fairfax as a stock
buy. The company is a consulting and computer systems developer, mostly for
commercial customers -- including Bell Atlantic, Bank of America and Citibank --
but also for state governments and universities. Last year it earned $ 17.8
million ($ 1.04 a share) on revenue of $ 364 million.

   Loomis notes in a recent report that the company's profits have grown 25
percent a year on average for the last 10 years, while revenues have grown an
average of 18 percent a year. A recent J.P. Morgan report described the
company's stock as being undervalued, "primarily because the company is not well
understood."

   Another winner, Loomis said, is CACI International Inc. of Arlington, which
provides computer engineering, integration and operations, document mangement
and a host of other hardware and software products. Half of its revenue comes
from the Pentagon, with 20 percent more coming from other U.S. government
agencies, Loomis said. For the fiscal year ended June 30, CACI earned more than
$ 6 million (60 cents a share) on revenue of $ 183.7 million.  ?

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994


                             634 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 12, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F33; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 1385 words

HEADLINE: A Less-Than-Bionic Mode for Biotech Stocks

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Despite America's love affair with new technology, biotechnology stocks,
especially those of smaller companies, have taken a beating this year.

   Fear of price controls from health care reform and more realistic
expectations of how quickly new products can be brought to market have sobered
investors and caused them to pull back and be more selective about where they
put their money.

   The handful of local biotech firms that are well known nationally have been
no exception for the most part, though several Wall Street analysts say these
firms still hold plenty of promise.

   At the end of August, the stock of Alpha 1 Biomedicals Inc. of Bethesda
closed at $ 1.69, an 88.4 percent drop from the beginning of the year.

   Medimmune Inc. of Gaithersburg ended the month at $ 4.75 a share, down 57
percent from the beginning of the year.

   A share of Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg traded at $ 10.25 Aug. 31,
down 37 percent since Jan. 1.

   The stock of Univax Biologics Inc. of Rockville fell 20.6 percent from the
beginning of the year, ending August at $ 5.75.

   Human Genome Sciences of Rockville ended August with its stock at $ 16.50, a
7 percent decline this year.

   By contrast, the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index gained 1.9 percent from
Jan. 1 to the end of August. Biotech stocks, as measured by an index of 171
companies selected by the investment banking firm of PaineWebber Inc. in New
York, fell 13 percent during the same period.

   Much of the drop in the stocks of Alpha 1 Biomedicals and Medimmune followed
disappointing news. At the end of 1993, Medimmune failed to win Food and Drug
Administration approval of a drug to prevent a common lung infection in
children, but it is working to address the agency's concerns. Alpha 1 has been
embroiled in a dispute with a major licensing partner that was resolved only
three weeks ago.

   Although the per-share price of Genetic Therapy and Univax took steep cuts,
these two companies are generally considered by Wall Street to be proceeding
quietly but steadily on their quests -- Genetic Therapy to insert genes into
cells to counteract faulty genes, and Univax to develop a variety of genetically
engineered vaccines.

   The problem, said PaineWebber biotech analyst Linda Miller, is that the
biggest biotech companies -- those considered the most likely to survive either
alone or by being acquired -- are garnering an increasingly larger share of the
dollars investors are willing to place in biotech. Price control worries as well
as several well-publicized product failures by some biotech firms have made
people skittish about investing in any but the most established companies, she
said.

   Many of biggest biotech firms -- Amgen Inc., Biogen Inc., Genzyme Corp., to
name a few -- have bucked the trend and seen their stocks rise since the
beginning of the year. The big companies in biotech often are defined as those
having a market capitalization -- a company's per-share stock price multiplied
by the number of its shares that are outstanding -- of $ 500 million or more.

   Neither Alpha 1, Medimmune, Genetic Therapy or Univax has a market
capitalization greater than $ 100 million, putting them in the third tier of
companies tracked in any detail by major investment banking firms.

   Human Genome stands apart in that respect, with a market capitalization of
more than $ 233 million. And investors like the company's strong alliance with
pharmaceutical giant SmithKline Beecham PLC.

   But while the company's stock has fared better than the industry average, its
decline reflects investor understanding that the company is not alone in the
quest to decipher the chemicals of the human hereditary code.

   Monarch Avalon Inc., known for complex board games such as D-Day and
Stalingrad, knows boy entertainment. Although founder and chairman Eric Dott is
the first to say the Baltimore company didn't follow that crowd from the living
room floor into computer game land as quickly as it might have, it has developed
several successful electronic adventures.

   So what does Monarch know about girls? Enough, Dott said, to know that there
was no magazine on the newsstand for girls ages 7 to 14 -- none, that is, beyond
teeny-bopper fare centered on makeup and rock stars. Dott's answer is Girls'
Life, a magazine for those too old for Highlights for Children but too young for
the likes of Seventeen or Elle magazines.

   The first issue of Girls' Life went on sale last month. Within three weeks,
all 87,000 printed copies sold out, Dott said.

   More than 6,000 subscribers are signed up; Dott said the company's goal is to
reach 1 million by year's end.

   The first issue featured articles on girls' soccer, on whether "being
popular" really matters, on how to raise grades, survive a road trip with the
family and buy school clothes. And there were extended excerpts from Slata's
Diary, a Bosnian fifth-grader's account of life amid civil war.

   From the response, both in sales and in letters from parents and young women,
Dott thinks he has a winner.

   The company, which employs 130 people, is known among investors for coming
out every few years "with a very creative idea," said Bonnie K. Wachtel of the
investment firm of Wachtel & Co. in Washington.

   In the mid-1980s the company produced the board game called the Dr. Ruth Game
of Good Sex. That helped boost the stock, which generally has traded in the
range of $ 2 to $ 3, to as high as $ 18 a share for a while, Wachtel said. The
craze lasted about two years and then died.

   The question for Monarch is whether Girls' Life can sustain consumer
interest.  Known for management that is great at concocting creative products
but perhaps not as good at the business side of selling them, the company lost $
94,000 on revenue of $ 5.7 million in fiscal 1994, which ended April 30. Still,
that was an improvement over fiscal 1993, when the company lost $ 153,000 on
revenue of $ 6 million.

   Even if the magazine should flop with the Nintendo set, it could succeed
thanks to "parents who are on the lookout for wholesome reading for their kids,"
Wachtel said.

   The professional service industry gets no respect from Wall Street. That's a
constant complaint from executives of the $ 200 billion business that is mostly
headquartered in Northern Virginia, mostly spawned from military or spy work
and, most of all, mostly hard to define.

   Its companies employ an estimated 3 million people and perform a range of
technology-based services, from building state-of-the-art communications systems
for generals to use during war, to computer systems to electronically manage
mountains of fingerprints for the FBI, to 911 systems for state and local
governments.

   Despite this variety of tasks, Wall Street has lumped the industry with
defense manufacturing. So when the military budget falls, so does the stock of
firms identified with defense.

   Two investment houses -- J.P. Morgan & Co. of New York and Ferris Baker Watts
Inc. of Baltimore -- broke ranks two years ago, however, and recognized
professional services as a distinct industry that is growing despite defense
cuts.

   Since May, Morgan analyst Sheryl A. Daniels and Ferris Baker analyst William
Loomis have both picked American Management Systems Inc. of Fairfax as a stock
buy. The company is a consulting and computer systems developer, mostly for
commercial customers -- including Bell Atlantic, Bank of America and Citibank --
but also for state governments and universities. Last year it earned $ 17.8
million ($ 1.04 a share) on revenue of $ 364 million.

   Loomis notes in a recent report that the company's profits have grown 25
percent a year on average for the last 10 years, while revenues have grown an
average of 18 percent a year. A recent J.P. Morgan report described the
company's stock as being undervalued, "primarily because the company is not well
understood."

   Another winner, Loomis said, is CACI International Inc. of Arlington, which
provides computer engineering, integration and operations, document mangement
and a host of other hardware and software products. Half of its revenue comes
from the Pentagon, with 20 percent more coming from other U.S. government
agencies, Loomis said. For the fiscal year ended June 30, CACI earned more than
$ 6 million (60 cents a share) on revenue of $ 183.7 million.  ?

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1994


                             635 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           September 11, 1994, SUNDAY

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: J.W. WOLFE CHAIR ENDOWED FOR OSU CANCER RESEARCH

BYLINE: Alan D. Miller, Dispatch Higher Education Reporter

BODY:


   The loss of his father to cancer in 1957 had a motivating effect on John
Walton Wolfe.

   After the death of Edgar T. Wolfe Sr., J.W. Wolfe devoted time and money to
improving health care in central Ohio. He became the driving force behind a
project that resulted in the Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and Research
Institute at Ohio State University.

   In honor of J.W. Wolfe, the late chairman of The Dispatch Printing Co. and
The Ohio Company who died June 10 at age 65, Wolfe Associates Inc. last night
pledged a $ 1.5 million gift to create the John Walton Wolfe Chair in Cancer
Research at OSU.

   Wolfe Associates Inc. is a charitable foundation established by the Wolfe
family and funded by the family's affiliated companies.

   The endowment will fund a faculty teaching and research position at the James
hospital, said John F. Wolfe, who announced the surprise gift in honor of his
cousin last night at the ''Up on the Roof'' gala fund-raising event for the
hospital atop the hospital parking garage.

   ''Cancer has touched many people's lives in our society, and we hope this
endowment will help to eventually lead to a cure,'' said John F. Wolfe, who
succeeded J.W. Wolfe as chairman of The Dispatch Printing Co.

   As J.W. Wolfe watched his father die, he became frustrated at the lack of
cancer treatment facilities in this region, John F. Wolfe said. J.W. Wolfe and a
handful of other community leaders sought to change that. The James Hospital
opened in 1990.

   University leaders were shocked and excited by the gift.

   ''I was absolutely stunned,'' said OSU President Gordon Gee, who learned of
the intended gift Wednesday, a day after he announced his engagement to OSU
professor Constance M. Bumgarner.

   ''Mr. Wolfe called me to congratulate me on my engagement and he said, 'By
the way, I have another thing I want to ask you. Do you think it would be all
right if we endowed a $ 1.5 million chair at the cancer institute?'

   ''I said, 'Is that all right?!' I was shaking. It was truly a surprise,'' Gee
said.

   It is the second time Wolfe Associates Inc. has funded a faculty position. In
1988, the Wolfe family foundation gave $ 1.25 million to create the H.P. Wolfe
Chair in Accounting in OSU's Max M. Fisher College of Business.

   H.P. Wolfe, who died in 1946, was president of The Dispatch Printing Co. and
was involved in banking, broadcasting and farming.

   David E. Schuller, director of OSU's Comprehensive Cancer Center/Arthur G.
James Cancer Hospital, said the latest gift is a critical first step in a major
fund-raising effort.

   ''It's tremendously important,'' Schuller said. ''We are now in the early
stages of developing a human genetics cancer program at the James Hospital. The
Wolfe family has been critically important in leadership and giving, and this
sends a very important message.''

   Schuller said a few hospitals in the world are working on programs to prevent
and treat cancer through gene therapy, which involves altering a person's genes
to fight or stave off cancer.

   ''Now in treating cancer, we either try to remove it with surgery or
eradicate it with radiation or chemotherapy. Gene therapy can help alter the
genes that allow cancer,'' Schuller said.

   Jerry May, OSU's vice president for development, is seeking leadership gifts
prior to launching a public fund-raising campaign in the fall of 1995. That
campaign will be the largest in OSU history, with a goal of more than $ 650
million.

   ''It is a marvelous leadership gift on behalf of the Wolfe family. We're just
ecstatic,'' May said. ''This is one of the perfect ways anyone could honor the
leadership John W. Wolfe provided the university and the hospital. It provides
mutual prestige. His name on a faculty chair will bring enormous prestige to the
program, and it brings great honor to him.''

GRAPHIC: Photo, John Walton Wolfe

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1994


                             636 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 24;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 193 words

HEADLINE: SMALLPOX IS DEAD. LONG LIVE SMALLPOX.

BODY:

   Siebert's excellent article omitted one of the most compelling reasons not to
destroy the last vestiges of this dreadful virus: gene therapy. Swift advances
in identifying disorders and therapies, in terms of molecular sequences in the
DNA of the human genome, have outstripped the methods of delivery. Viruses made
harmless and harnessed by medical science are the ideal "cruise missile" to
transport a corrected gene to its chromosomal destination.

   Yet obstacles abound. This genetic baggage can sometimes alter the essential
characteristics that target the virus, rendering it useless. Moreover, most
common viruses are recognized and immediately attacked by the immune system. A
repertory of rare exotic human viruses is essential for the development of
successful therapy at the genetic level. This has the potential of curing
cancers, inherited genetic disorders and even some forms of heart disease.

    An emasculated smallpox virus may one day be found to be the only method of
delivering a cure for, say, a malignant melanoma. Future generations may yet
thank us for the pardon on the eve of smallpox's execution.

ARYEH HERZIG
Brooklyn

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1994


                             637 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                   September 11, 1994, Sunday, HOWARD EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL (NEWS), Pg. 14B

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: Executive, wife leave careers to raise money for children with brain
tumors

BYLINE: Ellie Baublitz, Contributing Writer

BODY:


   Mike Traynor of Atlanta was a vice president of marketing and sales for a
suburban newspaper chain in 1980 when a co-worker became the father of a
daughter born with a malignant brain tumor.

   The event was to change Mr. Traynor's life.

   "It's amazing, the child is still alive today, but when she was born the
doctors gave her a 2 percent chance of surviving," he said. "Her parents took
her all over the country seeking the best treatment.

   "Some were old treatments -- they used to put high doses of radiation into
the brain, but that gave her skull cancer when she was 7, and she had to have
surgery to remove the affected part of the skull."

   The child's cancer recurred about five years ago and she has so many physical
and mental problems, he said, that she will be dependent on her parents for the
rest of her life. The tragedy made such an impact on Mr. Traynor that in 1983 he
decided to raise money for research into this deadly childhood disease.

   "I'd been a motorcyclist for many years, and I got the idea one day of doing
something with motorcycles that would get the attention of the media," he said
in a telephone interview from Monterey, Calif., where he was attending an event
for the Ride For Kids Foundation.

   In 1984 he set up the Ride for Kids Foundation. The first ride in Atlanta
drew 100 motorcyclists who raised $ 4,000 for childhood brain tumor research.

   Today, the foundation sponsors 12 events in 10 states. Over the years, Ride
for Kids has raised more than $ 2.5 million, all of which has gone into various
areas of childhood brain tumor research, Mr. Traynor said. Prizes, food, police
escorts and ride sites all are donated by local businesses and organizations, in
addition to American Honda Motor Co., the foundation's principal corporate
sponsor. After the first ride, Mr. Traynor thought his job was done -- until he
started meeting children who had brain tumors, then getting calls from their
parents saying that their child had died.

   In 1991, he was a pallbearer for a girl in Atlanta who had died of a brain
tumor. He decided then to devote his life to fighting childhood brain tumors.
Honda accepted Mr. Traynor's proposal for the company to sponsor the foundation.

   "My wife, Diane, and I both gave up our careers to do Ride For Kids full
time. We realized so much needed to be done," he said. "Brain tumors have become
the No. 1 killer disease of children in the United States, partly because very
little money has been pumped into research."

   In addition to donating money to research centers around the country, Ride
For Kids has given $ 100,000 to creating the Central Brain Tumor Registry of the
United States, based in Chicago.

   "For many years, about 40 states gathered brain tumor information of various
kinds, but the information wasn't being used, so we raised the money to put
together all the information from all the states into one national registry,"
Mr. Traynor said.

   The Traynors also are involved with the American Brain Tumor Association --
he as a member of the board, which works with the national registry to collect
information.

   Diane Traynor, a certified public accountant, is treasurer of the North
American Brain Tumor Coalition, which includes Canada. The coalition tries to
encourage legislators to fund research.

   According to Carol Kruchko, chairwoman of the Chicago-based Central Brain
Tumor Registry of the United States, "45 percent of the cancer deaths in
children through the age of 14 come from brain tumors, as opposed to 42 percent
from leukemia."

   The registry also works with other brain tumor research organizations to
lobby for money for in actual research. Much needs to be done in the area of
childhood brain tumors, Mrs. Kruchko said, including gene therapy, environmental
issues and their effect on tumors, and funding for new therapies.

   "The whole focus of Ride For Kids is on these kids and finding an answer to
this disease and putting a stop to it once and for all, just like they did with
polio," Mr. Traynor said.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1994


                             638 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 9, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 764 words

HEADLINE: Human testing of gene therapy scheduled here;
M.D. Anderson aims to protect marrow from anti-cancer drugs

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   University of Texas M.D.Anderson Cancer Center researchers
have received the go-ahead to begin human tests of a gene therapy
-- the first such experiment in people in Texas.

   It is also the first time that scientists have attempted to
use genes to protect bone marrow from the toxic effects of
anti-cancer drugs, said Dr. Albert Deisseroth, chairman of
Anderson's hematology department.

   The technique is to be tried first in 10 women with advanced
ovarian cancer, said Deisseroth.  He is collaborating with Dr.John
J. Kavanagh, director of Anderson's department of gynecologic
medical oncology, and the San Francisco-based Ingenex Inc., a
biotechnology company.

   Both men are excited about the long-awaited approval from
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.  But they warn that the
therapy has yet to be proven in people.

   ""We don't know if it works yet,'' Deisseroth said.

   He said it will take six months to one year to analyze the
data.  ""But in the future, this may be an option,'' he said.

   It is an option that combines the cutting edge of
biotechnology with proven methods of killing tumor cells.

   An estimated 22,000 new cases of ovarian cancer are
diagnosed each year in the United States.  It accounted for 13,300
deaths in 1993.  It is often a silent disease with no symptoms until
late in the tumor's development.

   Only about 39 percent of women diagnosed with ovarian cancer
are alive five years later, according to the National Cancer
Society.

   If the latest technique appears successful in ovarian
cancers, Deisseroth intends to try it in breast and lung tumors as
well.

   In the laboratory, Deisseroth and his colleagues will hook a
piece of DNA called the multidrug resistance gene to a virus that
will then invade bone marrow cells and become part of the cell's
genetic code.

   There, the gene will pursue its normal activity, pumping
toxic agents (in this case anti-cancer medications) out of the bone
marrow and preventing the drugs from destroying those cells.

   ""If this works, it will overcome a problem that has
hamstrung chemotherapy for the past 50 years,'' said Deisseroth.

   Anti-cancer drugs, for the most part, produce toxic effects
in the bone marrow.  When they destroy marrow, they eliminate the
body's ability to produce the white blood cells that protect
patients from infection.

   The body relies on 200 billion short-lived white cells daily
to ward off bacterial attacks.  When the body cannot produce these
cells, the patient contracts the disease and dies.

   To prevent that, doctors have had to limit the amount of
chemotherapy they use.

   After a bone marrow transplant, they have to wait for the
marrow to regrow, even though they suspect that the original
treatment might have left microscopic deposits of cancer cells
behind, he said.  While they wait, those cancer cell deposits can
grow.

   With the genetic technique, doctors can blast the tumor with
high dose anti-cancer drugs and follow that quickly with smaller
doses of different anti-cancer medications given over a period of
time.  Those smaller doses act to ""clean up'' residual cancer left
behind, Deisseroth said.

   The treatment is a multistage process, Deisseroth said.

   First, patients will undergo an initial treatment with
chemotherapeutic drugs in the hospital for seven to 10 days after
which bone marrow will be removed.

   In the laboratory, scientists will use a virus to take the
gene into bone marrow cells.  The gene will become part of the
marrow cells' genetic code, bolstering their ability to pump
harmful anti-cancer drugs out before they kill the cell.

   While this is going on, the patients recover from the
chemotherapy and the bone marrow procedure.  They then come back
into the hospital for phase two in which they will receive
intensive chemotherapy with two potent drugs -- thiotepa and
cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan).

   That ""big blast'' of chemotherapy should destroy most of the
tumor.  Patients will probably remain hospitalized three to four
weeks during this time, Deisseroth said.  The patients then are
recovering from the treatment and receiving an infusion of the
genetically altered bone marrow, he said.

   Then, after they leave the hospital, patients will receive
several treatments with a drug called Taxol which will be used ""as
a cleanup to go after the residual cells,'' Deisseroth said.

   The genetically altered bone marrow should protect women from
the toxic effects of the Taxol, which can usually be given in only
limited doses because of its toxic effect on bone marrow.


LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1994


                             639 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    September 9, 1994, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: BIOLOGIST AT UCLA WINS MEDAL;
RESEARCH: NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION AWARD GOES TO ELIZABETH NEUFELD FOR HER
WORK ON TWO GENETIC DISEASES.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Molecular biologist Elizabeth Neufeld of UCLA is one of eight U.S.
researchers to win this year's National Medal of Science, the highest award for
scientific achievement bestowed by the federal government, the National Science
Foundation announced Thursday.

   Neufeld was cited in particular for her research on Hurler and Sanfilippo
syndromes, two genetic diseases. Her work has led to tests for the diagnosis of
the two disorders and has laid the groundwork for the development of new
therapies.

   Neufeld will receive the award from President Clinton at a White House
ceremony in October. There is one other California recipient, structural
engineer Ray Clough, retired from UC Berkeley. He developed methods to design
large buildings and bridges that can more easily withstand earthquakes.

   Neufeld said that her selection "is an enormous honor. I cannot describe how
touched I am to have been selected. . . . In a way, I feel like I am accepting
it on behalf of all the people who have worked with me."

   Neufeld was a plant biologist when she started her career more than 30 years
ago. Her current interest began when "somebody wandered into my lab one day and
began telling me about a patient" with one of the syndromes. "I was working in
an area that was somewhat related biochemically, but in plants, not in people.

   "I had an idea what the problem might be," she continued. "As it turned out,
I was totally wrong, but by the time I had proved that, I was totally hooked."

   Hurler and Sanfilippo syndromes, along with the much better known Tay-Sachs
disease, are part of a family of genetic disorders called mucopolysaccharidoses.
The diseases, which typically cause fatal neurological deterioration in
children, are disorders of liposomes, which Neufeld calls "the recycling plants
of the cells. They take large molecules that the cells are through with and
break them down into their constituent parts, which can be reused."

   In the syndromes, one or more of the enzymes that are normally used to break
the materials down is absent or defective "and the material piles up in the
cell," distorting its shape and putting pressure on nearby tissues, such as
nerves. Nerve cells can be killed by the internal pressures within the cell.

   When Neufeld started studying Hurler and Sanfilippo syndromes, the working
hypothesis was that the cells simply made too much of the accumulated materials.
She was able, in her words, "to sort them out" to demonstrate what really was
happening and identify the defective gene.

   Her discoveries have already led to prenatal diagnosis of affected fetuses
and better treatment for the patients and has paved the way for future genetic
therapy.

   Neufeld's "excellence in research and teaching are underscored by her
contributions educating and counseling families of children affected by the
conditions she is working to cure," said Dr. Sidney Golub, provost of the UCLA
School of Medicine. "She is truly a role model for other scientists and
physicians."

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, HONORED: Molecular biologist Elizabeth Neufeld of UCLA,
above, is one of eight U.S. researchers to win the National Medal of Science,
the highest award for scientific achievement bestowed by the federal government.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1994


                             640 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   SEPTEMBER 8, 1994, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy for Brain Tumor
 UCSF surgeons use altered mouse cells to treat woman

BYLINE: Sabin Russell, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Surgeons at the University of California at San Francisco have planted
genetically altered mouse cells in the brain of a Stanislaus County woman in an
effort to kill a malignant tumor that is usually fatal.

   Phyllis Lema, a 58-year-old resident of the Central Valley town of Denair,
became the first patient in California to undergo the three- hour operation.

   Lema suffers from a recurrent gliobastoma, one of the most malignant and
deadly forms of brain cancer. Doctors at a Modesto hospital in January removed
an egg-size tumor from the right side of her brain, temporarily ending the
headaches, coughing and paralysis it was causing. But in August, her symptoms
returned. The tumor was back.

   On Tuesday, UCSF brain surgeon Dr. Charles Wilson removed the main portion of
the regrown tumor, and colleague Dr. Michael McDermott inserted the specially
treated mouse cells.

   Now begins a train of events that doctors hope will wipe out, or at least
shrink, the vestiges of the tumor left behind.

   Developed by Genetic Therapy Inc., a Gaithersburg, Md., biotechnology
company, the mouse cells were genetically altered to churn out millions of tiny
viruses. The viruses are hobbled by scientists -- a number of genes were removed
-- so they cannot replicate outside the mouse cells. But they can slip inside a
cancer cell, and once they do so, the viruses produce an enzyme that renders
tumor cells vulnerable to gancyclovir, a powerful drug ordinarily used to treat
viral infections in AIDS patients.

   In about three week, Lema will receive an intravenous injection of
gancyclovir, which doctors hope will kill any remaining tumor cells that have
been invaded by the virus.

   The treatment has been tried in three Midwestern medical centers since July
and was also tested using a different method on 15 patients at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Unlike the patients in the initial trials which began in 1992, Lema will
receive two doses of mouse cells before she is treated with gancyclovir.
Earlier studies showed that a patient's own immune system will kill the mouse
cells within a few days. Surgeons have implanted a tube in the top of her skull
that will be used to transport new batches of cells to the tumor site. Over
several months, she will receive at least six courses of treated mouse cells
alternating with infusions of the antiviral drug.

   Gancyclovir, one of the most expensive drugs ever made, is produced by Palo
Alto-based Syntex Corp., which is also contributing to the experimental study.

   Jim Barrett, chief executive of Genetic Therapy Inc., said that other
biotechnology companies are studying similar techniques against brain tumors,
but his company's work is the farthest along in clinical trials. He cautioned
that the intent of the study is not to cure the deadly cancer, but to reduce the
size of the normally fast- growing tumors.

   ''We're trying to improve the quality of life,'' he said. ''We want to
lengthen the time between recurrences and lengthen the time of symptom-free
life.''

   Lema, the owner of a Central Valley barbershop, was listed as in good
condition after the operation was carried out by a team of brain surgeons headed
by Wilson, director of the Brain Tumor Research Center at UCSF.

   ''We all have to take our chances,'' said Lema, prior to the surgery.  ''And
if it doesn't work out for me, maybe what they learn will help others in the
future.''


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,UCSF surgeons implanted genetically altered mouse cells in the
brain of Phyllis Lema in a bid to fight a usually fatal tumor , BY KAREN PREUSS
OF UCSF, SPECIAL TO THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1994


                             641 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                  September 7, 1994, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1; DIGEST

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From news services and staff reports

BODY:

   Eastman Kodak will sell its Clinical Diagnostics unit, a major worldwide
supplier of diagnostic products, to Johnson & Johnson for $ 1.008 billion in
cash. The sale is the latest in Kodak's plan to sell its health care businesses
and focus on its core imaging businesses.


   Big Three automakers finished August with sales of cars and light trucks 10.3
percent ahead of a year ago. Much of the industry's strength continued to be in
light trucks.


   Walter Mondale, U.S. ambassador to Japan, said in a speech that the United
States hopes to resolve a series of contentious trade issues with Japan without
resorting to sanctions at the end of the month, but that both sides remain far
apart. Mondale said a series of high-level meetings over the next several weeks
would determine whether trade deals can be reached by a U.S.-imposed Sept. 30
deadline.


   T-bill rates fell. The discount rate on three-month Treasury bills auctioned
yesterday fell to 4.58 percent from 4.61 percent the previous week. Rates on
six-month bills fell to 4.89 percent from 4.93 percent. The actual return to
investors is 4.70 percent for three- month bills, with a $ 10,000 bill selling
for $ 9,884.20, and 5.08 percent for a six-month bill selling for $ 9,752.80.
Separately, the Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year Treasury
bills, a popular index for changing adjustable-rate mortgages, fell to 5.56
percent last week from 5.61 percent the previous week.


   Japanese government officials raided the offices of major trading companies
in a search for evidence that the firms rigged bids for projects funded by
Tokyo's $ 11.5 billion Official Development Assistance program, according to
Japanese press reports.


   Continental Airlines said it is cutting one-way fall fares by up to 52
percent on domestic and some international flights. Sale tickets must be bought
between today and Sept. 16. The fares are good for travel between Sept. 21 and
Dec. 14.


   U.S. companies announced 46,380 job cut in August, the most since March and
142 percent more than a month earlier, said Challenger, Gray & Christmas, a
placement firm that tracks the figures.


   New-home completions fell for a second straight month in July, the Commerce
Department said, adding to signs that housing activity is leveling off. The
number of new homes finished and ready for occupancy fell 4.4 percent to a
seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.27 million after a revised drop of 7.8
percent in June.


   Jones Computer Network, the nation's first 24-hour cable TV channel dedicated
to computers, made its debut in seven major markets, including the District and
Baltimore.


   New York Stock Exchange member firms that do business with the public lost a
total of $ 404 million in the second quarter, compared with a profit of $ 1.5
billion in the same period a year ago.


   The SEC, in a bid to curb mutual fund losses on derivatives, is considering a
plan to cut the amount of money funds can invest in securities that can't easily
be sold to 10 percent of their portfolios, or the level it was until 1992, said
an SEC official familiar with the plan.


   Microsoft introduced a $ 99.95 computer keyboard designed for greater
comfort. Departing from conventional design, the keyboard is split in the middle
and can rotate outward in a V-pattern to help straighten wrist position. Apple
last year introduced a similar design.


   LOCAL BUSINESS





   GenVec, a Rockville biotechnology company developing gene therapy drugs for
cystic fibrosis, acquired Princeton, N.J.-based Theragen, a smaller biotech firm
using a herpes virus to deliver genes, in an exchange of stock. The deal's value
was not disclosed.


   MCI Communications said that in December it will offer government agencies
and business users a new high-speed data, voice and video link that is 20 to 30
ti ery." He cautioned, though, that the survey does not erase all concern about
the fragility of the rebound.

   A recovery in Japan, the world's second-largest economy, would be welcome
news for the Clinton administration, which has been prodding Tokyo to adopt
stimulative measures so that Japanese consumers and businesses will buy more
foreign products, especially American ones. Despite the difficulties U.S. firms
face in selling here, Japan is the second-largest market for American exporters,
after Canada.

   But few economists expect Japan to recover with the vigor it has shown after
previous recessions. Most analysts believe that economic growth will prove

GRAPHIC: CHART, TWP

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1994


                             642 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                    September 6, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; DISCOVERY; BREAKTHROUGHS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: Genetic cancer treatment shows promise

BODY:


   A new way to block a cancer cell's ability to grow and spread, by shutting
off an internal communication system, is showing so much promise that it may
soon be tried in patients, doctors said.

   The research, reported in the journal Gene Therapy, is under way at the
University of Alabama, Birmingham. The main target in the experiments is a
molecule called erbB2.

   When activated by a growth factor, the molecule stimulates cells to divide,
causing excess growth.

   The new approach uses a small, engineered piece of DNA, a sort of hybrid
gene, which can be placed in a virus that infects the cancer cell. Once  inside,
the hybrid gene makes a small chunk of protein that seeks out and  locks onto
the freshly made erbB2 protein. The tagged erbB2 molecules then get  stuck while
passing through a protein-processing organ, the endoplasmic  reticulum.

   Once the erbB2 molecules are trapped, they can't reach the cell's surface  to
stimulate excess growth. (Editor's note: There is no longer version of this
item available.)

Therapy prolongs life for thalassemia patients

   People suffering from thalassemia, a chronic anemia that is the world's  most
common inherited disease, are living dramatically longer because drug  treatment
has significantly decreased their incidence of heart disease, a  landmark study
shows.

   The study, led by Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, shows that the main
determinant of a longer life and healthy heart is a commitment by thalassemia
patients to undergo chelation therapy, which removes excess iron from the  body.

   "If you comply with the therapy, you have a 90 percent chance of  survival,"
said Dr. Nancy Olivieri, one of the study's authors and director  of the
thalassemia and sickle-cell-anemia program at the hospital.

Cells corrected in cystic fibrosis patients

   In the first reported genetic correction of lung cells in cystic fibrosis
patients, scientists have taken a major step toward ultimately curing the  fatal
disease.

   The scientists proved that they can safely transfer normal genes into the
lungs of CF patients.

   Using a modified cold virus, called an adenovirus, a gene known as CFTR was
"piggybacked" into four patients' cells. The healthy gene became embedded in
the cells' nuclei and stimulated production of a protein vital for healthy
lungs.

   In each patient, however, the gene lived for only about 10 days.

   None of the four patients in the latest study showed significant clinical
improvement, but that was not the purpose of the study, published in the
journal Nature Genetics. The aim was to evaluate the safety and effectiveness
of the gene transfer procedure.

New approach targets AIDS vaccine

    Researchers are reporting the first successful steps in developing an AIDS
vaccine - one that may also protect against infection from a variety of other
deadly diseases.

   Researchers at the Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology used
genetic engineering to alter a weakened form of the polio virus - the kind  used
in the familiar Sabin oral vaccine - so it carries two key genes from the  AIDS
virus, plus proteins from both the cholera bacterium and an influenza  virus.

   The scientists used the altered polio virus as a one-shot vaccine, and have
successfully induced immune responses in both mice and the monkeys to all  three
of the disease-causing microbes at once, in addition the virus that  causes
AIDS.

   That is a long way from immunizing humans, but the work by the Gladstone
researchers is an "outstanding approach" to the complex vaccine problem,  said
Dr. Bonnie Mathieson, a vaccine specialist at the National Institute of  Allergy
and Infectious Diseases.



Snoring not linked to blood pressure, report says

   Records of the breathing of more than 1,400 people as they slept have
disproved theories that people with high blood pressure are more likely to
snore, a doctor reported Thursday.

   Instead, Victor Hoffstein of St Michael's Hospital in Toronto wrote in the
British medical journal The Lancet that apnea, a temporary stoppage of
breathing during sleep, may be a sign of hypertension.

   Hoffstein noted previous studies have shown a link between snoring and  high
blood pressure or coronary heart disease, but said they were based on
subjective reports from bed partners about whether the people tested snored.

   He said his tests involved a microphone connected to a sound meter to  record
people at a sleep disorder clinic during the night. As soon as they  woke up,
their blood pressure was tested.

   "Once the confounding effects of age and obesity were taken into account  . .
. snoring was eliminated as an independent variable affecting blood  pressure,"
he reported.

   He said that when tests were done on snorers with hypertension, many were
found to have sleep apnea.

   This raised "a possibility that it is sleep apnea, and not snoring, which  is
an independent predictor of raised blood pressure," he wrote.

   Want to know more? Longer versions of Breakthrough items can be obtained by
mail or fax. Just call the Discovery voice mail, 892-2310 and leave your
request. Outside Pinellas County, call (800) 333-7505, ext. 2310.

GRAPHIC: COLOR DRAWING; four peppers

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1994


                             643 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    September 4, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: JERRY LEWIS TELETHON AIMS FOR STILL ANOTHER RECORD

DATELINE: LAS VEGAS (AP)

BODY:

    Jerry Lewis wants to set another record when he kicks off his 29th Labor Day
Telethon.

   Last year's show brought record public pledges of $ 46,014,922, along with
nearly $ 37,000 from corporate sponsors. This year's telethon will start today
(9 p.m., WGRZ-TV, Channel2), and Lewis says his goal, as always, is to raise
"one dollar more."

   Lewis has helped raise more than $ 1.4 billion for the Muscular Dystrophy
Association since joining the cause more than four decades ago. He says the
association is gaining ground in its fight against neuromuscular diseases,
thanks to advances in gene therapy and DNA research.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1994


                             644 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 3, 1994, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; PAGE A27; FREE FOR ALL

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: And the Victim Is ...

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   In the battle between Sen. Jesse Helms (R-N.C.) and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, your paper only repeats Helms's accusations as fact [Business, Aug.
5]. You report Helms's contentention that USDA employee Karl Mertz was
transferred from his position as an equal employment opportunity officer after
one statement to a Biloxi, Miss., TV station about homosexuality in which he
said the agency should be moving toward "Camelot, not Sodom and Gomorrah." Helms
and your paper portray Mertz as a victim in a debate over agency policies about
gay employees.

   In reality, Mertz chose to become a spokesperson by denouncing the USDA
anti-discrimination policy and attacking gay people, while maintaining he could
conduct himself fairly in his job, in which he was charged with implementing
agency policy, including a provision barring discrimination based on sexual
orientation. In a March 18 article in the Biloxi Sun-Herald, the reporter writes
that Mertz "has been granting interviews lately -- jeopardizing his career --
because he is disturbed over homosexual federal employees who think they should
be treated the same as heterosexuals."

   The reporter writes, "He cringes at the thought of same-sex partners rubbing
shoulders with him and his wife... . Mertz views homosexuals as sex addicts ...
the lifestyle offends Mertz." Mertz is quoted as saying, "In my mind, I'm
equating these three groups of people to the compulsive-obsessive behavior
that's associated with alcoholism. You're not doing them any good by, quote,
accepting them for what they are... Abstinence or, eventually, gene therapy, may
be the only solution." These are not the statements of a victim.

   You also reported that Mertz opposes a gay lifestyle on moral grounds. Unless
your paper can define "gay lifestyle," I suggest that it put such jargon in
quotation marks with attribution to the speaker.

    -- Robin Kane


   The writer is public information manager for the National Gay & Lesbian Task
Force.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1994


                             645 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 2, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; National briefs; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 385 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

BYLINE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   Bad heroin toll lowered

    NEW YORK -- Authorities on Thursday lowered from 14 to 8 the
number of deaths in the last week that police believe are related
to highly concentrated heroin being sold on the streets of
Manhattan.

   They said the change did not alleviate their concern about
the dangers of the powerful blend, called China Cat.

   The new death toll was the result of laboratory tests of
tissues and fluids by the medical examiner, Dr. Charles Hirsch.



   Spotted owl kept on list

   WASHINGTON -- The federal government on Thursday rejected the
timber industry's petition to remove the northern spotted owl from
the list of protected threatened species in California.

   The bird remains at risk in the Pacific Northwest despite
evidence that its population is doing much better in California
than once thought, the Interior Department's Fish and Wildlife
Service said.

   ""With some exceptions, the species appears to be well
distributed across much of its historic range in California,
including areas where extensive timber harvest has occurred in the
past,'' the service said.

   Nevertheless, the northern spotted owls in California do not
constitute a population segment distinct from northern spotted owls
elsewhere in the species' range -- a legal requirement for its
removal from the list, the service said.



   Cancer blocker touted

   A new way to block a cancer cell's ability to grow and
spread, by shutting off an internal communication system, is
showing so much promise that it may soon be tried in patients,
doctors said Thursday.

   The research, reported in the journal Gene Therapy, is under
way at the University of Alabama, Birmingham.  The main target in
the experiments is a molecule called erbB2.



   Writer Chastain dies

   NEW YORK -- Thomas Chastain, a best-selling mystery writer
and a former head of the Mystery Writers of America, died Thursday
in Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.  He was 73.

   The cause was lung cancer, said Priscilla Ridgway of the
Mystery Writers of America.  Chastain was the organization's
president in 1989.

   As a literary stylist, he could be blunt.  One critic wrote:
""Chastain is a rude writer.  He sticks his fingers into our eyes. ''
Another praised his skill in setting out ""a nice, taut story. ''

TYPE: Obituary

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1994


                             646 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 2, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: HOUSTON; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1305 words

HEADLINE: People helping people for 25 years;
MDA telethon, Channel 2 continue loving relationship

BYLINE: MIKE McDANIEL, Houston Chronicle TV Editor; Staff

BODY:

   It's an automatic - if it's Labor Day, it's time for the
muscular dystrophy telethon, which means marathon TV coverage
on Channel 2

   But for one brief period earlier this year, the automatic
pilot was disrupted.  It was when H&C Communications sold
Channel 2 to Post-Newsweek.

   ""I grabbed my throat, you better believe I did,'' said Wendy
Holden, regional director of the Muscular Dystrophy
Association.  ""The first thing I did was put in a call to the
national headquarters, and there I was very relieved to find
that Post-Newsweek's Hartford (Conn.) station was part of the
telethon network and did a super job for the MDA.  I was
ecstatic that we would be able to continue our relationship. ''
 Indeed, upon learning of the station's history with the
telethon, Channel 2 general manager Steve Wasserman quickly
pledged to continue the association.

   The result is that 8 p.m. Sunday -for the 25th consecutive
year - Channel 2 will be the station to tune to for
''Stars Across America"", this year's title for the
annual Jerry Lewis muscular dystrophy telethon.

   The relationship between KPRC-TV and the MDA is as old as
Lewis' ""Love Network'' itself.  Channel 2 was one of 65 stations
that took part in the first nationwide MDA telethon, back in
1970.

   But more significantly, the people involved with Channel 2's
local and national telethon coverage have proven themselves
deft in the fund-raising challenge.  Consider that:

   It was in 1970 on Channel 2 that the first MDA ""fishbowl''
appeared.  The fishbowl was used for kids to drop off,
on-camera, their door-to-door collections.  It became a
telethon sensation.

   The Houston area was the first to have an outlying pledge
center network, made up of nearby cities and towns.  Started in
1974, today that network takes in every city in the Greater
Houston area.

   It was Houston's firefighters who began the ""Fill the Boot''
street-corner campaign in 1975.

   The annual kickathon?  Started in Houston.

   The result is that $ 35 million in individual contributions
have been raised for the MDA in the Greater Houston area since
1970.

   For this year's coverage, the telethon will move from The
Summit back to its original home, the Channel 2 studios.

   ""We wanted more intimacy,'' said program manager Lyle Schulze,
the telethon's executive producer.  ""At The Summit, the sound
floated over our heads. ''

   ""The Summit is so big and, of course, was very expensive
because of lighting,'' said Holden.  ""Plus we rented all the
hardware from The Summit.  So it will be less expensive to move
back in, and somehow it feels better to move back into the
studio. ''
 The space limitation means the elimination of a studio
audience and a scaling back in the number of phones and
volunteers used.

   Not coincidentally, the move follows a two-year decline in
local contributions.  In 1991, $ 1.89 million was raised here,
the highest total in seven years. (The record is $ 2.03 million
in 1981, before oil went bust.) In 1992, donations fell to
$ 1.6 million, and last year's total was $ 1.3 million.

   But as Holden points out, two natural disasters - Hurricane
Andrew in 1992 and last year's Midwest floods - had
Houstonians helping others in need, affecting MDA fund-raising
efforts here.  Also not helping: Last year's telethon kicked
off on the same night as an Oiler preseason game.  And retired
Channel 2 news anchor Ron Stone, for 19 years the telethon's
host, resigned from the hosting chore last year.

   Other than Stone, the telethon has had only a handful of
hosts.  News and sports anchor Dick Gottlieb emceed the first
three.  Steve Smith, who today anchors the news for rival
Channel 11, hosted in 1973.  Jan Carson, Bill Balleza and Linda
Lorelle shared emcee duties last year and will do so again
Sunday and Monday.

   Since 1970, the ""Love Network''has grown to more than 200
stations, all beaming Lewis and the national part of the
telethon into living rooms coast-to-coast.  Among this year's
guests will be Tony Bennett, comedian George Wallace, Boyz II
Men, Mel Tillis, Billy Ray Cyrus and George Strait.

   But beyond the size of the network or the number of stars is
the local impact - the people-helping-people aspect that
Channel 2 and its MDA volunteers have had on the community.

   It was Jack Harris, Channel 2's first president, that got that
ball rolling.  Not only did he commit the station to the ""Love
Network,'' he was instrumental in linking Houston's famed heart
surgeon, Dr.Michael DeBakey, with Jerry Lewis.

   The Harris-DeBakey-Lewis association has meant long-term
benefits to Houston.  It was Harris who insisted that funds
raised in Houston be put back into Houston-area MDA projects.

   It was DeBakey who influenced a plan that would lead to the
building here of the Jerry Lewis Neuromuscular Research Center
at Baylor College of Medicine.  It was DeBakey who brought in
Dr.Stanley Appel to lead the center.

   ""Those funds (raised by the telethon) are very substantial in
that much of the money we raise comes right back to us,''
DeBakey said.  ""The people in this community who support this
can feel that they're really supporting their community,
too. ''

   Houston MDA clinics have been allocated more than $ 1.3 million
in the past 10 years to provide medical services for people
affected by the 40 neuromuscular diseases.  The MDA reports
that $ 18.9 million has gone to MDA researchers in Houston
since 1970.  And in 1993 Baylor received an MDA grant for
$ 139,875 to purchase a confocal laser scanning microscope,
capable of studying calcium's role in motor neuron cell death
(the primary symptom of ALS - Lou Gehrig's disease).

   In the past two years alone, MDA-funded researchers have:

   Discovered that insertion of a gene for a muscle protein
halted Duchenne muscular dystrophy in mice;

   Announced that riluzole is the first drug to show real
promise in the treatment of ALS;

   Identified a gene that, when flawed, results in the
condition known as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

   Shown that gene therapy of heart muscle is feasible without
direct injection.

   In addition to a long line of medical research
accomplishments, the telethon helps fund such MDA programs as
summer camps, clinic visits, flu vaccines, wheelchair
purchases and support group meetings.

   As it has for 25 years, Channel 2 will make this year's
telethon a stationwide event.  Dominique Sachse, Roland Galvan,
Dave Dixon and Craig Roberts will greet folks as they drop off
funds at the ""fishbowl,''which is making a comeback after a few
years' absence, with the help of former KILT general manager
Dickie Rosenfeld.

   Tony Bruni and Ron Putterman, 20-year telethon veterans, will
again provide their expertise in producing and directing
capacities, respectively.

   And Doug Johnson will be at Dave and Buster's on Richmond
reporting on bail raised at a celebrity ""jail. ''

   ""It's a total commitment from KPRC's employees and staff,''
said Tommy Hammond, whose own commitment to the fund-raiser is
legend.  He and fellow auto dealer Luke Johnson helped
establish the first pledge center network.  ""It's just an
amazing job they do.  They are a front-runner. ''

   Agreement to this arrived Thursday in the form of a personal
letter addressed to the Chronicle: ""If ever a station deserved recognition for
its assistance to
a life-saving cause, KPRC's dedication to MDA more than
qualifies.

   ""With KPRC airing our telethon and Houston's world-class
medical facilities conducting phenomenal research into
neuromuscular disease, the city is a very bright star in MDA's
efforts. . . .

   ""Houston and KPRC have my deepest thanks for making a
Texas-size contribution to MDA's fight against 40
neuromuscular diseases. ''

   The letter is signed: ""Jerry Lewis. ''

GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. Ron Stone on a telethon from the 1970s (color); Mugs: 2. Dick
Gottlieb (b/w, p.6); 3. Jerry Lewis (b/w, p. 6)

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1994


                             647 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            September 2, 1994 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 813 words

HEADLINE: Gene test funded in war on AIDS;
UCSD team, biotech firm get $2.4 million

BYLINE: KAREN KUCHER, Staff Writer, News service reports contributed to this
story.

BODY:

   A team of UCSD scientists and a San Diego biotech firm have received a $2.4
million grant to begin gene-therapy trials on AIDS patients, and is one of six
groups awarded federal money to pursue nondrug treatments in the fight against
AIDS. Early next year, doctors plan to begin testing the gene therapy on six
patients in San Diego.

   The strategy involves arming immune-system cells with a gene that builds
"molecular scissors" to cripple the HIV virus. Researchers emphasize that the
first trials are not expected to affect the progress of the disease, but will
demonstrate if the therapy is safe and can function in the human body. If the
trials are successful, a second study will be undertaken to determine whether
larger and multiple doses of the genetically altered cells can fight AIDS. The
Food and Drug Administration must approve the therapy before it can begin. "This
grant is very specifically to provide help in facilitating the transition to the
clinic," said Flossie Wong-Staal, a UCSD School of Medicine professor who is
coordinating the team.

   "You have something that looks promising in the laboratory and you would want
to do a very limited pilot study in people (that) will help you better design
and do more work in the laboratory to make better genes." Working with the
University of California San Diego scientists will be Immusol, a 2 1/2 -year-old
biotech company that recently moved to San Diego from Orange County.

   The company, which has licensed the pending UCSD patent of a gene -- called
the hairpin ribozyme gene -- is working on the FDA application and will oversee
production of the genes used in the trials. The National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) provided the funding under a program designed to
accelerate development of nondrug therapies to fight HIV infection.

   The program unites basic researchers, clinicians and private companies. "(The
grant) is a stimulus, in a way an endorsement," Wong-Staal said.

   "It is not just the money, but it is confirmation that somebody out there
thinks this work is important, so hopefully we can also stimulate other
resources." Immusol Chairman Tsvi Goldenberg said involving private companies in
the grant could result in getting promising treatments to patients more quickly.
"You need the discovery, of course, and then you need somebody to go through the
process of dealing with the FDA, making the drug and helping with the clinical
trial," Goldenberg said. Other institutions receiving NIAID grants included the
New England Medical Center in Boston; the University of Pennsylvania; the
University of Michigan; the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle;
and Stanford University.

   The research teams are exploring gene therapy, immune-system restoration and
DNA-based therapeutic vaccines. "This effort is crucial," NIAID Director Anthony
S. Fauci said, "because currently available anti-HIV drugs only partially and
temporarily suppress replication of the virus, and their use is hampered by
toxicity and drug resistance." More than 14 million people worldwide are
infected with HIV, and the World Health Organization has projected that the
disease could kill 121 million people by 2020. Participants in the UCSD trial
will provide a blood sample, from which the patient's disease-fighting T-cells
will be separated out and mixed with a disarmed virus package containing the
hairpin ribozyme gene, which targets HIV. When approximately 1 billion of the
cells that accept the gene reproduce, the cells will be injected into the
patient. By adding the gene to T-cells, scientists think they can prevent the
AIDS virus from destroying the T-cells. When the AIDS virus penetrates one of
the genetically engineered T-cells, scientists believe, the molecular scissors
will enter the virus and sever the virus' genetic instructions, its RNA. With
its genetic code disrupted, the virus no longer can take over the T-cell's
machinery for its own replication. In the event some virus was able to take
control of a T-cell, scientists believe the ribozyme would slice the genetic
instructions of the new generation of virus particles, preventing them from
escaping into the bloodstream to infect more T-cells. Over several months,
researchers will measure whether the treated T-cells resist HIV infection and
survive longer. Other UCSD scientists involved in the project are David Looney,
an assistant professor of medicine, and Eric Poeschla, an infectious-disease
researcher, who will be working with the patients.

   Anthony Ho, of the UCSD Cancer Center, is focusing on developing a
long-acting method of delivering the gene therapy by inserting it into stem
cells, which continually renew themselves. "I think gene therapy is the only
approach that can provide potentially a curative therapy," Wong-Staal said.

   "Everything else is just treating and suppressing it.

   So we are hopeful."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             648 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          September 1, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 16

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: Major step toward cure for a killer Cystic fibrosis hope seen in gene
transfer

BYLINE: By Charles Seabrook STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the first reported genetic correction of lung cells in cystic fibrosis
patients, scientists said Wednesday that they have taken a major step toward
curing the always fatal disease.

   The scientists proved they can safely transfer normal genes into the lungs of
CF patients.

   Using a modified cold virus called an adenovirus, a gene known as CFTR was
"piggybacked" into four patients' cells. The healthy gene became embedded in the
cells' nuclei and stimulated production of a protein vital to healthy lungs.

   In each patient, however, the gene lived for only about 10 days.

   The protein produced by the CFTR gene controls the flow of salt through the
cells lining the body's airway. In CF patients, defective CFTR protein causes
salt buildup, leading to abnormally thick mucus, infection, inflammation and
progressive lung damage.

   CF affects one in every 3,000 babies born in the United States. The disease
kills about 1,500 Americans a year, most of them younger than 30.

   None of the four patients in the latest study showed significant clinical
improvement, but that was not the purpose of the study, which was published in
the journal Nature Genetics. The aim was to evaluate the safety and
effectiveness of the gene transfer procedure.

   "We now know that we can safely transfer a gene to a lung," said Dr. Ronald
Crystal, who led the study while he was a lung researcher at the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute. Now he is working at the New York Hospital-Cornell
University Medical Center.

   "Now we must do further studies to determine if we can administer the healthy
genes repeatedly to derive a clinical benefit," he explained.

   Crystal and fellow researchers have designed a study scheduled to start this
fall to see how often they need to repeat the gene therapy until CF patients
experience a benefit.

   One question to be answered is whether a patient's body will develop an
immunity to the adenovirus that hauls the healthy gene into the defective cells.
Crystal said the just-completed study found no signs that the four patients were
developing immunity.

   He said a cure for CF will come when a healthy CFTR gene can be permanently
embedded in the cell's genetic material rather than just having it sit by itself
in the cell's nucleus. It may take several years of additional study to
accomplish that, Crystal and other researchers said.

   Although such gene therapy is still years away, the new study "provides
another piece of a complicated puzzle," said Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the
NHLBI.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1994


                             649 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          September 1, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: STATE NEWS; Section A; Page 1

LENGTH: 503 words

HEADLINE: 2 Georgia boys may be living proof of sickle cell anemia cure

BYLINE: By Anne Rochell STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Normally, doctors won't say they've cured an incurable disease such as sickle
cell anemia, but they're coming close to saying it about two Atlanta-area
children.

   The boys, ages 5 and 12, recently received bone marrow transplants and have
been declared disease-free, say doctors at Emory University School of Medicine.

   "The prospects are superb that they are cured," said Dr. John Wingard,
director of Emory's bone marrow transplant program.

   The children are the first patients in Georgia, and among fewer than 30
worldwide, to undergo a bone marrow transplant to treat sickle cell anemia, said
Dr. James Eckman, director of Emory's sickle cell center at Grady Memorial
Hospital.

   Seventy percent to 80 percent of the patients who have undergone transplants
have been cured.

   One of the two Atlanta children, Seye Arise of Tucker, now goes to school,
plays ball and giggles uncontrollably like any other 5-year-old.

   But he can remember how it was before his operation at Egleston Children's
Hospital at Emory last November, when he received bone marrow from his older
brother.

   "Everything hurted," he said.

   The second patient, 12-year-old Roger Johnson of Jonesboro, received marrow
from his older sister in April and will return to school in October, an Egleston
spokeswoman said.

   About 50,000 Americans have sickle cell anemia, a genetic disease that
strikes African-Americans almost exclusively. Patients with the disease have a
faulty gene that directs red blood cells to take on a curved, or "sickle,"
shape. They block and clog small blood vessels, causing severe anemia, bacterial
infections, strokes, and intense pain and swelling in the hands and feet.

   Some victims don't survive into adulthood. But many children with the disease
are surviving and living relatively normal lives, thanks to antibiotics.

   Because bone marrow transplants are risky and extremely expensive, they will
probably be an option only for high-risk patients, who make up fewer than half
of all such cases, Wingard said.

   Seye suffered a mild stroke and was at high risk for having more strokes. In
the bone marrow replacement, his faulty gene was replaced with a normal gene,
Eckman said. "There is only the remotest possibility that the recipient's own
bone marrow might grow back," he added.

   Researchers are hoping that with the dawn of gene therapy, it will be
possible to correct a child's faulty gene without having to find a donor with
matching bone marrow. Doctors someday may be able to remove a patient's own
marrow, insert a normal gene and put the marrow back, a treatment that would be
applicable to a much larger percentage of the patients.

   But Eckman said, "That's at least a decade away."

   For now, bone marrow transplants are only for children lucky enough to have a
relative with matching bone marrow - and unlucky enough to be very sick.

   "Seye has the bone marrow of his brother, and he's not going to be sick
anymore," said his mother, Adebisi Arise. "I can't describe the feeling. It's
great."

GRAPHIC: Color Photo: Seye Arise is back in class at Nesbitt Elementary School
in Tucker after a bone marrow transplant tamed his sickle cell anemia. Photo ran
only in The Atlanta Constitution. / DAVID TULIS / Staff

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1994


                             650 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                   September 1, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: GAIN REPORTED IN CYSTIC FIBROSIS FIGHT;
 SCIENTISTS LOOK FOR WAY TO IMPLEMENT GENE THERAPY FOR PATIENTS

BODY:

    WASHINGTON (AP) -- Scientists have proved they can safely transfer normal
genes into the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients, and now are researching how to
make those genes live long enough to fight the fatal disease.

   In a study published today, scientists report they used a modified cold
virus, called adenovirus, to give four cystic fibrosis victims' lungs a vital
gene.

   But those genes lived only about 10 days. So researchers are designing a new
study to see how often they can repeat this gene therapy until cystic fibrosis
patients experience a benefit.

   "We know we can transfer a gene to the lung," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, who
developed the treatment at the National Institute of Health. "Now the critical
question is: Can we do it more than once?"

   Cystic fibrosis patients inherit a defective gene that prevents salt from
being filtered out of cells lining the airways. As a result, heavy mucus builds
up and destroys the lungs, leading to death, usually by age 30.

   In the journal Nature Genetics, Crystal detailed how he added a normal
salt-filtering gene to adenovirus that was disabled so it wouldn't cause a cold,
and dripped it into four patients' lungs.

   Although the patients remain stable, the study didn't prove the gene worked,
only that it could be transferred.

   Crystal, now at Cornell University, had previously disclosed some early
results of the study in interviews and another journal. But his latest paper
unveils three important findings:

   The new gene, not permanent since it's merely carried by a virus, lived only
10 days.

   Patients showed no signs of developing immunity to the gene-virus solution.
So Crystal hopes to start a study this fall to see if he can safely give
patients the gene once a month for six months.

   The safe dose of the genetic solution is 5 milliliters, discovered after one
patient who received four times that dose experienced moderate side effects.

   Cystic fibrosis affects one of every 3,000 babies born in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1994


                             651 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             September 1, 1994, THURSDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Patients Get Normal Lung Gene in Test

BYLINE: By Lauran Neergaard

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have proved they can safely transfer normal genes into the lungs
of cystic fibrosis patients, and now are researching how to make those genes
live long enough to fight the always fatal disease.

   In a study published today, scientists report they used a modified cold
virus, called adenovirus, to give four cystic fibrosis victims' lungs a vital
gene.

   But those genes lived only about 10 days. So researchers are designing a new
study to see how often they can repeat this gene therapy until CF patients
experience a benefit.

   "We know we can transfer a gene to the lung," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, who
developed the treatment at the National Institutes of Health. "Now the critical
question is: Can we do it more than once?"

   Cystic fibrosis patients inherit a defective gene that prevents salt from
being filtered out of cells lining the airways. As a result, heavy mucus builds
up and destroys the lungs, leading to death, usually by age 30.

   In the journal Nature Genetics, Crystal detailed how he added a normal
salt-filtering gene to adenovirus that was disabled so it wouldn't cause a cold,
and dripped it into four patients' lungs.

   Although the patients remain stable, the study didn't prove the gene worked,
only that it could be transferred.

   Crystal, now at Cornell University, previously had disclosed some early
results of the study in interviews and another journal. But his latest paper
unveils three important findings:

   The new gene, not permanent since it's merely carried by a virus, lived only
10 days.

   Patients showed no signs of developing immunity to the gene-virus solution.
So Crystal hopes to start a study this fall to see if he can safely give
patients the gene once a month for six months.

   The safe dose of the genetic solution is 5 milliliters, discovered after one
patient who received four times that dose experienced moderate side effects.

   Crystal has now treated an additional five patients, and says he is seeing
similar results.

GRAPHIC: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1994


                             652 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    September 1, 1994 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: GENE INSERTED IN LUNGS OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS PATIENT THAT DID NOT PRODUCE
A CURE. IT SHOWED GENE THERAPY IS FEASIBLE, WHICH SCIENTISTS CALL A MILESTONE.

BYLINE: Jim Detjen, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In what is described as an important milestone in the quest to cure cystic
fibrosis, scientists have demonstrated that it's possible to use gene therapy to
insert a healthy gene into a patient's lungs.

   The researchers placed a healthy cystic fibrosis gene in the lung cells of a
23-year-old patient. Tests showed that the gene, once implanted, produced an
essential protein that is defective in cystic fibrosis patients.

   While the scientists, headed by Ronald Crystal of the New York Hospital-
Cornell Medical Center in New York City, did not cure the patient, they did show
that this type of gene therapy is feasible. The patient experienced no long-term
side-effects from the treatment.

   Robert J. Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, called the
findings "an important milestone."

   "Since the defective gene that causes cystic fibrosis was discovered in 1989,
efforts to find a cure have moved very rapidly," he said. "Obviously, we have a
ways to go, but Dr. Crystal's results are very promising."

   Crystal, who began his gene therapy trials while at the National Heart, Lung
and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., compared his team's work to the effort to
send humans to the moon.

   "We've shown that we can now orbit the moon," he said. "We have not yet
landed on the moon nor have we shown that it's possible to get back. But we have
demonstrated that we're on the right track."

   A report on Crystal's findings is being published in today's issue of Nature
Genetics, a scientific journal.

   About 30,000 Americans suffer from cystic fibrosis, the nation's most common
lethal hereditary disease. Approximately 12 million Americans - about one in 20
- are carriers of the gene that causes CF, meaning that even though they don't
have the disease, their children could.

   In people with CF, the gene that controls the proper flow of salt molecules
in their cells is defective. CF patients suffer severe salt imbalances that
cause thick mucus to build up in their lungs, pancreas and other organs. Current
treatments merely slow the progression of the disease, and half of CF patients
die before age 30.

   The federal government and private foundations are spending tens of millions
of dollars to find a cure for CF.

   One of the most promising strategies is to try to correct the salt imbalance
by installing a healthy gene - known as the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) gene - into the outermost cells of the lungs.

   The hope is that the healthy gene will correct the defect and enable the lung
cells to regain their ability to transport water and salt normally.

   Scientists at five medical centers are currently involved in clinical trials
to test the safety and feasibility of gene therapy in treating cystic fibrosis.
One of the largest studies is at the University of Pennsylvania, where James M.
Wilson, director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, has used gene
therapy to treat eight CF patients so far.

   The results of that study, which are continuing, have not yet been published
in a scientific journal.

   Wilson called Crystal's findings encouraging but said that lung inflammation
had occurred in one of Crystal's patients, raising questions that need to be
resolved.

   Wilson said none of his eight patients has suffered from inflammation. He has
received permission from the federal government to begin using a more effective
virus, and he said he hopes to treat his ninth patient within the next few
weeks.

   In Crystal's study, a common cold virus, known as an adenovirus, was
genetically altered. The CFTR gene was inserted into this virus and a fluid
containing the modified virus was put into the nose and lungs of four patients
beginning in April 1993.

   Crystal's team reported that the gene had been successfully transferred to
cells in the nose of one patient and to cells in the lung of another. Sampling
difficulties prevented detection of the healthy gene in the other patients, he
said.

   As expected, the activity of the transferred genes was not long-lasting.
Tissue samples collected 10 or more days after the gene therapy was performed
showed no evidence of the CFTR gene or of the beneficial protein it produces.

   One of the four patients developed chest inflammation after being given the
gene therapy. And a woman experienced fever, headache and low blood pressure.
The symptoms disappeared within several days.

   Crystal said one of the most important questions now is whether the body
develops an immune reaction to gene therapy treatments, thereby limiting their
effectiveness. He said he has proposed a new study to test whether gene therapy
can be given once a month without complications.

   "If we can show that it is possible, then we may be able to use it like a
drug," he said. "I'm really optimistic that we'll be able to develop a cure
using gene therapy before the end of the century."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             653 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       September 1, 1994 Thursday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 377 words

HEADLINE: NORMAL GENE TRANSPLANT TRIED ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have proved they can safely transfer normal genes into the lungs
of cystic fibrosis patients, and are researching how to make those genes live
long enough to fight the fatal disease.

   In a study published today, scientists report they used a modified cold
virus, called adenovirus, to give four cystic fibrosis patients' lungs a vital
gene.

   But those genes lived only about 10 days. So researchers are designing a new
study to see how often they can repeat this gene therapy until the patients
experience a benefit.

   "We know we can transfer a gene to the lung," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, who
developed the treatment at the National Institutes of Health. "Now the critical
question is: Can we do it more than once?"

   Cystic fibrosis patients inherit a defective gene that prevents salt from
being filtered out of cells lining the airways. As a result, heavy mucus builds
up and destroys the lungs, leading to death, usually by age 30.

   In the journal Nature Genetics, Crystal detailed how he added a normal
salt-filtering gene to adenovirus that was disabled so it wouldn't cause a cold,
and dripped it into four patients' lungs.

   Although the patients remain stable, the study didn't prove the gene worked,
only that it could be transferred.

   Crystal, now at Cornell University, had previously disclosed some early
results of the study in interviews and another journal. But his latest paper
unveils three important findings:

   The new gene, not permanent since it's merely carried by a virus, lived only
10 days.

   Patients showed no signs of developing immunity to the gene-virus solution.
So Crystal hopes to start a study this fall to see if he can safely give
patients the gene once a month for six months.

   The safe dose of the genetic solution is 5 milliliters, discovered after one
patient who received four times that dose experienced moderate side effects.

   "Although gene therapy for CF is still years away, this research provides
another piece of a complicated puzzle," said Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   Crystal has now treated an additional five patients, and said he is seeing
similar results.

   CF affects one of every 3,000 babies born in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1994


                             654 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 1, 1994, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: A 'delivery van' for gene therapy of cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Researchers show for the first time that healthy genes can safely be
delivered to the lungs of people with cystic fibrosis, a key step on the road to
successful gene therapy.

   "We now know it's feasible to transfer a gene and get expression of the gene
in the lung," says Dr. Ron Crystal, New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.

   Cystic fibrosis affects 1 in 3,000 babies born in the USA. One of the serious
problems caused by the disease is the buildup of thick mucus in the lungs. This
is due to a faulty gene that regulates the flow of salt through the lining.

   Crystal's strategy: Deliver a healthy version of the gene to cells in the
lungs' lining so it can regulate the flow of salt the way nature intended.

   To do this, Crystal commandeered an ordinary cold virus, disarmed it and
turned it into a delivery van for healthy genes. The virus is disarmed to stop
it from causing infection.

   In the study, the team put the gene-carrying viruses into a salt solution and
dripped it into the lungs of four patients via a long scope. Results in the
September Nature Genetics:

   -- The virus delivered its payload and the new gene has been detected in one
patient.

   -- The new gene could be detected for up to 10 days.

   -- The cold virus did not appear to spread.

   Because the new genes don't last in the lung cells, patients would need
repeated treatments, probably via a device similar to a breath spray.

   The next step: treat patients for six months to determine whether the
modified viruses continue delivering genes.

   "The central question now is can we administer the virus on a repetitive
basis? If we can, we really are on the way to cure the disease," Crystal says.

   One big concern is cystic fibrosis patients will develop immunity to the
viral delivery vans and the vans will fail to drop the cargo. But strategies are
being developed in case that happens. One idea: genetically engineered "stealth"
viruses that slip by the radar of the immune system.

LOAD-DATE: September 02, 1994


                             655 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    August 31, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 867 words

HEADLINE: $ 10 MILLION EXPANSION UNVEILED AT GRAND ISLAND BIOMEDICAL FIRM

BYLINE: By CARRIE A. LIBERANTE, News Business Reporter

BODY:

    Life Technologies Inc., which makes life science research and biomedical
manufacturing products, Tuesday unveiled a $ 10 million expansion to its Grand
Island facility.

   The 25,000-square-foot addition is aimed at improving the company's
competitiveness through upgrading the facility and its manufacturing processes.

   "The expansion will improve our competitiveness and help fulfill our
customers' needs better," said V.W. Brinkerhoff III, the company's vice
president for operations.

   The company, located at 3175 Staley Road, develops, manufactures and markets
more than 3,000 products for use in life sciences research and biomedical
manufacturing. The addition will bring the plant up to a total of 155,000 square
feet.

   The company distributes products under the GIBCO (Grand Island Biological
Co.) name.

   "This is a $ 200 million company," Brinkerhoff said. "So $ 10 million is a
substantial investment." The firm's board approved the expansion three years
ago.

   Life Technologies, which is headquartered in Gaithersburg, Md., has
operations in 17 countries in Europe, North America and the Asia-Pacific region,
and has distributors in Africa, Middle East and Latin America.

   "The Grand Island location is the company's largest," Brinkerhoff said. It
employs 367 people. "This expansion reaffirms our commitment to Grand Island."

   Brinkerhoff said most of the company's sales come through catalogs. "Half of
our business is outside the U.S.," he said. The company serves more than 20,000
customers around the world at universities and those engaged in public and
private research.

   Life Technologies, which employs 1,457 people worldwide, supplies serum,
liquid and power products used in tissue culture processes. The products are
used in the study of AIDS, cancer, diabetes, cystic fibrosis and Down's
syndrome.

   "Our operation is truly altruistic in how it contributes to the life sciences
field," Brinkerhoff said. "Our research and development group looks at the
emerging needs in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical fields. We look to treat
the newer diseases."

   The company's focus has changed from being more researched-oriented to having
an industrial outlook, Brinkerhoff said.

   Life Technologies' products also are used in genetic therapy research, as
well as in the development of improved techniques for bone marrow transplants,
wound healing and treatment of burns.

   "LTI is the world leader in cell culture media," Brinkerhoff said. Another
application is in genetically engineered health-care products, including
vaccines, therapeutic drugs for cardiovascular disease and improved tests for
infectious diseases such as hepatitis and AIDS.

   J. Stark Thompson, the company's president and chief executive officer, was
in town for the official opening ceremonies of the addition Tuesday.

   The company's last expansion in 1988 added 50,000 square feet of space and
cost about $ 4.8 million.

   Life Technologies, a publicly owned company, resulted from the 1983 merger of
two similar but different companies. GIBCO, a division of the Dexter Corp., was
merged with Bethesda Research Laboratories Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md.

   Grand Island Biological Co., or GIBCO, was founded in 1962 by Robert B.
Ferguson, a former Roswell Park employee, who began the company in his Grand
Island home. Ferguson moved it to the Staley Road location in 1963. The original
5,000-square-foot plant has seen at least a dozen expansions.

   Life Technologies trades on the National Association of Securities Automated
Quotations (Nasdaq) market. In 1993, it had a profit of $ 16.6 million, or $
1.01 a share, on sales of $ 205 million.

   The Grand Island operation received the 1993 "Customer of the Year Award"
from Opportunities Unlimited during the organization's annual awards dinner in
May at Niagara County Community College.

GRAPHIC: RON MOSCATI, Buffalo News, J. Stark Thompson, left, and V.W.
Brinkerhoff III stand in front of the new addition on Grand Island.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1994


                             656 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 31, 1994, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 3013 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
CRUEL LINK: HEMOPHILIA AND AIDS;
TRANSFUSIONS THAT ONCE WERE SEEN AS A SALVATION BROUGHT A DEADLY EPIDEMIC IN THE
1980S. AFTER A DECADE OF ANGUISH AND FRUSTRATION, SURVIVORS ARE FIGHTING BACK.

BYLINE: By SHERYL STOLBERG, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Josiah Andrew Alvarado is buried on a grassy slope in the Hollywood Hills, in
the shadow of a stand of giant pine trees and pink-blooming oleanders. His is a
simple grave, marked by a brass tablet bearing a quote from Psalms and figures
befitting a child just shy of his eighth birthday: a goose and rabbit, a cherub,
teddy bear and lamb.

   His mother doesn't come to the cemetery much. Visiting is too painful.

   It has been five years since her only child, a hemophiliac, died of AIDS.
Today, Joan Alvarado is brokenhearted, bitter and angry -- at the doctors she
feels betrayed her, at the manufacturer of the blood concentrate that should
have saved Josiah's life but infected him with the human immunodeficiency virus
instead, and paradoxically at herself, for unknowingly administering the deadly
infusion.

   "I struggle with that every day of my life, even though intellectually I know
it wasn't my fault," she said. "What makes you angry is you put your trust in
these people. They did nothing but lie to me. Nobody told me death was a side
effect of this concentrate. Yes, it was a wonderful product. Yes, he needed it.
But they helped me murder my son."

   The death of Josiah Alvarado speaks volumes about the tragic link between
AIDS and hemophilia. Through tainted blood products distributed in the early
1980s, HIV has decimated the hemophiliac population in the United States and
other developed nations that imported the U.S.-made concentrate.

   A decade later, the death toll is mounting. Survivors, many of whom remained
silent for fear that they would be stigmatized, are now going public and
fighting back.

   In the United States, officials estimate that half the 20,000 hemophiliacs
are HIV-positive, and the infection rate is 80% in those with severe forms of
the blood-clotting disorder. By the end of 1993, the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention had documented 3,342 AIDS cases among hemophiliacs. As a
result of the epidemic, the median life expectancy of a person with hemophilia
declined from 57 years in 1979 to 40 in 1989.

   Families are being wiped out. Wives of hemophiliacs (the disorder is genetic,
passed from mother to son, and afflicts men almost exclusively) have contracted
AIDS from their husbands, or passed HIV to their children.

   Generations are disappearing. In San Bernardino County, a couple had four
sons with hemophilia. Three are dead and the fourth is HIV-positive. AIDS has
also claimed two of the wife's hemophiliac brothers, and her nephew is infected.
Said the husband: "You're constantly worried about one and grieved about the
other."

   Amid this "hemophiliac holocaust," as some have called it, there is a growing
movement to avenge the deaths through lawsuits and legislation. It has been a
time-consuming and emotional campaign.

   Often, it has not been successful.

   In Los Angeles, lawyers for Joan Alvarado and her husband, Tim, spent five
grueling weeks this summer trying to persuade a Superior Court jury that Baxter
Hyland Therapeutics, one of four companies that manufactured the concentrate,
was responsible for Josiah's death by failing to take adequate precautions to
keep HIV out of its products.

   But the case, like so many others brought by hemophiliacs, was extremely
difficult to prove, and the couple lost -- as have the plaintiffs in all but one
of 11 other cases that have gone to trial.

   In Chicago, however, hemophiliacs recently scored a legal victory: This
month, a judge ruled that there was enough evidence for a group called the
Committee of Ten Thousand (COTT) -- named for the 10,000 infected -- to bring a
class-action lawsuit against the manufacturers and, ironically, the nonprofit
National Hemophilia Foundation.

   The suit alleges that the foundation, like the companies, knew the blood
products were risky but failed to warn its members because it received funding
from the manufacturers. While the foundation has declined comment, the
manufacturers have denied wrongdoing, saying the infections occurred long before
anyone knew that the blood supply was unsafe and thus could not have been
prevented.

   "Everyone understands what a terrible tragedy this is, what a horrible
disaster this has been for the community," said Duncan Barr, attorney for Miles
Inc., one of the pharmaceutical company defendants. "But the fact that something
bad happened doesn't necessarily mean that it is someone's fault."

   Yet the Committee of Ten Thousand says fault abounds, not only with the
companies, but with the federal government, for failing to protect the blood
supply in the epidemic's early days.

   Already, the committee's efforts have sparked an inquiry by the Institute of
Medicine -- the research arm of the National Academy of Sciences -- into how the
products became tainted; a hearing is set in Washington for Sept. 12. And the
advocacy group is pressing Congress to make reparations to infected
hemophiliacs, noting that most Western nations -- including Canada, Spain, the
United Kingdom and France -- have done so.

   Its harshest criticism, however, is reserved for the manufacturers. Two
companies, Baxter Hyland and Rhone Poulenc Rorer, together have offered to pay
$30,000 to each infected person -- not to admit guilt but simply to settle the
lawsuit. "An insult," is how one COTT board member described the offer. When the
judge ruled that the lawsuit could go forward, the settlement collapsed.

   "This was 100% avoidable," said Jonathan Wadleigh, a Massachusetts computer
salesman who, angry over his own HIV infection, founded COTT in 1990. "I'm a
business person, and I understand sales. But I also understand the value of
human life and ethics. These companies put their profit before human lives. They
should be held accountable for what they did, and we intend to hold them
accountable."

   *

   No lawsuit, of course, will bring back Josiah Alvarado.

   Nor has the legal system done much to ease the pain of his parents, who have
forced themselves to relive the details of their child's death through a trial
that yielded little but sorrow.

   Seared in their consciousness are terrible images of the fair-haired little
boy with the impish grin, the boy they named after a faithful Old Testament
king. There was Josiah, asking what it feels like to die. There was Josiah,
telling his mother jokes so she wouldn't be so sad. There was Josiah, struggling
to walk on the final day of his life, June 21, 1989, a Wednesday, the first day
of summer.

   "It's been like trying to heal but you can't," Tim Alvarado said, as the jury
deliberated. "They (Baxter Hyland lawyers) are just trampling over our son's
grave. You just want to stand up and scream and yell at them and say: 'Maybe
this doesn't mean anything to you. You get to go home and play with your
children and watch them grow. But what do we have? We have nothing. Our lives
are destroyed.' "

   Now that they know Joan Alvarado carries the hemophilia gene, the couple has
decided against having other children. Although they sometimes talk about
adoption, they feel they must first get Josiah's death behind them.

   "I'm stuck in the reliving," Joan Alvarado said. "I don't have a happy memory
of my son. All I see is the pain, the suffering."

   As she spoke, she hugged her own slender frame, wrapping her empty arms
tightly around her waist. Since Josiah died, she explained, she does not know
quite what to do with them.

   *

   If there is a bitter irony in the story of Josiah and the thousands of other
hemophiliacs with HIV, it is this: The very product that has cut their lives
short revolutionized the treatment for their age-old disorder, holding the
promise that for the first time, hemophiliacs could live a normal life.

   Contrary to popular belief, people with hemophilia do not bleed faster, nor
do they die from simple cuts or scrapes. They bleed longer, because their
plasma, a blood component, is missing proteins -- called "factors" -- that
facilitate clotting. Those with Hemophilia A, the most common form, lack Factor
8. Those with Hemophilia B, which afflicted Josiah, lack Factor 9.

   Internal bleeding from bumps and bruises, especially head injuries, is the
biggest danger. Nonetheless, as recently as four decades ago, many hemophiliacs
made it past childhood. Those who lived longer often suffered crippling
deformities in the knees, ankles and other joints where blood pooled.

   But the image of the hemophiliac as a frail, homebound child is outdated
because of dramatic advances in treatment since the 1950s, when blood
transfusions were the only option. Transfusions were ineffective and dangerous;
huge volumes of blood were required to get a small amount of clotting factor,
and patients sometimes suffered heart failure as a result.

   Then came fresh frozen plasma, until the 1960s when -- after a freezer
failure in which the plasma turned to slush -- scientists discovered that
clotting factor could be separated from plasma. But the resulting
"cryoprecipitate" was slow to administer and difficult to store, and patients
often suffered severe bleeding by the time they got to the hospital for
treatment.

   In the 1970s came factor concentrate -- a freeze-dried form of Factor 8 and
Factor 9, packaged in tiny vials of powder that were mixed with saline solution.
It was convenient, stable and easy to use.

   No longer would patients have to rush to the emergency room; they could be
treated at home. Even better, the factor concentrates could be given
prophylactically. A hemophiliac could play soccer or any other sport; he or his
parents would infuse the factor in advance.

   "It was a revolution in quality of life," said Dr. Peter Smith, a hemophilia
expert at Brown University. "Once you had a portable, practical, easily stored
factor, people could pop that in their car. They could go on vacations when they
never dared to do that.

   "Fathers could move onto a different job because they knew how to treat their
child. Mothers could get a job themselves because they didn't always have to
worry, waiting for the call from school that something had happened to Johnny."

   *

   Factor concentrate so dramatically altered the outlook for hemophiliacs that
in 1981, when the Alvarados learned their infant son suffered from the disorder,
a nurse told them that if he had to pick a disease for his own child, he would
choose hemophilia because it was so easy to treat.

   So the Alvarados followed the medical mantra of the day: Treat early and
often.

   But there was a problem with the concentrate: Unlike cryoprecipitate, which
was drawn from a single donor, Factor 8 and Factor 9 were drawn from the pooled
plasma of up to 20,000 donors.

   Most donors were paid; some were prisoners, others lived on Skid Row. Lawyers
for the Alvarados say Baxter should have known that taking plasma from such
high-risk groups was dangerous. Baxter attorney Rick Berkman counters: "Nobody
ever said that poor people transmit AIDS."

   As important as who the plasma came from was that it came from so many
people, any one of whom could taint the entire batch.

   Indeed, by the late 1970s it was clear that the concentrates were
transmitting disease -- not AIDS, which no one knew about, but a new strain of
hepatitis later known as Hepatitis C. The concentrate was so rife with hepatitis
that, in experiments at the CDC, scientists used Factor 8 to infect chimps.

   Still, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration did not yank the factor off the
shelves; the prevailing sentiment was that the benefits outweighed the risk.
This baffles Dr. Donald Francis, the former CDC official who has been lionized
for his unsuccessful efforts to make the blood supply safe in the early days of
the AIDS epidemic.

   "Here you had this stuff that was filthy and yet was allowed to go through,"
Francis said. "We knew that this stuff infected every single person who used it
(with hepatitis). I guess that was acceptable when you thought the disease was
mild."

   The experience with hepatitis looms large in the legal wrangling over whether
the pharmaceutical companies did enough to keep their products clean.

   In 1981 -- three years before the AIDS virus was discovered -- a German firm
patented a method of heat-treating the concentrate to rid the factor of
hepatitis. But U.S. manufacturers did not employ the method. They argued that
such treatments -- which involved heating the concentrate to at least 148
degrees Fahrenheit for 24 to 144 hours -- altered the composition of the factor
so that it could no longer be produced in large enough quantities to meet
patient needs.

   Had they done so, many hemophiliacs would have been spared. Heat-treating,
the companies later learned, kills HIV.

   Moreover, hepatitis was prevalent among homosexuals, who were also at risk
for AIDS. Although there was no AIDS test in the epidemic's early days, lawyers
for the Alvarados say that if a donor had hepatitis, he probably carried the
AIDS virus too. They say Baxter should have questioned donors more thoroughly
about their sexual practices, and should have tested plasma for hepatitis
antibodies as a "surrogate marker" for AIDS.

   But Baxter never used the surrogate test. Arthur Grebow, a lawyer for the
Alvarados, says the company was too cheap to use it. "They knew they'd have to
go out and replace the donors," he said, "and that was going to be costly."

   Berkman, the Baxter attorney, counters with studies showing that hepatitis
was not a good marker for AIDS. Moreover, he says, the antibodies served a
useful purpose -- they helped kill off any active hepatitis virus that slipped
into the concentrate. And, he says, the FDA never required the test.

   "If you get past the smears and go to the hard data," Berkman said, "there is
no evidence that anything we did caused this boy to be infected."

   *

   Caught in the middle of this lawyers' duel are the Alvarados. They are a
quiet couple who live in an apartment not far from the Beverly Center. Joan, 42,
recently took a job as a paralegal for Grebow's firm; Tim, 39, repairs home
security systems.

   They came to Grebow a year after Josiah died, on the recommendation of a
friend. Unlike Berkman, who works for a high-powered Philadelphia firm and
recites medical terms with the fluency of a doctor, Grebow knew nothing of AIDS
or hemophilia. He is a business lawyer, and his partner is a tax attorney. They
knew only that the Alvarados had a tragic story, and so they agreed to take the
case on contingency.

   Winning required convincing a jury of two points: that Baxter was negligent
by accepting prison plasma, failing to use the hepatitis surrogate test and not
screening donors effectively; and that Baxter's product -- and not one
manufactured by another company -- infected Josiah.

   It was this last point that tripped up the jury, according to both sides.

   Joan Alvarado kept a meticulous infusion log; each time she gave Josiah
factor concentrate, she noted the date, the lot number of the product and the
name of the manufacturer. The log for the first five months of 1984 -- when the
Alvarados believe their son was infected -- lists only one product: Baxter
Hyland Lot 2808 X018 AA.

   During the trial, two top AIDS experts -- Dr. Michael Gottlieb, who
identified the earliest AIDS cases, and Dr. Steven Miles of UCLA -- testified
that Josiah was almost certainly infected between February and April, 1984. It
was then, the doctors said, that Josiah exhibited the acute flu-like symptoms
that appear when blood "seroconverts" -- becomes HIV-positive.

   Baxter countered with evidence that Josiah showed similar symptoms earlier,
and the jury apparently could not agree on the date of infection. On Aug. 17,
after four days of deliberations, they voted in favor of the defense.

   The Alvarados and their lawyers were stunned.

   "To me," Joan Alvarado said, "it seems like they have gotten away with
murder."

   *

   Few hemophiliacs have been infected with the AIDS virus since 1985, when the
test to detect it was developed. There have been no seroconversions since 1987,
according to the National Hemophilia Foundation.

   Since then, there has been another round of improvements in the manufacturing
of factor concentrate: At the minimum, products are heat-treated and go through
other purification processes. And there is an even safer way to make Factor 8,
through genetic engineering. This new "recombinant" factor, available since
December, 1992, is expensive -- infusions can cost $100,000 a year or more,
depending on the patient. But it is risk-free because no plasma -- and hence, no
donor -- is required to make it.

   So amid the disappearance of one generation of hemophiliacs, the outlook for
the next has never been brighter.

   "It's a very exciting time, actually," said Dr. Jonathon Goldsmith, who
directs the Hemophilia Comprehensive Care Center at Childrens Hospital Los
Angeles. "Something good has come out of the tragedy."

   But the biggest excitement of all is gene therapy, which Goldsmith says could
be available within the next decade. If experiments -- some of which are being
conducted by Baxter Hyland -- bear fruit, there would be no more need for Factor
8 and Factor 9.

   After a decade of death, there would be a cure.

Hemophilia and AIDS

   AIDS has taken a devastating toll on people with hemophilia; half of the
estimated 20,000 hemophiliacs in the United States are infected with the human
immunodeficiency virus as a result of tainted blood products. By 1984, AIDS had
been diagnosed in 103 people with hemophilia, and 98 of them had died. The
following chart shows how many new AIDS cases were reported each year, and how
many of those patients have since died.
Hemophiliacs diagnosed with AIDS in a given year: Patients diagnosed in that
year who have subsequently died
1985 / 136: 129
1986 / 221: 199
1987 / 333: 303
1988 / 410: 332
1989 / 392: 280
1990 / 421: 250
1991 / 495: 213
1992 / 585: 118
1993* / 131: 4
* NOTE: Data is through June 30, 1993. Reporting for recent years is incomplete,
and deaths for all years are underestimated because of underreporting.

    SOURCE: U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Joan and Tim Alvarado with photo of their son Josiah, a
hemophiliac who died five years ago of AIDS. The couple lost a lawsuit against a
company that sold blood products.  ANACLETO RAPPING / Los Angeles Times; Chart,
Hemophilia and AIDS

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1994


                             657 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 401 words

HEADLINE: We Shouldn't Phase Out Medical Specialists

BODY:

   To the Editor:

   In "Swamped With Specialists" (Op-Ed, Aug. 23), Lambert N. King argues for
the Administration position that the Federal Government should decree 55 percent
of medical residents in American hospitals to be generalists, as against 35
percent now, and only 45 percent specialists. Further, the Administration would
have a proposed board determine which specialties.

    It appears to me that this argument confuses two different categories of
postgraduate education. The number of generalists -- family doctors -- is a
function of demography. For every 100,000 people, you need, say, 85 such
physicians.

   By contrast, specialties are a function of science. With each discovery, a
new specialty emerges. We are just now, for example, entering the field of gene
therapy. Science is not linear. It goes where the Rosalyn Yalows of the world
take it. We are not swamped with specialists; we abound in them. And that is
surely the glory of this great moment of medical discovery.

   This has special relevance to New York, which is the epicenter of two plagues
that descended on us in the 1980's: AIDS and crack cocaine. The cost of the
research is nothing compared with the cost of the diseases.

   Dr. King also notes, somewhat indirectly, that the Administration proposes to
reduce the number of residents in training. This would keep out foreign
graduates, who make up 40 percent of the resident physicians being trained in
New York. In no small measure they are the ones caring for the victims of the
two epidemics.

   Their replacements would cost New York hospitals something like $550 million
a year. Dr. King counsels that "New Yorkers need to insist that any such reform
insures that hospitals are properly compensated for any loss of residency
positions." Just how would he do this? We have two votes on the Senate floor.
Once the underlying legislation is adopted, forget about compensation. It would
have to come from other states.

   We need more general practitioners and they need to be better distributed. My
judgment is that the advent of managed care will tend to bring this about
through market forces, as the phrase has it. But in the meantime, New York
City's great teaching hospitals are a national treasure that needs to be
protected. First, in the words of the Hippocratic Oath, do no harm.

DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN
U.S. Senator from New York
New York, Aug. 23, 1994

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1994


                             658 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   August 28, 1994, SUNDAY, FIVE STAR Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: STYLE PLUS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1115 words

HEADLINE: HI-HO RODEO: PARTY WILL BENEFIT HEAD INJURY ASSOCIATION

COLUMN: JOAN DAMES COLUMN

BYLINE: Joan Dames

BODY:


   ON A PERFECT summer day, Kimmy Brauer and Carolyn Danforth entertained a
dozen or so of the hardest workers on their committee for Boots, Hoots & Spurs,
the annual fund-raiser for the Missouri Head Injury Association.

   The luncheon was at the stables and pavilion at Hunter Farms, which will be
the site of a laid-back party with a goal of raising a quarter of a million
dollars for the charity. To this point $ 180,000 has been raised, and the
invitations for the Sept. 24 party are about to be mailed.

   Guests stopped in the spotless, fresh-smelling stable where the party is
slated to begin at 6 p.m. with cocktails with the horses, including the two
named Bill and Hillary.

   August Busch had better look to his laurels because the Hunter Farm stable is
even nicer than his stable at Grants Farm, though not as large.

   After cocktails at 6:30 p.m., guests take their drinks outside to a grassy
hill that is a natural amphitheater to watch a mini-rodeo down in the corral
next to a small man-made lake.

   Guests will perch on bales of hay in their jeans and boots and checkered
shirts and cheer on Don Danforth on one of the Hunter's horses, performing deeds
of derring-do while looking exactly like the Marlborough Man.

   He will be backed up by the Hunter's caretaker, Roger DeWitt, and a
half-dozen of DeWitt's professional rodeo friends. Danforth heads the volunteer
committee for corporate giving.

   By 7 p.m., guests will board the Hunter Cannonball, a sort of trolley
designed by Steve Brauer, to be transported to the pavilion to watch the sunset
over the lake. Then it's a barbecue dinner and dancing to bluegrass music and
the singing of Kathy Chiavolo.

   Chiavolo, whose sister is St. Louisan Sue Englehardt, studied opera at
Oberlin College before falling in love with bluegrass. You've heard her sing,
even if you didn't recognize her. Chiavolo has recorded with Garth Brooks, and
hers is the voice of the State Farm Insurance commercial, "Like a good
neighbor." Chiavolo will be backed by a fiddle, a mandolin and two guitars.
Practice your line dancing and two-step.

   The box-lunch picnic tables at the recent luncheon were smaller versions of
the tables for 10 that will be used at the party. The centerpieces, bunches of
tall, fat marigolds grown in the Hunter fields, were arranged in polished
Western boots, just as they will be the night of the party. Volunteers are asked
to contribute for the night extra boots to be used for the marigolds, cut fresh
from the fields, on the 35 tables.  The boots will be returned intact, but
highly polished by one of the Brauer children. And, no, the marigolds won't be
in water, so your boots will survive.

   Everything is being done to see that the party earns the maximum with 350
guests, a smaller-than-usual number because a large space is being set aside for
dancing. Patron tickets are $ 1,000 a couple; benefactors, $ 1,500 a couple;
with general admission $ 175 a person or only $ 75 for those 34 years or
younger.

   Reservations may be made by calling the Missouri Head Injury Association at
(314) 893-2444 from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday through Friday.

   Not much has been written about head injuries, though a head injury is a
likely accident for the young and the most grievous of injuries for both child
and family.

   As co-chairwoman Carolyn Danforth explained: "Even if the head-injured person
survives the injuries, they may suffer serious effects of the accident for the
rest of their lives. The way my husband tries to make people understand head
injuries is to use the example of a computer. You drop a computer, you can pick
it up and plug it in again, but it won't work as it did. The pathways of the
computer system are tangled. A head injury victim may not be able to work, be
subject to mood swings and require care for the rest of their lives.

   "A lot of the money raised for Missouri Head Injuries Association will go to
help families who are bogged down caring for a head-injured family member, for
therapy, for a summer camp, which is a respite program for both head-injured
survivors and their families, who need a break from care-giving
responsibilities."

   The association also provides a volunteer network of survivors and family
members who are specially trained to provide information and support to newly
injured individuals during his or her acute hospitalization.

   Support groups help struggling families throughout the state. One such group
in the St. Louis area works with brain-injured children and their families.

   A St. Louis-based pilot project helps survivors to develop social skills and
socialization opportunities through volunteer work in community charitable
organizations, such as nursing homes, food pantries and child-care centers.

   One dramatic program provides adolescent and young adult survivors of head
injury to speak to high school students on the consequences of drinking and
driving, a common cause of severe head injury.

   Among the committee members who attended the picnic luncheon were: Robin
Engler; Laura Barnes; Sue Engelhardt; Gloria White; Ann Desloge; Becky Hyland;
Kathy Hollow; Stevie Werner; Betty Farrell; Marion Black; Sally Parriott; Betty
Johnson.

   Sue George and Tee Baur will serve as co-chairmen at the 8th Annual Diamond
Ball, called A Million Sparkling Miracles, Sept. 30 at the Ritz-Carlton.

   The ball has raised $ 886,000 collectively to benefit the Ed Heitz Memorial
Research Fund. This year's goal is to lift the leukemia research fund by $
114,000 to a round $ 1 million.

   Dr. Michele M. LeBeau has discovered that some leukemia patients' chromosone
9 lacks the interferon genes, which regulate cell growth and the immune system.
It is hoped that this finding will result in gene therapy and a cure for acute
lymphocytic leukemia. Dr. LeBeau also reports discovery of a new chromosomal
abnormality in patients with acute erythroblastic leukemia. Dr. LeBeau and Dr.
Joanne Kurtzburg will be honored at the ball.

   Tickets are available at $ 300 a couple; $ 1,500 for a table of 10.

   For more information or a reservation, you may call Karen Bisko at 878-0780
from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday through Friday. Casey O'Brien and Leslie Lindblad
are co-chairmen of the preview party of the Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital
Guild and the American Society of Interior Designers' Showhouse '94, 7 to 10
p.m. Sept. 9.

   The Showhouse is Mudd's Grove, at 302 West Argonne in Kirkwood, at the
intersection of Argonne and Harrison.

   Admission to the party is $ 50 a person. Proceeds go to benefit the bone
marrow transplant program at Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital. To reserve
your place, call Carol Dark at 822-8535.

CORRECTION:
Correction published August 28, 1994: The reservation chairwoman for the
Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital Glennon Guild preview party is Karen
Grutsch, 843-3780. Joan Dames' column in Sunday's Style gave an incorrect number
to call for reservations.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Photo by Robert C. Holt Jr./Post-Dispatch - Kimmy Brauer (left)
with Donald and Carolyn Danforth at Hunter Farms where they entertained the
committee for Boots, Hoots & Spurs, a fund-raiser for the Missouri Head Injury
Association.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1994


                             659 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 25, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: Keeping blood going: Device found to help;
Medical Notebook / RICHARD SALTUS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Balloon angioplasty to open clogged coronary arteries has enabled many
thousands of heart patients to avoid bypass surgery, but the vessels tend to
squeeze shut again in 30 to 50 percent of cases, often within days or weeks.

   Two reports today in the New England Journal of Medicine say that devices
known as stents - small metal tubes inserted in the heart arteries by means of a
catheter - improve the long-term results of angioplasty in some patients.

   Both studies, one of which included physicians at Boston's Beth Israel
Hospital, showed that with the Palmaz-Schatz stent, just approved by the Food
and Drug Administration, more vessels remained open for at least six months than
after conventional angioplasty. Consequently, patients were less likely to need
another procedure to reopen the vessel.

    Dr. Donald Baim, a cardiologist at Beth Israel, where more than 400 of the
devices have been implanted since 1988, said the stent is not for all
angioplasty patients but in selected cases can open blocked vessels wider than
the balloon method.

   However, one of the research groups, which included several European centers,
reported that patients getting stents had more bleeding complications, longer
hospital stays and higher bills.

   In an accompanying editorial, Dr. Eric J. Topol of the Cleveland Clinic
Foundation warned that heart specialists may be tempted to overuse stenting,
despite the risks and the lack of data about long-term outcomes.

Cystic fibrosis battle records gene victory

    In another step on the long road toward gene therapy for cystic fibrosis,
government researchers have transferred a normal gene into a patient's lung
cells containing a mutant form of the gene. Scientists headed by Dr. Ronald
Crystal of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, used a modified cold
virus to carry copies of the normal gene, known as the CFTR gene, into the lungs
of a 23-year-old patient.

   The gene caused the cells to manufacture a protein that is lacking in
patients with cystic fibrosis, a relatively common inherited condition that
causes respiratory problems and shortens life. The transferred gene remained in
place only a few days, however. "Although gene therapy for CF is still years
away, this research provides another piece of a complicated puzzle," said Dr.
Claude Lenfant, director of the institute.

Lethal virus causes death in Providence

    The lethal Muerto Canyon virus, which caused a mysterious outbreak of
pneumonia-like illness in the Southwest last year, has claimed its first victim
in New England.

   A 22-year-old man died in January five hours after seeking emergency
treatment, physicians at Miriam Hospital in Providence report today in a letter
to the New England Journal of Medicine. The virus was identified in lung tissue.

   A member of a class of viruses called hantavirus, the Muerto Canyon organism
spread among Navajo Indians and others in the Four Corners area of New Mexico,
Arizona, Colorado and Utah before it was identified as a virus carried by the
deer mouse.  Humans can become infected by exposure to rodent droppings.

   Dr. L. Ellen Brackett and two colleagues from Miriam Hospital reported in the
the journal that the man who died in Providence had recently cleaned a warehouse
in New York City and had been exposed to a large amount of dust.

Yet another benefit found from exercise

    Moderate, regular exercise (which is good for you anyway) can sharply reduce
the risk of severe gastrointestinal bleeding in older people, according to a
study of individuals 68 and older in East Boston and elsewhere.

   Gardening, walking or other thrice-weekly physical activity was sufficient to
cut in half the risk of GI bleeding, which can necessitate blood transfusions
and can be fatal. Reporting in today's issue of the New England Journal of
Medicine, researchers from the National Institute on Aging and from universities
in Iowa and in Rome, Italy, said moderate activity was just as effective as
vigorous exercise.

   GI bleeding is five times more frequent in people aged 65 and older than in
middle-aged adults.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1994


                             660 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 24, 1994 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:1,3,5,6,7,8; B-2:2,4

LENGTH: 1007 words

HEADLINE: Ethnic tie found in genetic ailment

BYLINE: ANGELA LAU, Staff Writer

BODY:

   In an age in which women strive for thinness, Khammone Sydavong would do
anything to give up hers. The 19-year-old, 5-foot-4 Laotian-American suspects
her inability to gain weight beyond 98 pounds is the work of a serious genetic
disease that she recently discovered afflicts her entire family. Called
thalassemia, it is a form of anemia that is prevalent among Southeast Asians and
Mediterranean ethnic groups, and as yet it has no cure. "Thalassemia patients
can't make blood, and in severe cases, they not only become
transfusion-dependent, but most of them don't live past 30," said Kim-Yen Ngo, a
UCSD molecular geneticist researching the disease.

   She presented a paper to a World Health Organization medical genetics meeting
in Bangkok last month. Three years of research with a $618,000 federal grant
indicate there is much to be learned, Ngo said.

   The 3,000 blood samples sent to her campus laboratory in La Jolla by area
physicians for DNA testing show that more than 35 percent of Cambodian-Americans
and Laotian-Americans are carriers of the genetic defect. Not all carriers are
sick, but some may develop severe symptoms of the illness.

   Some who have the defect will pass the disease to their children, Ngo said.
"We don't know how many more there are out there, but my guess is there are a
lot more," Ngo said, referring to the more than 1 million Southeast Asians
nationwide.

   "It is a serious problem." Thalassemia often is mistaken for simple anemia
because it manifests similar symptoms -- fatigue, retarded growth and paleness,
Ngo said. As a result, thalassemics often are treated with iron, which their
bodies do not need, said Dr. Faith Kung, head of UCSD's pediatric hematology
oncology program, which provides transfusions for thalassemics.

   An overload of iron in the body can lead to heart, kidney and endocrine
disease, and sometimes, death. The severe form of thalassemia usually manifests
itself three to six months after birth, producing symptoms such as shortness of
breath, jaundice and spleen enlargement because of the rapid breakup of red
blood cells, according to information supplied by the American Medical
Association. Untreated cases can result in early childhood death or bone-marrow
abnormalities that produce skull enlargement, protruding teeth and facial
distortions. With her federal grant running out next month, Ngo has launched a
campaign to raise funds from the state government and from organizations
throughout the country to continue her education program in the Asian and
medical communities. Because of general lack of awareness of the problem in the
Southeast Asian community itself, it is important that Ngo's work not be
discontinued, Kung said. "Some of them are very suspicious of Western medicine,"
Kung said.

   "They don't want to hear they're ill.

   They've never heard of the disease before, and they don't believe it. "They
don't even want their blood drawn because they believe blood is precious to
their bodies," Kung said.

   "We face cultural problems and language problems.

   But Dr. Ngo is one of them.

   It's much easier for her to educate them." Working in conjunction with Ngo,
Kung's clinic schedules transfusions with iron-reduction treatments to rid
thalassemics of excessive iron that accumulates when they receive the additional
blood.

   Kung estimates these therapies to cost hundreds of thousands of dollars over
a patient's lifetime. "They're living on somebody else's blood," Kung said.

   "Their transfusion intervals get shorter and shorter as they become
sensitized to other people's blood.

   When they become really sensitized, they can't use anybody's blood.
"Researchers are diligently trying to find a cure short of bone-marrow
transplant," Kung said.

   "The medical community has considered gene therapy, but that is many, many
years away." Sydavong found out about her genetic deficiency when her parents
took her to see a doctor because she looked pale.

   She said her family -- her parents and two siblings -- were surprised to hear
they were ill. "My parents are worried, but what can they do?

   They can't make it go away." But the SDSU freshman, whom Ngo counseled to
undergo blood testing with her future husband when they began planning for a
family, is grateful for being told. "Many Asians don't know enough to go and get
checked up," she said.

   "I see so many people out there who are like me.

   They're very, very skinny and obviously sick." Worried but nonetheless
optimistic, Manivon, a Laotian-American whose last name is withheld to protect
her privacy, is trying to fight her thalassemia with sheer willpower. She is
recovering from the physical and emotional pain of a recent abortion that ended
her first pregnancy.

   The unborn baby exhibited severe symptoms of thalassemia at 23 weeks and a
diagnosis indicated it might die in the womb.

   Nonetheless, Manivon is trying for a child. "I want a family," the
middle-aged woman said, knowing her baby will have a 25 percent chance of being
severely affected by her defect. In fact, Ngo's research on 20 problematic
pregnancies that were brought to her attention showed that five fetuses had died
in their mothers' wombs in the 22nd to 24th weeks because of severe thalassemia.
Even then, people like Manivon can still expect a 25 percent chance of producing
a normal baby, and a 50 percent chance of bearing a baby who carries the faulty
gene but who is not severely affected by the disease, Ngo said. Manivon and
Sydavong are some of few who got the message and who can make child-bearing
decisions and health-care decisions intelligently, Ngo said. Others, however,
react with disheartening apathy. Sitting in an empty counseling room with her
interpreter at the East San Diego Public Health Center recently, Ngo
acknowledged that the three families scheduled to receive the news of
thalassemia did not show up -- like many others diagnosed with the problem.
"Health education is so important for this population -- some of them have never
seen a doctor back home," she said.

   "I can't let this program stop. We're just building up momentum."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Lab work: Molecular geneticist Kim-Yen Ngo and
research assistant John Lee work at UCSD, where Ngo is investigating a form of
anemia that affects many Southeast Asians. (B-1:1,6,7,8; B-2:2,3,4,5); PHOTOBY:
Union-Tribune / SEAN M. HAFFEY

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             661 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1994 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                         August 23, 1994, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1045 words

HEADLINE: A chance to survive;
 Bone marrow proves a rich source of hope

BYLINE: Gordon Slovut; Staff Writer

BODY:

    When Dave Stahl suddenly fell ill in 1975, his doctor in Olivia, Minn., sent
him by ambulance to the University of Minnesota Hospitals, where doctors told
him that he had Burkitt's lymphoma, a rare and fatal disease.

    "They told me that they wanted to try a bone marrow transplant because
nobody lived who had this kind of cancer," said Stahl, who was 16 years old
then.

    The university's Dr. John Kersey was considering trying the risky procedure
on lymphomas - cancer of part of the immune system. Because it was his only
chance of living, Stahl and his parents, who lived in Blomkest, Minn., agreed.

    That was 19 years ago. Today Stahl is alive, healthy and an expectant
father. He is one of thousands who have benefited from pioneering research in
the use of bone marrow transplants as treatment.

    On Monday nearly 1,000 of the world's leading bone marrow researchers,
including some of the pioneers, opened the 23rd annual convention of the
International Society for Experimental Hematology in Minneapolis. It continues
through Thursday.

    Among the participants was Dr. Robert Good, the Minnesota-born father of
bone marrow transplantation. From 1944 to 1973 (when he left to head the
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York) Good directed immunology
research at the University of Minnesota.

    He told his colleagues Monday that the progress in bone marrow transplant
has far exceeded his expectations.

    In 1968 Good's team performed the first successful bone marrow transplant,
providing a disease-fighting immune system for then 4-month-old David Camp of
Meriden, Conn., who was born with severe combined immune deficiency disease,
which left the infant unable to fight infection.

    Good had experimented with the technique on animals when Camp's doctor in
Connecticut suggested the parents take the baby to Minneapolis for a last-ditch
try for survival.

    Good's team removed some marrow from David's older sister and gave it to the
boy intravenously. Camp has had a healthy immune system - and healthy life in
general - ever since.

    "He is 26 now, and his wife just gave birth to twin boys," Good said.  "The
twins are fine."

    Six years after Camp's transplant, Kersey gave Stahl massive doses of
anticancer drugs and irradiated his entire body to wipe out as many cancer cells
as possible, a course of treatment that also wiped out Stahl's bone marrow. (The
radiation also left him sterile. His wife conceived the child they are expecting
through artificial insemination.)

    Kersey then extracted some bone marrow from Stahl's younger brother, Kim,
whose tissues and blood were almost identical to Dave's, and dripped it into a
vein near Dave's shoulder.

    The marrow became seeded inside Dave's bones and began producing blood cells
- the marrow's main duty.  Dave recovered completely, becoming the world's first
successful bone marrow-for-lymphoma transplant patient.

    Since then bone marrow transplants have saved the lives of thousands of
lymphoma patients, and it routinely is used to treat otherwise deadly cases of
leukemia. The treatment is either being used, tested or developed as a therapy
for at least 75 diseases - including breast cancer, diabetes, sickle cell anemia
and several kinds of brain deterioration that occur in early childhood.

    Researchers have discovered that bone marrow can be used to replace
defective genes - that when it produces healthy cells, the healthy cells often
can displace damage-causing irregular cells.

    Good said there seems to be an almost-unlimited potential for using bone
marrow transplants against diseases, especially in combination with gene
therapy.

    He said that he has used it successfully in rats and mice at the University
of South Florida children's hospital in St. Petersburg on animal versions of
lupus, diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis-type diseases.

    He said that some researchers have shown that low doses of bone marrow can
be used to build a "tolerance" for a transplanted organ such as a kidney, liver
or heart.  Then the organ recipient doesn't require high doses of
immune-suppressing drugs to prevent organ rejection.

    Some doctors also believe marrow transplants should be used now for
so-called end-stage breast cancer, but insurers say there is not enough evidence
to warrant general use of the expensive treatment.  The insurers have been
challenged successfully in some court cases.

    Dr. Esmail Zanjani, a researcher at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
the University of Nevada in Reno, said that he has successfully treated animal
versions of sickle cell anemia and other blood disorders with stem cell (cells
produced in bone marrow) transplants into fetal lambs. All of those disorders
can be diagnosed before birth.

    He said the savings in human suffering and medical costs could be
substantial if the treatments turn out to be practical and successful.

    The average cost for treating someone with severe sickle cell anemia is $
61,000 a year while the cost of correcting the genetic defect in utero would be
about $ 10,000, he said.

    Zanjani said it appears to be much easier to get good results by putting
corrective stem cells in a fetus than to try to get similar results after birth.
Insurance, though, is another matter.

    Stahl and Camp got their transplants in the premanaged-care era, when
insurance companies usually left decisions about treatment up to doctors. That
has changed.

    Stahl, who lives in Inver Grove Heights and works as a technical
illustrator, said he pays out of his own pocket for annual checkups by Kersey
and for his visits to a university eye specialist who is treating him for
radiation-induced cataracts.

    "They say they [the Medica plan, which originally was Share] will only cover
the cost if I go to one of their doctors," Stahl said.  "So I pay it out of my
own pocket.  It costs about $ 100 a time.  After all, Dr. Kersey saved my life.
I trust him."

    Kersey said he was unaware Medica wasn't covering Stahl's visits.  "He's
perfectly healthy," Kersey said.  "There is about zero chance of a recurrence of
his lymphoma."


GRAPHIC: Photograph

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1994


                             662 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 22, 1994 Monday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 028

LENGTH: 578 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS MONDAY PEOPLE Houston Effler names O'Donnell, Robbins
associate directors

BYLINE: Sarah P. Jones

BODY:

   Houston Effler in Boston promoted Eileen O'Donnell to associate media
director, and named Ellen Robbins associate research director. O'Donnell was
previously media supervisor, and worked at Marshall's prior to joining the
company. Robbins was most recently manager of marketing research at Bank of
Boston. UroMed Corp. in Watertown appointed Dr. Elizabeth B. Connell to its
board of directors. Connell is professor in the Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta.

   Douglas M. Hotchkiss joined Passages Unlimited in Boston as director-sales
and marketing. Hotchkiss was most recently director of marketing for Overseas
Adventure Travel of Cambridge. The Weber Group in Cambridge appointed Catherine
Lugbauer senior vice president. Lugbauer was most recently executive vice
president with Creamer Dickson Basford.

   Transkaryotic Therapies in Cambridge named Richard F. Selden president and
CEO. Selden is founder of the company. Fabian Lapointe was named associate
director of Source Engineering in Westboro. Lapointe was previously design
engineer at Hitchiner Mfg.

   Barron & Stadfeld in Boston appointed Judith C. Knight associate in the
litigation department. Knight was formerly assistant district attorney in
Middlesex County.

   Standex International Corp. named Edward J. Trainor president and chief
operating officer. Trainor was most recently president of Standex Institutional
Products division. Patricia Blale was named executive director of Secure
Horizons, Tufts Health Plan for seniors. Blake was previously with PacifiCare of
California.

   B. Maynard Scarborough was named director of public affairs for Morgan
Memorial Goodwill Industries, Inc. Scarborough was previously Massachusetts Port
Authority's public affairs manager and agency spokesperson. -- Eastern
Enterprises in Weston named Jane W. McCahon vice president-corporate relations.
Most recently, McCahon was assistant vice president-investor relations at Waban,
Inc.

   Robert Unger was named president of Raytheon Marine Co. Unger was previously
president of Sorenson Co. in Chicago. Mary Corbett joined The Commerce Insurance
Co. in Webster as actuary. Corbett was most recently consulting actuary for
Tillinghast-Towers Perrin.

   Gov. William F. Weld appointed Kenneth C. Mermer to the board of registration
of nursing home administrators. Mermer is executive director of The Recuperative
Center in Boston. Michael B. Uretsky joined life and benefits division of
Manzonson, Inc. in Peabody. Uretsky previously operated his own insurance and
investment practice in Boston.

   R. Jon Stouky was elected vice president of Stone & Webster Environmental
Technology & Services in Boston. Mark L. Marheineke joined Innovative
Information Systems Inc.-CDI Computer Services Inc. in Norwood as manager,
quality and customer value. Marheineke was most recently training specialist for
CDI Corp.

   John A. Piccione joined Epstein Becker & Green in Boston to lead its
securities law group. Piccione was most recently vice president-corporate
finance with Thomas James Associates. Trans National Travel in Boston named
Claudia Zeien to the newly-created position of advertising and marketing
manager. Zeien was most recently a freelance marketing and media consultant.
Please send items to Monday People, the Boston Herald, P.O. Box 2096, Boston,
Mass. 02106 or fax them to (617) 426-1865. No phone calls, please.


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 1995


                             663 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                             August 22, 1994 Monday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS MONDAY PEOPLE;
Houston Effler names O'Donnell, Robbins associate directors

BYLINE: Sarah P. Jones

BODY:

   Houston Effler in Boston promoted Eileen O'Donnell to associate media
director, and named Ellen Robbins associate research director. O'Donnell was
previously media supervisor, and worked at Marshall's prior to joining the
company. Robbins was most recently manager of marketing research at Bank of
Boston.

   UroMed Corp. in Watertown appointed Dr. Elizabeth B. Connell to its board of
directors. Connell is professor in the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics
at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta.

   Douglas M. Hotchkiss joined Passages Unlimited in Boston as director/sales
and marketing. Hotchkiss was most recently director of marketing for Overseas
Adventure Travel of Cambridge.

   The Weber Group in Cambridge appointed Catherine Lugbauer senior vice
president. Lugbauer was most recently executive vice president with Creamer
Dickson Basford.

   Transkaryotic Therapies in Cambridge named Richard F. Selden president and
CEO. Selden is founder of the company.

   Fabian Lapointe was named associate director of Source Engineering in
Westboro. Lapointe was previously design engineer at Hitchiner Mfg.

   Barron & Stadfeld in Boston appointed Judith C. Knight associate in the
litigation department. Knight was formerly assistant district attorney in
Middlesex County.

   Standex International Corp. named Edward J. Trainor president and chief
operating officer. Trainor was most recently president of Standex Institutional
Products division.

   Patricia Blale was named executive director of Secure Horizons, Tufts Health
Plan for seniors. Blake was previously with PacifiCare of California.

   B. Maynard Scarborough was named director of public affairs for Morgan
Memorial Goodwill Industries, Inc. Scarborough was previously Massachusetts Port
Authority's public affairs manager and agency spokesperson.

   Eastern Enterprises in Weston named Jane W. McCahon vice president-corporate
relations. Most recently, McCahon was assistant vice president-investor
relations at Waban, Inc.

   Robert Unger was named president of Raytheon Marine Co. Unger was previously
president of Sorenson Co. in Chicago.

   Mary Corbett joined The Commerce Insurance Co. in Webster as actuary. Corbett
was most recently consulting actuary for Tillinghast/Towers Perrin.

   Gov. William F. Weld appointed Kenneth C. Mermer to the board of registration
of nursing home administrators. Mermer is executive director of The Recuperative
Center in Boston.

   Michael B. Uretsky joined life and benefits division of Manzonson, Inc. in
Peabody. Uretsky previously operated his own insurance and investment practice
in Boston.

   R. Jon Stouky was elected vice president of Stone & Webster Environmental
Technology & Services in Boston.

   Mark L. Marheineke joined Innovative Information Systems Inc./CDI Computer
Services Inc. in Norwood as manager, quality and customer value. Marheineke was
most recently training specialist for CDI Corp.

   John A. Piccione joined Epstein Becker & Green in Boston to lead its
securities law group. Piccione was most recently vice president-corporate
finance with Thomas James Associates.

   Trans National Travel in Boston named Claudia Zeien to the newly-created
position of advertising and marketing manager. Zeien was most recently a
freelance marketing and media consultant.

   Please send items to Monday People, the Boston Herald, P.O. Box 2096, Boston,
Mass. 02106 or fax them to (617) 426-1865. No phone calls, please.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             664 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 17, 1994, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 6; Column 6; Editorial Writers Desk

LENGTH: 250 words

HEADLINE: AIDS WATCH;
CLINICAL DEPRESSION

BODY:

   It speaks volumes about the world AIDS epidemic that the annual International
Conference on AIDS will henceforth be held only every two years. There is simply
not enough medical progress to warrant annual meetings. And that indeed was the
depressing bottom line of the 10th conference, which ended last week in
Yokohama, Japan.

   The participants confronted the sobering reality that there is no vaccine, no
cure, no effective treatment -- and that the epidemic is just reaching its
explosive phase in Asia and Africa.

   There were some glimmers of hope in Yokohama -- discussion of promising new
antiviral drugs, of possible gene therapies to combat the AIDS-causing virus and
of recent success in using the drug AZT to prevent the virus from passing to the
fetuses of infected pregnant women.

   And the new director of the American Office of AIDS Research, Dr. William E.
Paul, announced that the U.S. government would boost its allocation for basic
research on AIDS by 20% next year by diverting money from unpromising clinical
tests of drugs and vaccines.

   Paul also promised new AIDS research, an area shamefully neglected for
political reasons by the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush.

   Still there was little hope any of this could soon help millions of infected
people worldwide. As one blunt Canadian AIDS worker put it last week, "We're
doing elegant molecular biology and nice clinical studies, and what we're doing
is irrelevant for 95% of the infected population."

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1994


                             665 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994, The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    August 16, 1994, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 18C, BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 446 words

HEADLINE: Phone-TV talks under way

BODY:


   Creative Artists Agency, Hollywood's most powerful talent agency, and
 three regional Bell operating companies are in talks to launch a network
 that would send programming over telephone lines to subscribers' homes.

   The three Bells are Bell Atlantic Corp., Nynex Corp. and Pacific Telesis
 Group.

   Federal regulations allow Baby Bells to distribute programming over their
 networks but prohibit them from developing it.

NASD expels Bethesda firm

   The National Association of Securities Dealers expelled Lux Investors
 Services of Bethesda from membership for what it charged were violations of
 securities laws and the agency's regulations.

   Lux Investors and principal John Ernst Lux were jointly fined $ 100,000
 and ordered to pay $ 10,191 in restitution for, among other things, not
 maintaining required minimum net capital, according to the NASD, the
 self-regulatory organization for the securities markets.

   The regulator also said the firm, acting through Mr. Lux, bought stock for
 an account in which it had a beneficial interest; effected transactions with
 customers at unfair prices; and failed to accurately disclose markups.

   The firm and Mr. Lux agreed to be barred without admitting or denying
 wrongdoing.

Martin chief sets retirement

   A. Thomas Young, president of Martin Marietta Corp. since 1990, announced
 yesterday that he plans to retire in July, ending a 33-year career in the
 aerospace industry.

   Mr. Young, 56, came to Martin in 1982 as vice president of research and
 engineering for aerospace. Martin has not identified a successor.

New cancer therapy tested

   Genetic Therapy Inc. has begun testing an experimental gene treatment on
 patients whose cancers have spread to their brains and spinal cords, the
 Gaithersburg-based company said yesterday.

   Spokesman Marc R. Schneebaum said the first patient has already received a
 treatment. The tests, being held at the National Institutes of Health, may
 include up to 15 patients, he said.

   The treatment is not expected to affect the patient's primary cancer, but
 it may lengthen lives for those in whom the tumors have spread, he said.

Outlet deal announced

   Prime Retail Inc. said yesterday that it has agreed in principle to
 purchase a 30 percent stake in the partnership that owns Oxnard Factory
 Outlet, an off-price manufacturer's outlet center in Oxnard, Calif. Terms
 were not disclosed.

   The 147,000-square-foot center is 50 miles north of Los Angeles. One of
 the sellers is Fru-Con Development Corp., a long-time financial partner of
 the Baltimore-based outlet center developer.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994


                             666 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 15, 1994, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1081 words

HEADLINE: AIDS research takes steps but few leaps

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   YOKOHAMA, Japan -- The 10th International Conference on AIDS
held here last week was not a venue for breakthroughs.

   AIDS research, like all scientific work, measures progress
in bits of knowledge.

   Those tidbits of information, however, are important because
they allow measurement of progress being made in each field.

   The following are the most important findings in each area:

   VACCINES -- The biggest disappointment occurred earlier this
summer when the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases decided to postpone proposed expanded tests in the United
States of one of the oldest HIV vaccines in development.

   The vaccine, made by two U.S.companies, induced antibodies
against an HIV protein on the exterior or envelope that covers the
virus.

   ""The consequences that stem from this (postponing the
trials) are far-reaching,'' said Dr. Dani Bolognesi of Duke
University Medical Center and a major vaccine expert.  ""First, it
is likely that NIAID-sponsored efficacy trials in the United States
will be delayed one to three years. ''
 Bolognesi said federal officials acted because two patients
who had received the vaccine in small trials did become infected.

   They also feared that people who took the vaccine would then become
promiscuous or use intravenous drugs because they considered
themselves protected by the vaccine.

   DRUGS -- The most promising new drugs are those called
protease inhibitors.  Most drugs used in humans now block the action
of an enzyme called reverse transcriptase, which changes the
genetic material of HIV from RNA to DNA.  When the genetic material
becomes DNA, it can be permanently incorporated into the genetic
blueprint of a cell, thus subverting the cell's life cycle.

   The protease inhibitors act at a different point in the life
cycle.  The enzyme protease cuts protein strands in HIV so that they
can be assembled into infectious virus particles.  Protease
inhibitors bind to this protease enzyme, preventing the cutting of
the protein strands.  Thus, at the end of HIV's life cycle in the
cell, it is prevented from creating more infectious viral particles.

   Developing such new drugs is important because the older
ones, such as AZT, lose effectiveness after about two years, said
Dr. Paul Volberding of the University of California at San
Francisco.  He and others feel that the future lies with combination
therapies that hit the virus hard at the beginning and reduces the
level of virus in the body so that the immune system can keep it
under control.

   Volberding also recommended that people with at least half
the normal number of the immune cells most often infected by HIV --
the T4 or CD4 cells -- do not begin therapy with antiviral drugs.

   The issue remains unanswered as to how these drugs will
benefit the majority of the world's population that now carries
HIV.  The drugs are expensive and frequently require costly medical
monitoring that is simply not possible in countries where the
annual health care expenditure per person is extremely low, said
Dr. Stefano Vella of the Instituto Superiore di Sanita in Italy.

   One new area is the commitment by many at the conference,
including Dr. Michael Merson of the World Health Organization, to
developing HIV-killing creams or drugs that can be put into the
vagina.  They would be used to prevent transmission of the virus to
women who frequently have sex with men who refuse to use condoms.

   VIRUS -- Perhaps the most disturbing news was the
description of a new form of HIV-1 called type O that appears to
elude detection by commonly used blood tests.

   Current technology can change blood tests so that they
detect new forms of virus as they occur.

   But as Dr. Leopold Zekeng, chief of the laboratories and
transfusion section in the AIDS Control Program in Cameroon, said:
""The question is "Are there more divergent strains to come? ' ''

   Zekeng is part of a global effort to survey the world in
search of such new viruses.

   But new knowledge about the virus has aided efforts by Dr.
Flossie Wong-Staal and others to manipulate HIV or the cells it
infects to prevent destruction of cells.  Wong-Staal admitted that
such gene therapeutics are still years away.

   Studies by Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, have found that
certain aspects of the virus itself give important clues as to
which patients will live long with the virus and which will die
early.

   The most important information was that by Dr. David Ho of
the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York city.  Ho has
identified patients who have lived as long as 15 years with HIV
infection but still have intact immune systems.  This may mean that
people can be infected but never go on to develop AIDS.




   AIDS research takes steps but few leaps
 Attacking the AIDS virus.

   Researchers now know the key steps by which HIV virus invades
and takes over cells of human immune system, using them to produce
more virus.  Work in advancing on drugs designed to stop the virus
at various points.

   1. AIDS virus attaches itself to cell and enters through a
receptor molecule called CD4.  Decoy molecules are being used to
catch and inactivate the virus.  Early versions were disappointing,
but versions now being tested are more promising.

   2. Virus sheds its sugar-protein shell.  A new drug called
hypericin may block this step.

   3.The virus, a bit of genetic material in the form known as
RNA, changes to DNA form with the help of an enzyme, reverse
transcriptase.  A family of drugs, including AZT, ddC and ddl, can
block this step but are toxic.  Doctors are trying new ""TIBO''
drugs, derived from Valium, that act by a different mechanism.

   4.Virus, now in DNA form, migrates to cell's nucleus and
integrates with cell's DNA.  Scientists envision -- but do not yet
have -- a drug to block an enzyme, integrase, that performs this
step.

   5. Once mixed in with cell's own DNA, the AIDS virus orders
cell to make proteins needed to create more virus.

   6. One key viral protein is made by AIDS TAT gene.  A drug to
block this protein is being tested in humans.

   7. At the cell membrane, viral RNA and proteins are
""packaged'' to create new virus particles, after one large protein
is cleaved into two.  Drugs called protease inhibitors block
cleaving.


GRAPHIC: Drawing: 1. Steps which the HIV virus uses in attacking cells; Graph:
2. Attacking the AIDS virus (text); 1-2. Knight-Ridder Tribune, Source: Boston
Globe, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1994


                             667 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   August 15, 1994, MONDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: FREE SPEECH, CROP INSURANCE AND HOMOPHOBIA

BODY:


   One hates to discourage Sen. Jesse Helms when he says he's on the side of
free speech. Unfortunately, the free speech that the North Carolina Republican
is currently defending with his legislative guile is gay bashing by an
Agriculture Department official whose job it was to stop gay bashing.

   Mr. Helms is employing his patented obstructionist tactics to win the
reinstatement of Karl Mertz to his old job as equal employment opportunity
manager in Athens, Ga. Mr. Mertz was transferred after criticizing the agency's
policy toward gays.

   First, Mr. Helms put a "hold" on the confirmation of two low-level appointees
to the Agriculture Department. Now, he is blocking passage of an important bill
to reform the federal government's program for compensating farmers for crop
losses after natural disasters. Nearly everyone associated with the crop
insurance and disaster programs agrees they need reform. The stalled bill is
designed to address situations like that in St. Charles County, where only 1
percent of farmers had crop insurance before the Flood of '93. The insurance was
expensive and the farmers relied instead on free disaster aid. Mr. Helms himself
supports the reform bill. But first he wants his way on Mr. Mertz.

   Secretary of Agriculture Mike Espy explained Mr. Mertz's transfer in a letter
last month. He said Mr. Mertz had publicly disagreed with the department's
policy of creating a "work environment free of discrimination and harassment
based on sexual orientation." In a television interview in March, Mr. Mertz
said, "We need to be moving toward Camelot and not toward Sodom and Gomorrah."
And in a newspaper interview, Mr. Mertz said gay rights are not civil rights.
"Abstinence or, eventually, gene therapy, may be the only solution" to
homosexuality, he said. Based on those statements, Mr. Espy reasonably
transferred Mr. Mertz to another job with the same pay.

   Mr. Mertz objected, noting he had spoken on his own time. He also said he
favors equal employment opportunities for homosexuals, although he opposes open
displays of homosexuality, such as putting a photo of a companion on a desk at
work.

   Mr. Helms then began his legislative strongarm tactics dressed up in First
Amendment respectability. But his quasi-constitutional argument doesn't hold
water. An equal-employment officer who made racist or sexist statements could
properly be transferred. So can Mr. Mertz for his homophobia. Mr. Helms should
unlock the gridlock and let the important crop insurance reform measure become
law.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1994


                             668 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     August 14, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1774 words

HEADLINE: A MAGIC BULLET TO CURE AIDS MAY NOT EXIST, EXPERTS SUSPECT

BYLINE: By SHERYL STOLBERG, Los Angeles Times

BODY:

    ROBERT GALLO'S black address book is filled with crossed-out names -- the
names of the dead.

   It has been 10 years since the controversial cancer researcher proudly
announced to the world that he had found the virus that causes AIDS, a discovery
for which he shares credit with French scientists. It was a heady time for
Gallo, and he was flush with optimism, confident that soon there would be a drug
or a vaccine to cripple the galloping plague.

   "Find the bug, find the drug," the theory went.

   Now, over a glass of lager in the oak-paneled bar of New York's Plaza Hotel,
Gallo broods about what might have gone wrong. He contemplates the destructive
swath of a disease that, like a familiar enemy, he and countless others have
spent too many years trying to outwit.

   He did not expect it to be this way.

   Villages in Africa are being wiped out. AIDS is racing through Asia, where
more than 10 million infections are expected by the year 2000. In the United
States, 92 people die of the disease each day.

   For Gallo, who trained as a doctor before turning to research, there are
faces to these numbers. He recalls having dinner last year with Jesse Dobson, a
well-known AIDS activist. Two weeks later, Dobson was dead.

   Another name crossed out of the black address book.

   "I feel like we should have solved problems sooner," the virologist says
somberly. "Would've, should've, could've."

   But didn't. Thirteen years after AIDS made its first appearance in this
country and a decade after "the bug" was found, just a handful of drugs that
directly attack the virus -- AZT and three others -- are on the market. None of
them works very well, and doctors are confused about how to use them. Other new
medicines have either been slow to emerge from drug company laboratories or
abandoned altogether.

   The prospects for a vaccine are equally dim. The wizards of genetic
engineering have been unable to work their magic into a shot that prevents AIDS
neatly and efficiently. In tests of the most promising candidates, six
volunteers who got the high-tech injections became infected anyway, and the
government stopped testing.

   The best hope for a vaccine, many scientists now say, lies with an
old-fashioned method that uses a  weakened but live form of the human
immunodeficiency virus -- a method that paradoxically may be too dangerous to
test in humans. This formula worked with polio.

   But HIV is not that simple. It is a retrovirus, meaning it inserts its own
genes into the cells of the person it infects. And it mutates rapidly, raising
fears that a vaccine containing live virus could transform itself to infect the
person it was supposed to protect.

   It is no wonder, then, that the days of talking about a cure for AIDS are
long gone. There isn't a cure in sight.

   Instead, as scientists gathered last week in Yokohama, Japan, for the 10th
annual International AIDS Conference most used words such as "crisis" to
describe the state of AIDS research.

   Among researchers, a consensus has emerged: After 10 years, it is time to go
back to the drawing board.

   "Over the past decade, ever since the discovery of the virus, there was a
great deal of effort put in place to see if we could quickly hit a home run,"
says virologist David Ho, director of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Institute
in New York. "I think, in retrospect, that strategy is not going to work, and
did not work."

   "We probably know more about this virus than we do most other viruses," says
AIDS researcher Steven Wolinsky of Northwestern University's Medical School.
"But many of the basic issues are still begging to be answered."

   Researchers, for example, do not fully understand how the AIDS virus crosses
the body's mucous membranes -- the linings of the mouth, vagina and anus -- to
infect cells. They do not know precisely how HIV spreads inside the body. Nor do
they know if certain strains of the virus are more deadly than others, nor why
some people die quickly while others live for years.

   These issues are the nitty-gritty of AIDS research. If AIDS had been cured by
now, there would be no need to address them; after all, who cares about the
intricacies of a disease that can be rendered powerless with drugs?

   But that is not the case. And so, researchers say, they will have to learn a
lot more about HIV -- perhaps the cagiest, most formidable of viruses -- before
they come up with a way to conquer it.

   To that end, the federal government is shaking up its AIDS research machine.
Officials are planning to revamp the $ 1.3 billion annual AIDS budget to devote
more money to laboratory studies -- basic research, in the lexicon of science --
and less to clinical research to test new treatments.

   In a sense, the story of AIDS research is a product of a uniquely American
belief: Science can do anything. Doctors have all the answers.

   Today, significant strides have been made in preventing and treating certain
types of cancers. Some childhood leukemias, for instance, have a cure rate of
more than 80 percent. The advances have come as doctors learned how to put
seemingly ineffective drugs together to work wonders. Even so, cancer remains
the nation's second-leading cause of death. Nobody expects there will be a
single "cure for cancer" anymore.

   Many scientists think AIDS may follow the same pattern.

   Among them is Dr. Harold Varmus, the new director of the National Institutes
of Health. With an annual budget of $ 11 billion, NIH is the seat of medical
research in this country. Its 17 institutes and six scientific centers and
divisions are spread over a hilly campus in Bethesda, Md.

   Under his watch, NIH is shaking up its AIDS bureaucracy. Four months ago,
Varmus ousted the well-known scientist who has been the government's point man
on AIDS since the epidemic began, Dr. Anthony M. Fauci, and brought in Dr.
William E. Paul to head NIH's Office of AIDS Research. Paul is a highly regarded
immunologist, but he has no experience in AIDS.

   "I was looking for somebody who would inspire a lot of confidence, who would
do new things, who was well liked," Varmus says. "I was very much attracted by
the idea of his being somebody who was interested in AIDS but not in the middle
of it."

   Paul has a big job ahead. He is re-creating the Office of AIDS Research from
the ground up; the tiny agency had no real power until last year, when -- in one
of the many remarkable twists that characterize AIDS research today -- Congress
reconstituted it at the urging of activists who charged that the federal
research program was a mess.

   Not everyone thinks Paul and the Treatment Action Group activists are on the
right track.

   Dr. Robert T. Schooley is the incoming chief of the AIDS Clinical Trials
Group. He thinks the criticisms of the AZT studies are too harsh. He worries
that his program will be gutted just when it is on the verge of studying new and
better classes of drugs, as well as gene therapy and other innovative approaches
to treating AIDS.

   "If they kill this system . . . we may end up killing trials that many of us
think have a lot of potential," Schooley says.

   As the debates continue, science grinds forward, step by agonizingly slow
step.

   On the drug frontier, pharmaceutical manufacturer Hoffman-LaRoche is seeking
FDA permission to market its "protease" inhibitor (it attacks an enzyme that
enables HIV to reproduce inside the body) under a special program that allows
AIDS drugs to be made available to patients before they are proven effective.
The Treatment Action Group is fighting against the approval, arguing that it is
unfair to put another drug on the market until the company can show that it
works.

   Although tests of another new class of drugs -- the "tat inhibitors" -- have
been shelved permanently, some scientists believe it will be possible to develop
yet another type, called "integrase inhibitors."

   There is no telling where these efforts will lead. The miracle breakthrough,
the magic bullet, may still be just around the corner. Then again, it may not.

   Gallo puts it this way:

   "You could know everything about the Himalayan mountains, but you might not
be able to climb them until somebody developed a new technique called a
helicopter. Knowing everything there is to know about AIDS may not make us solve
the problem. It may be unsolvable. I don't believe that, but that is possible.
Maybe we need a whole new technological development from elsewhere, maybe not
even from biomedical science. God knows from where. For some things, knowing
everything may not be enough."

GRAPHIC: Robert Gallo, AIDS researcher

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1994


                             669 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     August 14, 1994, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1957 words

HEADLINE: ASIA'S RESPONSE TO AIDS MARKED BY FEAR, DENIAL;
HEALTH: CONTINENT'S HIV INFECTIONS MAY HIT 10 MILLION BY 2000. MANY DOCTORS IN
JAPAN REFUSE TO TREAT VICTIMS.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   Toshihiro Oishi is very lonely.

   Oishi is one of only two self-acknowledged AIDS victims in Japan. Two others
came out of the closet as well, but they have died, leaving Oishi and one other
as the lone public symbols of Japan's 764 AIDS patients and 3,075 HIV-positives.

   The young photographer, who contracted AIDS from blood products used to
control his hemophilia, is nearly blind in one eye, the result of a
cytomegalovirus infection. But he is still vigorous, devoting his free time to
bringing AIDS awareness to Japan.

   It is a difficult fight. "It is not easy for a person with AIDS or HIV to
live in Japanese society," Oishi said. "Japanese society is still very far from
being (empathetic) to persons with AIDS and HIV, as evidenced by the fact that,
since my announcement (at last year's AIDS conference in Berlin), no Japanese
with AIDS or HIV has made his or her disease known to the public."

   Oishi addressed last Sunday's opening session of the 10th International
Conference on AIDS. His talk struck a poignant chord at the meeting, which was
marked by pessimism about the spread of the disease and a scattering of
encouraging, if preliminary, scientific results.

   During his speech, Oishi asked everyone in the audience who was HIV-positive
or who had AIDS to stand. The group received a warm and sustained round of
applause from the audience, which included Crown Prince Naruhito and Crown
Princess Masako.

   But behind this appearance of openness, observers say, is an undercurrent of
fear and distrust, a bitter resentment of the "Westernized morals" that many
Japanese believe lie behind the impending AIDS epidemic. A significant number of
physicians in Japan refuse to treat AIDS victims, and many hospitals will not
accept them, government officials acknowledge. "We have a proven history of
extremely intense discrimination against AIDS," said Dr. Kenzu Kiikuni of Tokyo
Women's Medical College. "That's got to change."

   This contradictory attitude of public openness but private rejection of AIDS
as a public health problem is typical of the Eastern response to the disease at
the first AIDS conference held in Asia, experts say. Public health officials
from throughout the region talk of educational programs, condom distribution and
other proactive measures, but in private they deny that their countries are
threatened.

   "The denial here is as great as it has been anywhere else in the world," said
Dr. Michael H. Merson, head of the World Health Organization's Global Programme
on AIDS.

   But the facts fly in the face of the denial. In the last 12 months, according
to WHO, 3 million more people worldwide have become infected with the human
immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS.

   "The cumulative number of HIV infections to date exceeds 17 million
worldwide," said Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, director-general of WHO. "If the present
trend continues, the figure will . . . reach 30 (million) to 40 million by the
year 2000."

   Asia will carry an increasing share of that burden. In the past year, the
number of AIDS cases in Southeast Asia has risen from 30,000 to 250,000.
Moreover, WHO predicts that the number of HIV infections in all of Asia -- now
about 2.5 million -- could quadruple to 10 million by 2000.

   The suffering from the disease will be economic as well as human. According
to McGraw Hill, the New York-based publisher and information service purveyor,
the epidemic could cost Asian economies up to $52 billion directly and in lost
productivity through the end of the decade.

   But that is "only half of the story," according to Dr. Arata Kochi, head of
WHO's Tuberculosis Programme. "It gets a lot worse" when tuberculosis is
considered in the equation.

   Fully 30% of Asians -- as many as 50% in some regions -- are infected by the
TB bacterium, but live their lives without becoming sick because the bacteria
are trapped inside blood cells "like a cobra in a basket with the lid fastened
on," Kochi said. "HIV is like an evil genie that goes around the body pulling
the lids off all the millions of baskets."

   An HIV-positive person who is already infected with TB is 30 times more
likely to get sick with tuberculosis than one who is HIV-negative, he said. And
each of those people who get sick, if not treated, will infect 10 to 20
additional people within a year.

   "In Asia, the number of annual TB deaths in (HIV- and TB-) infected people is
doubling every three years," he said. "We expect Asia to surpass Africa in the
number of annual TB/HIV deaths by the year 2000."

   Merson said: "We have a very narrow window of opportunity to prevent an
(AIDS) epidemic in Asia and it is closing fast."

   Perhaps the most pessimistic of all at the meeting was Dr. Jonathan M. Mann
of Harvard University, who was the first head of WHO's Programme on AIDS. Even
if all the envisioned educational and control programs were implemented in
developing countries, he said, they would fail to halt the impending catastrophe
because they do not take into account human rights issues, especially the rights
of women.

   Of the estimated 1.4 million people who contracted AIDS last year, more than
a third were women, according to the Global AIDS Policy Coalition, based at
Harvard University. Although HIV-infected men now outnumber HIV-infected women 3
to 2, according to WHO, the gap is closing and "equality" should be reached by
the turn of the century.

   And a cruel, ironic equality it is. Throughout the developing world, speakers
said, women are subject to the whims of fathers, brothers, husbands and pimps,
with no divorce or inheritance rights of their own. Men often feel no
responsibility to the women -- whom they view as little better than disposable
property -- and thus are immune to exhortations to use condoms and adopt other
safe sex practices.

   In Kenya, women are taught that when sex is not engaged in to conceive
children, its purpose is to give pleasure to men, said Dorothy Onyango, a member
of the International Community of Women Living With HIV and AIDS, a grass-roots
network.

   Although male promiscuity puts married women at risk, many Kenyan women are
afraid to raise the subject of condom use for fear of embarrassing their
husbands -- or, worse, sparking suspicion that they themselves are cheating.

   "With husbands, it's unheard-of to use a condom," Onyango said. "He will beat
you, thinking you have been with someone else."

   "Disempowered people are vulnerable," said WHO's Merson. "(Consider) the
untold numbers of women who fear infection from their partner, but do not have
the power to insist on condom use or the economic power to leave the
relationship."

   "No matter how hard we try, traditional public health programs cannot make up
for the negative impact of this difference in societal status and realization of
rights," Mann said. "A group of women lawyers in Uganda has convinced me that
the first step in fighting AIDS must be to rewrite the divorce and inheritance
statutes."

   The plight of women extends to their children, growing numbers of whom are
being orphaned or born with HIV. WHO estimates that more than 5 million children
under age 10 will lose their mothers to AIDS before the end of the decade.

   Because of the threat to children, one of the most exciting pieces of news at
the conference, which ended last week, was the recently reported National
Institutes of Health study showing that the anti-HIV drug AZT can reduce the
transmission of the virus from infected mothers to children by two-thirds.

   But Dr. James Balsley of NIH cautioned that the long-term effects of the
therapy on the children have not been determined and that the success of the
approach may drop as AZT-resistant strains of the virus become more common in
the population.

   "What we are saying today may not be true in several years," said Dr. Yvonne
Bryson of UCLA.

   But perhaps the most important roadblock to widespread AZT use in developing
countries is the cost of the drug ($3,500 per year for regular use) and need to
infuse higher levels of it during childbirth.

   "(In the future), we have to make these treatments affordable and feasible,"
Balsley said.

   Other, isolated bits of good news were scattered through the conference.

   Dr. Paul Volberding of UC San Francisco reported findings that seem to
resolve some of the questions that have dogged use of AZT. The bottom line, he
said, is that AZT prolongs life if given after an AIDS patient's CD4 count -- a
measure of the health of the immune system -- has dropped below 500 cells per
microliter of blood. Administering it earlier, he said, provides no additional
benefit.

   Several other researchers reported encouraging results with new antiviral
drugs, especially the second-generation versions of the so-called protease
inhibitors. These drugs, which block an enzyme that is intimately linked to
viral replication, are just now entering clinical trials.

   "It's going to be a slow, evolutionary process," said Dr. Michael Saag of the
University of Alabama at Birmingham.

   "Under the best scenario, three years from now we may be getting excited by a
certain combination of drugs," he said. But he cautioned that it would be more
like eight years before scientists knew for sure if they worked effectively.

   Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases suggested that, in some cases, clinicians might be going in the wrong
direction. While the focus of gene therapy, vaccines and other approaches is to
bolster the patient's underactive immune system, he says part of the problem may
be an overreaction of components of the immune system. If so, it might be more
beneficial to suppress certain immune functions.

   That approach was apparently supported by two papers presented by Dr.
Jean-Marie Andrieu and his colleagues at the University of Paris. They reported
that giving AIDS patients the immune-suppressing steroid Prednisolone in one
study, and the anti-rejection drug cyclosporin A in a second, prevented
progression of disease in small numbers of subjects. Twenty-seven patients who
received cyclosporin showed no significant loss of CD4 cells during an average
of 11 months of treatment.

   Fauci applauded the results, but cautioned against a rush to use the drug.
"There is a thin line between good and bad" immune suppression, he said, and it
is not clear where that line is.

   Researchers also drew hope from studies of so-called long-term survivors,
people who have been infected by HIV for 10, 12 or even 15 years without
developing full-blown AIDS. Such individuals represent less than 5% of the
HIV-positive population.

   Dr. David Ho of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York said there
are at least two important factors in long-term survival. One is infection by a
weaker strain of HIV -- what Ho termed "a wimpy virus." The second is an unusual
capacity of the individual's CD8 cells, a form of white blood cell, to control
replication of the virus in the body.

   Dr. Jay A. Levy of UC San Francisco said he is very close to isolating a
protein from CD8 cells, called CD8 antiviral factor, which will hold the virus
in check. Ho and other researchers said identification of this protein could be
one of the most important developments in AIDS research to date. And in a move
unusual in today's competitive research atmosphere, he called on funding
agencies to give Levy more money.

   Although some advances have been made in AIDS research, scientists are not
yet close to a cure, according to Dr. Peter Piot, president of the International
AIDS Society. He concluded: "Let us face the fact that AIDS is no longer an
outbreak but has become endemic in many countries, and will be an integral part
of the human condition for a very long time to come."

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1994


                             670 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     August 14, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: WASHINGTON POST MAGAZINE; PAGE W3; 20071

LENGTH: 626 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   MCMEDICINE?

   MARK COHEN'S COMPARISON OF JOE Schulman to Ray Kroc ["Repro Man," June 26] is
not particularly accurate. Although both perfected the American dream by
becoming successful through ingenuity and hard work, Mr. Kroc's companyr earns
billions of dollars stuffing Americans full of unhealthy junk food while Dr.
Schulman profits from providing results and options to Americans with
infertility or genetic diseases.

   As a carrier of Fragile X syndrome, I am enormously grateful to have
benefited from several of Dr. Schulman's programs. Even though there is
currently not a cure that will reconfigure my son's affected brain cells, I am
extremely glad I was able to avoid having a houseful of children with mental
retardation thanks to Dr. Schulman's work.

   KATHLEEN M. MAY

   Fairfax


   I WAS SURPRISED TO SEE THAT "REPRO MAN" strained to put a sinister spin on
genetic testing. My wife and I were among the expectant couples mentioned in the
article who, in 1990, received the incomplete cystic fibrosis test with
ambiguous results: i.e., dad a "positive" carrier; mom a "probable negative."
While this information provoked considerable anxiety, it was far from useless.
Combined with other information from an ultrasound exam, we were able to
calculate that our son had a 1-in-2 chance of having CF. He turned out not to
have it, but in the interim we were able to learn a great deal about CF and
prepare ourselves to care for an affected child.

   In 1993, expecting a second child, we were faced with the question of what to
do about the 1-in-400 chance of his having CF. This turned out to be easy: The
Genetics & IVF Institute already had my wife's DNA on file, so it was able to
complete the CF test that had not been available in 1990. No one had to draw
blood or even see us; a phone call is all it took to find out that she is not a
carrier. Was it disconcerting to realize that our entire DNA is available in a
library to be read when the tools are available? Certainly. What are the
implications? Based on our experience, there are three: convenience, improved
health care and lower costs.

   From 1987 to 1992 I served on the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee at the
National Institutes of Health, where I got to review the first genetic therapy
for human patients. I know firsthand the temptation one feels on such committees
to decide whether the public is "ready" for some new technology or some new
information. But I also know firsthand what it is like to be a concerned parent.

   BRIAN F. MANNIX

   Gainesville, Va.


   CARLSON COUNTRY

   THANK GOD NO ONE WAS IN THE house as I read, and laughed hysterically at,
Peter Carlson's [ July 3] "Is This a Great Country or What?" Is this a great
writer or what?

   MELANIE A. FILES

   Martinsburg, W.Va.


   IF DAVE BARRY THINKS HE HAS A LOCK on American humor, he should be quaking in
his boots after the publication of Peter Carlson's piece. The cover alone speaks
to the diversity of our nation, and I laughed and enjoyed it all.

   FRED ARMSTRONG

   Burke


   I JUST WANTED TO LET YOU -- AND Peter Carlson -- know how much I enjoyed his
article. This is the first newspaper article I have saved in a long time. In
this age of put-down of everything American, it was a delight to read something
positive.

   SHIRLEY K. WOOD

   Friendship, Md.


   IN RESPONSE TO PETER CARLSON'S question "Is this a great country or what?" I
should like to contend that the answer is "what." The phrase "disgustingly
decadent" springs to mind.

   Peter's dad sounds quite cool, though.

   TREVOR RAVEN

   London


   Please address letters to: 20071, The Washington Post Magazine, 1150 15th St.
NW, Washington, D.C. 20071. Letters must include name, address and daytime
telephone number and are subject to editing.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1994


                             671 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994, The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    August 12, 1994, Friday, CARROLL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: AIDS conference concludes without promise of hope

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   YOKOHAMA, Japan -- The gist of 3,500 reports this week from the war on
 AIDS is simple enough: There is no cure for AIDS, no effective treatment, no
 vaccine.

   Nor will there be anytime soon.

   "Anyone with HIV won't find much solace at this meeting," said Dr. Mervyn
 Silverman, president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.

   The tone of the 10th International Conference on AIDS, which concluded
 yesterday, was restrained from the start. Organizers warned the 12,000
 participants not to expect anything big. They were right.

   After four days of discussion, the goal of controlling the human
 immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, seems as distant as ever.

   "Breakthrough findings don't time themselves to coincide with
 international meetings," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S.
 National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

   But in the field of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, breakthroughs are
 rare in the months between international meetings, too. The only one that
 surfaced since last year's conference in Berlin was the discovery that
 AIDS-infected women can avoid passing the virus to their babies during birth
 if they take the drug AZT.

   Even this is a limited victory. Because the medicine is so expensive, it
 will not help those living in poor countries, where the disease is most
 common. And it might be worthless to even those who can afford it if
 AZT-resistant strains of the virus grow dominant.

   If any theme emerged from the conference, it was the need to go back to
 basics. Rather than a scattershot scramble for new drugs, many scientists
 seemed to agree that they need new ideas. And they will get them by
 exploring the innermost workings of the virus, and the body's complex and
 ultimately futile response to it.

   The new head of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research said this will be the
 focus of the federal government's annual $ 1.3 billion AIDS budget.

   "The engine that will drive the entire AIDS research enterprise forward is
 basic research," Dr. William E. Paul told the meeting.

   But scientists have been gathering this kind of information since the
 epidemic began. Two of the most talked-about subjects at the conference --
 long-term survivors and gene therapy -- build on the encyclopedic store of
 basic knowledge already assembled about HIV virology and immunology.

   While almost everyone who catches HIV eventually gets sick and dies, about
 5 percent are still perfectly healthy 12 to 15 years after their infection.
 Researchers believe that if they figure out how these people's immune
 systems tame HIV, maybe they could turn it into a treatment for those less
 fortunate.

   Other researchers said their decade of basic research into HIV's origins,
 structure and life cycle is about to result in human experiments in gene
 therapy, the most exotic AIDS treatment yet. The idea is to insert
 HIV-killing genes into people's blood cells so they will be able to protect
 themselves from the virus.

   No one knows whether this will produce a practical AIDS therapy. Time and
 time again, the virus has proved to be more clever than the scientists. Its
 principal tactic is to evolve mutant genes that make it impervious to new
 drugs.

   During treatment, HIV quickly becomes resistant to AZT and all the other
 drugs developed so far. No clearly effective new drugs were introduced at
 the meeting. Doctors still hope that mixing the drugs together will improve
 their potency.

   However, researchers showed little of the bravura that reigned early in
 the epidemic, when many were convinced that victory over AIDS was
 inevitable.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994


                             672 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 12, 1994, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 73

LENGTH: 119 words

HEADLINE: Forrest leaving TKT;
BUSINESS, BRIEFLY

BODY:

    TRANSKARYOTIC Therapies Inc. said that Dr. Richard F. Selden, the company's
founder, will succeed K. Michael Forrest as president and chief executive
officer, effective immediately.. Forrest, who was president for three years,
came to TKT after 11 years at American Cyanamid. Selden will also continue as
chief scientific officer of the company he founded in 1988. The Cambridge
company, which is developing nonviral gene therapy products for a broad range of
chronic diseases, said Forrest "left to pursue other interest." TKT, which
employs 75 people, recently completed construction of a pilot manufacturing
facility from which it will supply clinical material for trials of its gene
therapy products.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1994


                             673 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               August 12, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29; S

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: AIDS Experts Short on Breakthroughs;
Back to Basics at World Parley

BYLINE: By Daniel Q. Haney

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   The gist of 3,500 reports this week from the war on AIDS is simple enough:
There is no cure for AIDS, no effective treatment, no vaccine. Nor will there be
anytime soon.

   "Anyone with HIV won't find much solace at this meeting," said Dr. Mervyn
Silverman, president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.

   The tone of the 10th International Conference on AIDS, which concluded
Thursday, was restrained from the start. Organizers

   warned the 12,000 participants not to expect anything big. They were right.

   After four days of discussion, the goal of controlling HIV, the AIDS virus,
seems as distant as ever.

   "Breakthrough findings don't time themselves to coincide with international
meetings," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S. National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

   But in the field of AIDS, breakthroughs are rare in the months between
international meetings,

   too. The only one that surfaced since last year's meeting in Berlin was the
discovery that AIDS-infected women can avoid passing the virus to their babies
during birth if they take the drug AZT.

   Even this is a limited victory. Because the medicine is so expensive, it will
not help women living in poor countries, where the disease is most common. And
it may be worthless to even those who can afford it if AZT-resistant strains of
the virus grow dominant.

   If any theme emerged from the conference, it was the need to go back to
basics. Rather than a scatter-shot scramble for new drugs, many scientists
seemed to agree that they need new ideas. And they will get them by exploring
the innermost workings of the virus and the body's complex and ultimately futile
response to it.

   The new head of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research said this will be the focus
of the federal government's annual $ 1.3 billion AIDS budget.

   "The engine that will drive the entire AIDS research enterprise forward is
basic research," Dr. William E. Paul told the meeting.

   But scientists have been gathering this kind of information since the
epidemic began. Two of the most talked about subjects at the conference --
long-term survivors and gene therapy -- build on the encyclopedic store of basic
knowledge already assembled about HIV virology and immunology.

   While almost everyone who catches HIV eventually gets sick and dies, as many
as 8 percent are still perfectly healthy 12 to 15 years after infection.
Researchers believe that if they figure out how these people's immune systems
tame HIV, maybe they could turn it into a treatment.

   Researchers said their decade of basic research into HIV's origins, structure
and life cycle is about to result in human experiments in gene therapy, the most
exotic AIDS treatment yet.

   No one knows whether this will produce a practical AIDS therapy. Time and
again, the virus has proven to be more clever than the scientists. Its principal
tactic is to evolve mutant genes that make it impervious to new drugs.

   During treatment, HIV quickly becomes resistant to AZT and all other drugs
developed so far. No clearly effective new ones were introduced at the meeting.
Doctors still hope that mixing the drugs will improve their potency.

GRAPHIC: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                             674 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      August 12, 1994 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: INTERNATIONAL AIDS CONFERENCE MARKED BY A TONE OF RESTRAINT

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   The gist of 3,500 reports this week from the war on AIDS is simple enough:
There is no cure for AIDS, no effective treatment, no vaccine.

   Nor will there be anytime soon.

   "Anyone with HIV won't find much solace at this meeting," said Dr. Mervyn
Silverman, president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.

   The tone of the 10th International Conference on AIDS, which concluded
yesterday, was restrained from the start. Organizers warned the 12,000
participants not to expect anything big. They were right.

   After four days of nonstop discussion, the goal of controlling HIV, the AIDS
virus, seems as distant as ever.

   "Breakthrough findings don't time themselves to coincide with international
meetings," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S. National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

   But in the field of AIDS, breakthroughs are rare in the months between
international meetings, too. The only one that surfaced since last year's big
meeting in Berlin was the discovery that AIDS-infected women can avoid passing
the virus to their babies during birth if they take the drug AZT.

   Even this is a limited victory. Because the medicine is so expensive, it will
not help those living in poor countries, where the disease is most common. And
it may be worthless to even those who can afford it if AZT- resistant strains of
the virus grow dominant.

   If any theme emerged from the conference, it was the need to go back to
basics. Rather than a scatter-shot scramble for new drugs, many scientists
seemed to agree that they need new ideas. And they will get them by exploring
the innermost workings of the virus and the body's complex and ultimately futile
response to it.

   The new head of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research said this would be the focus
of the federal government's annual $1.3 billion AIDS budget.

   "The engine that will drive the entire AIDS research enterprise forward is
basic research," Dr. William E. Paul told the meeting.

   But scientists have been gathering this kind of information since the
epidemic began. Two of the most talked about subjects at the conference -
long-term survivors and gene therapy - build on the encyclopedic store of basic
knowledge already assembled about HIV virology and immunology.

   While almost everyone who catches HIV eventually gets sick and dies, about 5
percent are still perfectly healthy 12 to 15 years after their infection.
Researchers believe that if they figure out how these people's immune systems
tame HIV, maybe they could turn it into a treatment for those less fortunate.

   "This is obviously a hot topic," said Dr. David Ho, head of the Aaron Diamond
AIDS Research Center in New York City.

   His preliminary study, presented at the meeting, offers hints of unique
immune system responses in people who carry HIV without harm.

   Other researchers said their decade of basic research into HIV's origins,
structure and life cycle is about to result in human experiments in gene therapy
, the most exotic AIDS treatment yet. The idea is to insert HIV-killing genes
into people's blood cells so they will be able to protect themselves
from the virus.

   No one knows whether this will produce a practical AIDS therapy. Time and
again, the virus has proved to be more clever than the scientists. Its principal
tactic is to evolve mutant genes that make it impervious to new drugs.

   During treatment, HIV quickly becomes resistant to AZT and all the other
drugs developed so far. No clearly effective new ones were introduced at the
meeting. Doctors still hope that mixing the drugs together will improve their
potency.

   "We will combine them in as many different ways as we can imagine," said Dr.
Paul Volberding of the University of California at San Francisco.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             675 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      August 12, 1994 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 377 words

HEADLINE: AIDS MESSAGE: KEEP TRYING;
RETURN TO SCIENCE BASICS IS THEME OF CONFERENCE

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN

BODY:

   The gist of 3,500 reports this week from the war on AIDS is simple enough:
There is no cure for AIDS, no effective treatment, no vaccine.

   Nor will there be anytime soon.

   "Anyone with HIV won't find much solace at this meeting," said Dr. Mervyn
Silverman, president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.

   The tone of the 10th International Conference on AIDS, which concluded
yesterday, was restrained from the start. Organizers warned the 12,000
participants not to expect anything big. They were right.

   After four days of non-stop discussion, the goal of controlling HIV, the AIDS
virus, seems as distant as ever.

   "Breakthrough findings don't time themselves to coincide with international
meetings," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S. National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

   But in the field of AIDS, breakthroughs are rare in the months between
international meetings, too. The only one that surfaced since last year's big
meeting in Berlin was the discovery that AIDS-infected women can avoid passing
the virus to their babies during birth if they take the drug AZT.

   Even this is a limited victory. Because the medicine is so expensive, it will
not help those living in poor countries, where the disease is most common. And
it may be worthless to even those who can afford it if AZT-resistant strains of
the virus grow dominant.

   If any theme emerged from the conference, it was the need to go back to
basics. Rather than a scatter-shot scramble for new drugs, many scientists
seemed to agree that they need new ideas. And they will get them by exploring
the innermost workings of the virus and the body's complex and ultimately futile
response to it.

   The new head of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research said this would be the focus
of the $1.3 billion annual AIDS budget.

   "The engine that will drive the entire AIDS research enterprise forward is
basic research," Dr. William E. Paul told the meeting.

   But scientists have been gathering this kind of information since the
epidemic began. Two of the most talked about subjects at the conference -
long-term survivors and gene therapy - build on the encyclopedic store of basic
knowledge already assembled about HIV virology and immunology.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1994


                             676 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     AUGUST 12, 1994, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: AIDS Conference Winds Down -- Little to Rejoice About

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

DATELINE: Yokohama

BODY:

    The Tenth International Conference on AIDS closed here last night in a
ceremony marked by more admissions than ever before that progress has been
frustratingly slow in combating the deadly epidemic and that the near future
offers few prospects for major victories.

   It is a message that has grown clearer with each of the previous nine
congresses. If this weeklong meeting differed from the earlier ones, the
difference was captured in a very few closing words by an African delegate who
noted that for the first time, organizations representing people whom the
epidemic has hit hardest have been partners and co-sponsors of all the sessions.

   The words came from Winnie Chikafumbwa of Malawi, who helped create the
Global Network of People Living With HIV/AIDS three years ago. She drew applause
and cheers from a crowded audience in Yokohama's ceremonial hall in a brief
speech that reminded the delegates:

   ''Friends, if the last 10 years have proven anything to us, it is that the
fight against HIV/AIDS cannot go on without us, the people living with it. It is
very clear that without us you are fighting a losing battle.''

   The scores of sessions during each day of the conference yielded hopeful
reports on a few fronts, with scientists reporting on their searches for
vaccines and new drugs and describing new approaches to gene therapy. Those
quests, however, have not come to fruition. No one here would predict when or
whether the research efforts might succeed.

   Nor could the 10,000 researchers, physicians, health workers and AIDS
activists feel encouraged as they heard again and again that the epidemic is
spreading to more and more countries, with a toll in death and social disruption
matched only by the worst wars of this century.

   As Dr. Jonathan Mann of Harvard, the first chief of the World Health
Organization's Global Program on AIDS, put it in a pessimistic address:

   ''Quite clearly, the gap between the expanding pandemic and the global
response is growing -- rapidly and dangerously. Pilot projects fail to be
sustained; the lessons painfully learned from hard global experience are ignored
and not widely applied. Community and political commitment to AIDS is plateauing
or even declining. The disparity between rich and poor, within and between
nations, grows ever larger, and HIV remains disconnected and isolated from
broader health concerns.

   ''Today our global strategy has become a source of false reassurance -- and,
tragically, an increasingly empty slogan.''

   In the epidemic's first decade, Mann argued, people around the world --
including some, if by no means all, national leaders -- responded ''with a
creativity and courage which had no historical precedent.''

   Strategies were devised for public health, for AIDS education and for the
first therapies, which have proven at least partially successful where they have
been vigorously applied, Mann said.

   ''Yet it is clear,'' he added, ''that the first strategy -- innovative and
powerful in its time -- is now terribly incomplete, outdated and inadequate, and
therefore it no longer has the power to mobilize people and resources.

   ''Standing now in the way of progress, it must be replaced.''

   To Mann, the new approach means that while the epidemic continues to demand
public health and therapeutic measures, a more pressing need is a worldwide
social transformation that attacks poverty, racism and the powerlessness of
women.

   Mann is known around the world of AIDS workers as an idealist and a
visionary, but at least some of his vision was also voiced during the
conference's closing session by Patricia S. Fleming, President Clinton's newest
AIDS policy coordinator. Whether or not Fleming's words reflect White House
realities, they drew loud applause when she described the epidemic this way:

   ''The marginalized, the stigmatized, the disenfranchised members of our human
family have been most at risk. But make no mistake: This virus draws no
distinctions based on class, national origin, sexual orientation or gender.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO,At the Yokohama conference, Miki Wakabayashi, 19, hung up a
message inscribed with her wish for the eradication of AIDS , BY ASSOCIATED
PRESS

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                             677 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 12, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 780 words

HEADLINE: AIDS summit ends with a last look at weight of prejudice

BYLINE: Doug Levy

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

    The 10th International Conference on AIDS wrapped up Thursday with
researchers and activists reflecting on the scientific and social progress - or
lack of it - since AIDS emerged in 1981.

   That the meeting was in a country that reports only hundreds of AIDS cases
was just one of several ironies.

   Inside the Pacifico Yokohama conference center, social researchers and others
discussed how to end discrimination against people with AIDS. Outside, only two
Japanese people publicly acknowledged their infection, fearing that very same
discrimination.

   "There are walls everywhere in this world that contribute to the disaster
AIDS has become," said ACT UP member Andrew Velez, speaking at a funeral
ceremony for Aldyn McKean, an HIV-infected New York man who spoke at last year's
AIDS conference in Berlin.

   In the conference closing ceremony, Velez led a brief demonstration against
nations that close their borders to HIV-infected people. "Most of the issues
(McKean) addressed . . . remain unaddressed," Velez said.

   Inside, U.S. officials touted new guidelines that state pregnant HIV-infected
women should be counseled about AZT treatment to prevent transmission to their
infants. But outside, many women cannot afford the costly drug and the medical
care that goes with it.

   Nonetheless, many of the 12,417 participants left the week-long meeting with
new information about how HIV becomes AIDS and how health workers worldwide can
prevent and treat it. "We're moving in small steps, in increments, and that's
positive," says Don de Gagne, a Canadian AIDS activist and member of the
conference steering committee.

   World Health Organization AIDS program director Dr. Michael Merson says the
meeting had a "sense of realism" as researchers try to bounce back from the
pessimism obvious in last year's sessions.

   That realism translates into a decision not to hold the next meeting until
1996, in Vancouver, Canada. Organizers don't believe advances in the field
justify bringing all the researchers together every year. Much of the
information now is exchanged at smaller specialty meetings.

    AIDS AND WOMEN: In addition to a series of sessions discussing how to stop
the spread of HIV among prostitutes, especially in Asia, researchers called
attention to the need for more research involving women and AIDS.

   "Most of the information we have on the natural history of HIV infection is
on men," said Barbara Suligoi of Italy's Instituto Superiore Di Sanita. "Not all
the information we have . . . can apply to women."

   WHO's Dr. Peter Piot said women need more ways to prevent HIV infection and
called for more research on vaginal microbicides, which might be a new weapon in
the arsenal against the deadly virus.

    FASTER TESTS: Before long, finding out whether you are infected with HIV may
take 20 minutes instead of two weeks, the typical time lag now.

   Dr. William Kassler of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, says a trial of a new, rapid HIV test not only worked but also
increased the numbers of people who actually got their test results.

   Standard tests are processed after a person leaves. In the trial, 45% or
fewer people showed up to get their results. When the rapid test was offered,
93% obtained test results.

   Another study finds that giving HIV test results by telephone is another
effective way to get results to those tested and doesn't have any negative
consequences, says the CDC's Dr. Bernard Branson. Home test kits that allow
people to get results by phone are under review by the Food and Drug
Administration.

    SPORTS: Risk of HIV infection among professional football players is
"negligible," but risk of bleeding injuries increases on artificial turf, said
Dr. Lawrence Brown, Columbia University, New York.

   HIV is transmitted by the exchange of blood or other bodily fluids, which
means that at least theoretically, a bleeding player could transmit infection to
another player if his blood contacts another player's bleeding injury.

    GENE THERAPY: By the end of the year, Flossie Wong-Staal hopes to use gene
therapy techniques to treat infants with HIV infection. "It's still in an early
stage," says Wong-Staal, of the University of California, San Diego. "We haven't
cured any patient of any disease with gene therapy yet."

   Wong-Staal's plan is to modify stem cells taken from umbilical cord blood so
that they can produce "reinforced" immune system cells after being transferred
into an infant.

   But Dr. David Klatzmann, of Pierre and Marie Curie University, France,
cautions that practical application of gene therapy for AIDS is a long way off.
He's also pursuing a gene-therapy approach for AIDS.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Eriko Sugita, Reuter

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1994


                             678 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           August 11, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: FOREIGN NEWS; Section A; Page 10

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: Hope and horror Gene tests: Cautious optimism

BYLINE: By Anne Rochell STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Yokohama, Japan - Treating AIDS by cloning and altering genes lies in the
distant future, but small trials to test the safety and efficacy of gene therapy
are set to begin this year.

   "We are still faced with many hurdles, both technical and conceptual," Dr.
Flossie Wong-Staal of the University of California at San Diego said Wednesday
at the 10th International Conference on AIDS. "So I feel both optimistic and
necessarily cautious."

   Wong-Staal and other researchers plan to test a type of gene therapy designed
to boost the human cell's immunity to the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV,
which causes AIDS. By making clones of T-cells - which fight off infection - and
genetically altering them to be more potent, it may be possible to stop HIV's
replication.

   This approach is called antiviral gene therapy. The trials will involve a
small number of human subjects and will test the therapy's safety.

   DNA contains all the information needed to create and direct the machinery of
life. In genetic engineering, DNA is altered to make modified versions of genes.

   In Wong-Staal's research, the idea is to genetically alter most, if not all,
cells in the body that could potentially be infected by HIV. There are three
steps to this process: Design the right gene or combination of genes, develop an
efficient way to package the genes, and then find a way to introduce the
therapeutic genes into the targeted cells.

   Dr. Robert Gallo of the National Cancer Institute, one of the first
researchers in 1983 to isolate HIV, is working on gene therapies that would
cripple certain proteins that HIV needs to make copies and spread.

   And Dr. Phil Greenberg of the University of Washington at Seattle is set to
begin a trial involving 15 patients to test antiviral gene therapy designed to
make T-cells more powerful opponents of HIV.

   "This is a very exciting time for us who have been working in basic labs,"
Greenberg said. "Now the technology exists to apply [the lab work] into clinical
therapy."

   As with other therapies such as AZT, there is a possibility of the virus
mutating and becoming resistant to gene therapy. So a combination of gene
therapies may be needed, Wong-Staal said.

   Perhaps a more serious obstacle is that all the current experiments with gene
therapy require removing the cells that need to be strengthened from the body.
This so-called "ex-vivo" approach is enormously expensive and therefore
impractical in developing countries. Until the altered, cloned genes can somehow
be injected into an infected person, where they would then alter the T-cells,
these therapies won't travel far from the laboratory.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1994


                             679 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   August 11, 1994, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: AIDS gene therapy prospects promising

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   YOKOHAMA, Japan -- Gene therapy for AIDS -- a high-tech,
expensive approach -- appeared the best prospect for long-term AIDS
treatment presented here Wednesday at the 10th International
Conference on AIDS.

   But what once seemed science fiction has already been tried
in two patients at the University of Michigan and could be used in
patients at the University of California at San Diego early next
year in a plan described by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal, a pioneer AIDS
researcher.

   ""Although it looks like a pipe dream at this point, gene
therapy is a rapidly developing field, and we hope that the urgency
of the AIDS epidemic will also provide impetus to accelerate the
development of this powerful technology,'' she said.

   She admitted that gene manipulation promises to cost in the
hundreds of thousands of dollars per patient.  But she hopes that
gene therapy can be refined so that it is taken orally and could be
made available to the Third World.

   One of Wong-Staal's proposed gene therapies is pending
approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and another
will begin the complicated approval process soon.

   Wong-Staal said she is optimistic and cautious about the
prospects for such treatment.  The rationale for it is sound, but
""we are still faced with many hurdles, both technical and
conceptual,'' she said.

   Dr. Gary Nabel in Michigan has used the molecular biological
equivalent of ""golden bullets'' to actually shoot the defective
proteins into the T-cells in order to inhibit the destructive
action of the human immunodeficiency virus on those immune system
components.

   While Wong-Staal knows of Nabel's experiment, she said there
is no information about its results.

   She is using a ""hairpin'' ribozyme -- a small RNA molecule
that can degrade HIV (an RNA virus).  The ribozyme is the shape of
an old-fashioned hairpin -- hence its name.

   The ribozyme can act two different times during the virus'
life cycle.  It can attack HIV when it enters the cell or it can
attack the new viruses that occur after HIV reproduction.

   In that way, the ribozyme can prevent the virus level from
increasing.

   The ribozyme actually cuts or cleaves HIV at several sites,
inactivating several molecules.  Because it has several targets, the
ribozyme has greater efficiency in inactivating the virus.

   Wong-Staal has eschewed the gold bullet technique and is
instead attempting to deliver the ribozyme to T-cells using an
inactivated form of mouse retrovirus (a virus with a mode of action
of HIV itself).

   The technique involves removing blood cells from the
patients and infecting them with the ribozyme gene.  Then the
genetically altered blood cells will be reinfused into the patients.

   Scientists will then measure how many of the ribozyme
infected cells survive and for how long.  Their resistance to viral
infection also will be measured, Wong-Staal said.

   In the test tube, Wong-Staal said she was able to completely
suppress the virus.

   A major pitfall is that it is unlikely that the treatment
will affect more than 10 percent of the critical T-cells most
likely to be infected by HIV.

   ""Even with repeated infusions at regular intervals, will it
be sufficient? '' Wong-Staal asked.  ""The answer, again, is not
known.  We really do not know what the threshold of virus load is
for disease progression and at what point the immune system can
kick in and take care of the bulk of the infected cells. ''

   In the future, she hopes to use her technique to infect the
early progenitors of T-cells typically found in the umbilical cords
of newborn infants.

   The cord blood would be genetically manipulated to contain
the ribozymes that both prevent viral infection or viral
reproduction, she said.  Then it would be given back to the babies
from whom it was taken if those children are found to carry HIV.

GRAPHIC: Mug: Flossie Wong-Staal

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                             680 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     August 11, 1994 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 585 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY ENVISIONED IN AIDS FIGHT A SCIENTIST HOPES TO BEGIN
TESTING ON INFECTED BABIES. BLOOD CELLS WOULD BE GIVEN A VIRUS-KILLING PROTEIN.

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   The youngest people infected with AIDS will be among the first to receive a
dramatic new treatment - genetic manipulation that arms blood cells with a
virus-killing protein - researchers said yesterday.

   The fact that scientists would even consider tinkering with the genetic
makeup of newborns also illustrates their frustration, even desperation, in
finding therapies that work.

   HIV, the AIDS virus, has proven to be an amazingly resistant enemy, able to
change itself quickly to counter whatever new drug is thrown at it. Despite
years of work, no one has come up with an effective virus-killing medicine or a
vaccine that protects people from catching it.

   So at the 10th International Conference on AIDS, scientists laid out
strategies for gene therapy, their latest idea. These mostly involve inserting
protective new genes into the blood cells that HIV infects. These genes would
combat HIV by producing substances to disrupt the virus' internal workings.

   HIV kills by taking over a variety of critical white cells called helper
cells. It turns them into virus factories and then destroys them.

   One gene-therapy idea is called the kamikaze approach: Cells would get a
poison gene that turns on only if the cells get infected, making them self-
destruct before they do more harm.

   Another is to outfit closely related blood cells, called suppressor cells,
with new genes so they will make the proteins that are ordinarily produced by
helper cells. This way, the suppressor cells will at least partly take over the
duties of their AIDS-stricken cousins.

   As farfetched as some of these approaches might seem, gene therapy was
singled out by Dr. William Paul, director of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research,
as a promising area deserving federal support.

   Among the gene-therapy approaches that appear to be closest to actual use is
one for newborns developed by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal and colleagues at the
University of California in San Diego.

   She said she hoped to begin testing it on infected babies within a year, and
eventually to develop a simple AIDS treatment that could be given in a single
injection.

   "This might seem like an unreachable goal right now, but we should bear in
mind that gene therapy is a rapidly developing field," she said.

   Wong-Staal's approach is aimed at babies who receive HIV from their mothers
during birth.

   Doctors would remove blood from the umbilical cord that connected the baby to
its mother. The blood contains stem cells, which ordinarily live in the bone
marrow and produce new blood cells.

   Next, they would give these stem cells a new gene, one isolated from a virus
that infects tobacco plants. This gene produces an enzyme called a hairpin
ribozyme, which destroys the RNA that HIV uses for its own genes.

   The gene-altered stem cells are injected into the baby, where they continue
to make white blood cells containing the ribozyme gene. If one of these new
cells is attacked by the AIDS virus, the gene would prevent it from becoming
established, making new copies of itself and eventually killing the cell.

   Before it can be tried, the new approach must be approved by the Food and
Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health.

   While adults typically live with HIV for a decade, the virus kills babies
much faster - often within two years of birth. Because of the quick course of
the disease, the researchers believe studies in newborns will soon tell them
whether gene therapy has promise as an AIDS treatment.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             681 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   AUGUST 11, 1994, THURSDAY, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A5

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: AIDS THERAPY MAY BE COSTLY SCIENTISTS SEEKING WAYS TO CUT EXPENSE OF
NEW GENE INSERTION

BYLINE: MICHAEL WOODS, SCIENCE EDITOR, BLOCK NEWS ALLIANCE

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN

BODY:


   Gene therapy for AIDS may be extremely expensive, costing perhaps several
hundred thousand dollars to treat a single patient, an international authority
said yesterday.

   Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal, of the University of California at San Diego, said
costs may decline if scientists find better ways of inserting new genes into the
body cells of AIDS patients.

   But she acknowledged gene therapy -- one of the great hopes for defeating
AIDS -- probably will be available initially only to HIV-infected patients in
the richest countries who have the best health insurance coverage. HIV is human
immunodeficiency virus, the cause of acquired immune deficiency syndrome.

   In a report at the Tenth International Conference on AIDS, Wong-Staal said
gene therapy has great theoretical potential in controlling AIDS and other
diseases.

   Gene therapy involves replacing specific natural genes that are involved in
disease with genes produced by genetic engineering technology. One approach to
gene therapy for AIDS, for instance, involves inserting engineered genes into
the immune system cells that HIV infects and kills.

   The new genes might order the immune cells to manufacture proteins that
prevent HIV from infecting the cell; enzymes that chemically attack the virus;
or in what is termed the ''kamikaze approach,'' order an infected cell to
self-destruct before HIV can reproduce and spread.

   But Wong-Staal cautioned against expectations for quick results that can be
used on a wide basis.

   ''We are still faced with many hurdles, both technical and conceptual, that
relate to gene therapy in general and HIV in particular. The first feasibility
studies are just getting underway, and the next year or two will be critical.''

   The federal government has given several medical centers permission to begin
small-scale clinical trials of gene therapy for AIDS in human volunteers. The
tests are not designed mainly to determine whether gene therapy is safe enough
for further human studies.

   Wong-Staal heads one of the research groups. Another is headed by Dr. Gary
Nabel at the University of Michigan.

   Following her report at the conference, several physicians in the audience
asked why the first gene therapy tests could not be done in developing
countries, where most HIV infections occur. Wong-Staal said techniques needed in
these early feasibility tests are too complex.

   One key to reducing the cost and complexity of AIDS gene therapy is finding
better ways of getting engineered genes into immune system cells, she added.
Currently, cells must be removed from the body and the engineered genes inserted
using an elaborate laboratory process.

   Simpler approaches, Wong-Staal said, might involve inserting the anti-AIDS
genes into a harmless virus that would then infect every immune system cell and
pass along the engineered genes.

   ''Although that looks like a pipe dream at this point, gene therapy is a
rapidly evolving field, and we hope that the urgency of the AIDS epidemic will
speed development of this powerful technology,'' she said.

   A genetically engineered human hormone is showing surprising effects in
treating one of the most common causes of death in AIDS patients, researchers
announced.

   The condition, ''wasting syndrome,'' occurs in AIDS and in other diseases,
including cancer. Patients lose weight, critical body stores of protein dwindle,
and the body wastes away to a level where life no longer is possible.

   Dr. Morris Schambelan said death in patients infected with HIV may often be
due to the effects of simple starvation and cell wasting, rather than to the
effects of infection.

   Schambelan, of San Francisco General Hospital, heads the study, which
involves 179 patients with AIDS-related wasting at several medical centers. Half
get recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) and half an inert medication.

   The hormone is so named because it is produced with genetic engineering or
recombinant DNA technology.

   After 12 weeks of the study, patients given hrGH gained an average of 8
pounds, mainly in muscle tissue. Schambelan emphasized that wasting syndrome
patients treated with conventional methods -- appetite stimulants and
nutritional supplements -- gain mainly fat tissue, which does not replenish body
protein stores.

   Patients given the placebo, in contrast, lost an average of 5.5 pounds during
the same period.

   Schambelan believes hrGH may represent an important advance that could extend
the lives of AIDS patients.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1994


                             682 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     August 11, 1994 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TO BE TRIED FOR AIDS INFANTS

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN

BODY:

   The youngest people infected with AIDS will be among the first to receive its
most dramatic new treatment, genetic manipulation that arms blood cells with a
virus-killing protein, researchers said yesterday.

   HIV, the AIDS virus, has proven to be an amazingly resistant enemy, able to
change itself quickly to outwit whatever new drug is thrown at it. Despite years
of work, no one has come up with an effective virus-killing medicine or a
vaccine that protects people from catching it.

   Gene therapy was singled out by Dr. William Paul, director of the U.S.
Office of AIDS Research, as a promising area deserving federal support.

   Among the gene therapy approaches that appears to be closest to actual use is
one for newborns developed by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal and colleagues at the
University of California in San Diego.

   She said she hopes to begin testing it on infected babies within a year and
eventually to develop a simple AIDS treatment that can be given in a single
injection.

   Wong-Staal's approach is aimed at babies who receive HIV from their mothers
during birth.

   Doctors would remove blood from the umbilical cord that connected the baby to
its mother. The blood contains stem cells, which ordinarily live in the bone
marrow and make new blood cells.

   Next, they give these stem cells a new gene, one isolated from a virus that
infects tobacco plants. This gene produces an enzyme called a hairpin ribozyme.
It destroys the RNA that HIV uses for its own genes.

   The gene-altered stem cells are injected into the baby, where they continue
to make white blood cells containing the ribozyme gene. If one of these new
cells is attacked by the AIDS virus, the gene would prevent it from becoming
established, making new copies of itself and eventually killing the cell.

   Before it can be tried, the new approach must be approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health, but Wong-Staal
said, "We don't expect a long delay."

   While adults typically live with HIV for a decade, the virus kills babies
much faster, often within two years of birth. Because of the quick course of
their disease, the researchers believe studies in newborns will soon tell them
whether gene therapy has promise as an AIDS treatment.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                             683 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    AUGUST 11, 1994, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 756 words

HEADLINE: HIV Gene Therapy Ready for Trials
 Engineered genes aimed at human cells

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

DATELINE: Yokohama

BODY:

    A boldly imaginative effort to use gene therapy to endow AIDS- infected
infants and adults with the capacity at the cellular level to fight back against
HIV, the AIDS virus, is ready for its first human trials, researchers reported
here yesterday.

   After a recent series of successful laboratory experiments, scientists from
the University of California at San Diego expect federal approval to begin their
human gene therapy attempts within the next few months. The plans were announced
by Flossie Wong-Staal, a distinguished molecular biologist and the team's
leader.

   Altering the genes of humans to correct genetic defects and even to treat a
variety of cancers has long been a dream of many scientists.

   Efforts are under way at the National Cancer Institute to treat terminally
ill melanoma patients, while infants born with defective immune systems have
been treated by gene therapy pioneers at Los Angeles Children's Hospital and the
University of California at San Francisco.

   But although several other American teams have experimented with techniques
for putting genes to combat HIV into human cells, Wong-Staal's group is the
first to move toward full-scale human clinical trials.

   Wong-Staal was a research colleague of Dr. Robert C. Gallo at the time when
his group was among the first to isolate the AIDS virus and develop a test for
its presence in human cells.

   PROTECTIVE GENES

   The forthcoming effort to insert protective anti-virus genes into the cells
of infected humans is a ''potentially exciting therapeutic modality,'' she said.

   Because government agencies that regulate pioneering medical research have
begun streamlining their rules on use of genetic engineering, Wong-Staal said
she expects her team's work to achieve a ''rapid feedback between bench and
bedside.''

   During their early laboratory and animal experiments, Wong- Staal said, the
gene therapy technique her team developed was able to reduce the quantity of the
AIDS virus in infected blood cells by a factor of more than 10,000. None of the
viruses developed mutations capable of resisting the genetic attack.

   In their first human experiments, the San Diego researchers plan to insert a
unique gene into the blood cells of patients infected with the AIDS virus and
make those cells resistant to further infection by the virus.

   The gene they have engineered produces a singular molecule called a ribozyme,
which acts as an enzyme to snip out specific segments of the genetic material
inside the AIDS virus and render it incapable of reproducing.

   HOW ENZYME WOULD WORK

   Ribozymes are powerful molecules, Wong-Staal noted. A properly designed
ribozyme can recognize and cleave AIDS viruses as they first enter cells of the
immune system, or even later, when they try to take over the genetic machinery
of the cells they have invaded.

   Wong-Staal's team plans first to harvest the genes for ribozymes from a plant
organism called the tobacco ringspot virus. They will then use mouse leukemia
viruses -- which cannot harm humans -- to carry the new genes into white blood
cells removed from volunteer adults who are infected with the AIDS virus but
free of disease.

   The gene-treated blood cells will then be returned to each adult. If the
experiment succeeds, as it did in laboratory experiments, the new ribozyme genes
in each volunteer's blood cells would help their immune systems resist further
attacks by the AIDS virus.

   A question that must still be answered is whether the treatment will provide
lifetime protection in adults, the researchers said. Hope for such a permanent
fix is greatest for small babies.

   One of the most tragic aspects of the AIDS epidemic is the passing of the
AIDS virus from HIV-infected mothers to their children during pregnancy,
delivery and breast-feeding.

   Wong-Staal and her colleagues have applied for permission to remove blood
cells from the placenta and umbilical cord of the fetuses of infected women who
are near term and infuse those blood cells after gene therapy treatment into the
infected infants, days or weeks after they are born.

   The unique advantage of the treatment, Wong-Staal said, is that blood from
the placenta and the umbilical cord contains quantities of immature
''progenitor'' cells that will differentiate into the varied cells of the immune
system as the infants mature.

   As a result, if the pioneering gene technique succeeds, the newborns will
possess genetically engineered immune systems capable of resisting future
infection by the AIDS virus for a lifetime.


LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1994


                             684 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           August 10, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: FOREIGN NEWS; Section A; Page 1

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy trials set in AIDS fight Researchers seeking to boost
human cell's immunity to HIV

BYLINE: By Anne Rochell STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Yokohama, Japan - Treating AIDS by cloning and altering genes lies in the
distant future, but small trials are set to begin this year testing the safety
and efficacy of gene therapy.

   "We are still faced with many hurdles, both technical and conceptual," Dr.
Flossie Wong-Staal of the University of California at San Diego said today at
the 10th International Conference on AIDS. "So I feel both optimistic and
necessarily cautious."

   Wong-Staal and other researchers plan to test a type of gene therapy designed
to boost the human cell's immunity to the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV,
which causes AIDS. By making clones of T-cells - which fight off infection - and
genetically altering them to be more potent, it may be possible to stop HIV's
replication.

   This approach is called antiviral gene therapy. The trials will involve a
small number of human subjects and will test the therapy's safety.

   DNA contains all the information needed to create and direct the machinery of
life. In genetic engineering, DNA is altered to make modified versions of genes.

   In Wong-Staal's research, the idea is to genetically alter most, if not all,
cells in the body that could potentially be infected by HIV. There are three
steps to this process: Design the right gene or combination of genes, develop an
efficient way to package the genes, then find a way to introduce the therapeutic
genes into the targeted cells.

   Dr. Robert Gallo of the National Cancer Institute, one of the first
researchers in 1983 to isolate HIV, is working on gene therapies that would
cripple certain proteins HIV needs in order to make copies and spread.

   And Dr. Phil Greenberg of the University of Washington at Seattle is set to
begin a trial involving 15 patients to test antiviral gene therapy designed to
make T-cells more powerful opponents of HIV.

   "This is a very exciting time for us who have been working in basic labs,"
Greenberg said. "Now the technology exists to apply [the lab work] into clinical
therapy."

   As with other therapies such as AZT, there is a possibility of the virus
mutating and becoming resistant to gene therapy. So a combination of gene
therapies may be needed, Wong-Staal said.

   Perhaps a more serious obstacle is that all the current experiments with gene
therapy require removing the cells that need to be strengthened from the body.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                             685 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994, The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   August 10, 1994, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Experimental gene therapy for infants is at center of new  assault on
 AIDS

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   YOKOHAMA, Japan -- In a new assault on AIDS, researchers today said they
 plan to alter the genetic makeup of infected newborns to destroy the virus
 before it harms them.

   The experimental approach, not yet approved, represents an attempt to head
 off AIDS at the earliest possible stage in its youngest victims.

   When human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, invades the body, it
 takes over white blood cells. Then it turns these cells into virus
 factories, eventually killing them as it spews new copies of HIV into the
 bloodstream.

   The new idea is to arm these cells with a weapon against acquired immune
 deficiency syndrome -- a protein that cripples HIV by chopping up its viral
 genes.

   The approach was outlined by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal of the University of
 California-San Diego at the 10th International Conference on AIDS.

   She said she hopes to begin testing it on infected babies within a year
 and eventually to develop a simple AIDS treatment that can be given in a
 single injection.

   "This might seem like an unreachable goal right now, but we should bear in
 mind that gene therapy is a rapidly developing field," Dr. Wong-Staal said.

   Her approach is one of several kinds of gene therapy under consideration
 to attack HIV. The ideas, which would have been considered science fiction
 only a few years ago, are now being seriously discussed as more traditional
 approaches to control the disease have failed.

   Drug therapy has been disappointing because the virus quickly evolves
 inside the body to elude the effects of these medicines. No vaccines have
 been developed with a clear chance of protecting against infection.

   Dr. William Paul, director of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research, cited
 "great enthusiasm about the potential of gene therapy to limit the capacity
 of cells to support the growth of the virus."

   But whether gene therapy will work is still uncertain. In fact, no one
 knows whether anything can slow or stop the virus once it becomes
 established in the body. However, many believe that treatment early in the
 infection has the best chance of success.

   Dr. Wong-Staal's approach is aimed at babies who receive HIV from their
 mothers during birth. It would work this way:

   First, doctors remove blood from the umbilical cord that connected the
 baby to its mother. The blood contains stem cells, which ordinarily live in
 the bone marrow and make new blood cells.

   Next, doctors would give the stem cells a new gene that produces an enzyme
 called a hairpin ribozyme. It destroys the RNA that HIV uses for its own
 genes. The gene-altered stem cells are injected into the baby, where they
 continue to pump out white blood cells containing the ribozyme gene. If all
 goes as planned, the treatment will destroy HIV's ability to reproduce. When
 a cell containing the alien gene becomes infected, the ribozyme immediately
 attacks the invader before it becomes established. If that fails, it gets
 another chance when the virus begins producing new copies of itself.

   Before it can be tried, the new approach must be approved by the federal
 government.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994


                             686 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    August 10, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 534 words

HEADLINE: GENE SPLICE TO FIGHT AIDS IN NEWBORNS

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY, Associated Press

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN

BODY:

    In a new assault on AIDS, researchers today said they plan to alter the
genetic makeup of infected newborns to destroy the virus before it harms them.

   The experimental approach, not yet approved, represents an attempt to head
off AIDS at the earliest possible stage in its youngest victims.

   When HIV, the AIDS virus, invades the body, it takes over white blood cells.
Then it turns these cells into virus factories, eventually killing them as it
spews new copies of HIV into the bloodstream.

   The new idea is to arm these cells with a weapon against AIDS -- a protein
that cripples HIV by chopping up its viral genes.

   The approach was outlined by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal of the University of
California, San Diego, at the 10th International Conference on AIDS.

   She said she hopes to begin testing it on infected babies within a year and
eventually to develop a simple AIDS treatment that can be given in a single
injection.

   "This might seem like an unreachable goal right now, but we should bear in
mind that gene therapy is a rapidly developing field," Dr. Wong-Staal said.

   Her approach is one of several kinds of gene therapy under consideration to
attack HIV.

   The ideas, which would have been considered science fiction only a few years
ago, are now being seriously discussed as more traditional approaches to control
the disease have failed.

   Drug therapy has been disappointing because the virus quickly evolves inside
the body to elude the effects of these medicines.

   No vaccines have been developed with a clear chance of protecting against
infection.

   Dr. William Paul, director of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research, cited "great
enthusiasm about the potential of gene therapy to limit the capacity of cells to
support the growth of the virus."

   But whether gene therapy will work is still uncertain. In fact, no one knows
whether anything can slow or stop the virus once it becomes established in the
body.

   However, many believe that treatment early in the infection has the best
chance of success.

   Dr. Wong-Staal's approach is aimed at babies who receive HIV from their
mothers during birth.

   Before it can be tried, the new approach must be approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                             687 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    August 10, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 200 words

HEADLINE: AIDS PROJECT WILL TRY TO ALTER GENES

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, JAPAN

BODY:

    In an attempt to frustrate the AIDS virus at its earliest possible stage,
scientists today said they will seek to alter the genetic makeup of infected
newborns.

   The experimental approach was outlined by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal of the
University of California, San Diego, at the 10th International Conference on
AIDS.

   Doctors plan to insert into cells taken from a baby's umbilical cord a gene
that destroys a key enzyme of HIV. Those altered cells would be injected into
the baby. If all goes as planned, they would pump out white blood cells
containing the gene that will destroy HIV's ability to reproduce.

   She said she hopes to begin testing the procedure on infected babies within a
year. It is one of several kinds of gene therapy under consideration to attack
HIV. Story on A6.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                             688 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 10, 1994 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL ; Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 447 words

HEADLINE: Robert Craig; fight against cancer inspiration to others

BYLINE: JACK WILLIAMS, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Robert Craig, who battled various forms of cancer with uncommon aplomb and
tenacity for nearly half his 53 years, died of the disease Saturday at Sharp
Memorial Hospital. A pioneer in experimental therapies and an inspiration to
patients in his support group, Mr. Craig, of Serra Mesa, recently was honored by
the National Coalition of Cancer Survivors and nominated for a hero's award by
Coping, a national magazine for cancer patients.

   He also received the Purple Heart Award, which Sharp Memorial presents to
patients exhibiting extraordinary courage. "I've worked in the field 20 years
and never have seen anything like him," said Laurel Barile, counselor for the
oncology unit at Sharp Memorial. "His whole attitude was, `I will find a way to
heal and help myself and, hopefully, it will help someone else.' We all looked
to Bob for inspiration." At the time of his death, Mr. Craig was awaiting Food
and Drug Administration approval of a new gene therapy to address the colon,
bone and lymphoma cancer that ravaged his body -- but seemingly failed to weaken
his will -- over the last five years. He was first diagnosed with Hodgkin's
disease 26 years ago and given six weeks to six months to live. That marked the
beginning of his efforts to pursue cutting-edge treatments -- many of which
today are considered life-threatening because of their dosages and side effects,
Barile said.

   He also underwent more than 50 surgeries during his years as a patient. "We
owe him a debt of gratitude.

   He was at the forefront of radiation therapies and the most contemporary
chemotherapy," Barile said. Mr. Craig, who had been in and out of the hospital
for the last few months, worked until nine months ago as a master plumber and
was studying for examinations that would qualify him to be a plumber's
consultant. He coached girls softball in Serra Mesa and was active in Girl
Scouts and the Parent Teachers' Associations at Jones Elementary and Farb Middle
School. He was a participant in We Can Weekend, a nationally recognized retreat
for cancer patients and their families. Mr. Craig was born in Benton Harbor,
Mich., and grew up in San Diego.

   He was a member of Crawford High School's first graduating class and was
helping to plan a 35th class reunion this year. Survivors include Bobbie, his
wife of 26 years; a daughter, Christine, of San Diego; his parents, Virginia and
Elmer Craig, of Encinitas; a sister, Suzanne Dow, of Valencia, and two brothers,
Bill, of San Diego, and Tom, of Valencia. Services are scheduled at 10 a.m.
today at Greenwood Mortuary's Salli Lynn Chapel.

   The family suggests donations to Our Best Friends Therapy Dog Program, P.O.
Box 2346 Spring Valley, CA 91979.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             689 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994, The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     August 9, 1994, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES, Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 1106 words

HEADLINE: Artery de-clogging gene therapy shows promise for future

BYLINE: Gina Kolata, NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:


   Every year, about 400,000 Americans have a procedure called angioplasty,
 in which tiny balloons are inflated in their coronary arteries in an attempt
 to push artery-clogging plaque against the blood-vessel walls.

   And every year, one-third to one-half of these operations fail within six
 months: The plaque comes back with a vengeance.

   Cardiologists have tried about 50 drugs to stop this process, called
 restenosis, but none have worked.

   Now two groups of investigators have shown that, in animals at least, they
 can use gene therapy to prevent plaque from growing back. The technique
 involves inserting a suicide gene into the cells that proliferate to clog
 the arteries.

   One group, led by Dr. Elizabeth G. Nabel and Dr. Gary J. Nabel of the
 University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, who are married, worked with pigs, a
 species that closely resembles humans in the size of their blood vessels and
 in their propensity to develop atherosclerosis. The balloon angioplasty was
 done in the pigs' groin arteries. The Nabels' work is published in the
 current issue of the journal Science.

   The second group, led by Dr. Toren Finkel and Dr. Stephen E. Epstein of
 the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., did virtually
 the same experiment with the same results in the neck arteries of rats.

   Their paper, based on work with 70 rats, will be published next month in
 The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Cardiologists were enthusiastic about the results but said that more work
 must be done before the method can be tried in human patients.

   Wave of the future

   "It's exciting," says Dr. David Hathaway, director of the Krannert
 Institute of Cardiology at Indiana University.

   "It is definitely the wave of the future." But, he adds: "It's a little
 bit like the first car or the first airplane. There is a long way to go
 before it becomes standard therapy."

   Dr. R. Sanders Williams, the chief of cardiology at the University of
 Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, says, "This work is quite
 high-tech and futuristic, but it's also extraordinarily promising."

   Nonetheless, he adds, "it's probably overly enthusiastic to think that it
 will move directly to the clinic."

   The reclogging of an artery after it has been opened with a balloon is
 caused by a tumorlike growth of the smooth-muscle cells that line the artery
 wall. The balloon scrapes off the lining of the artery, leaving a raw
 surface and exposing the smooth- muscle cells underneath. Then these cells
 start to divide and may pile one on top of another until they form a mass
 large enough to block the artery.

   The conventional approach has been to try to treat patients with drugs to
 prevent the cells from proliferating.

   But even if researchers had found a drug that worked, says Dr. Judith
 Swain, chief of cardiovascular medicine and professor of medicine and
 genetics at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in
 Philadelphia, it would be far from an ideal approach: "There are miles of
 blood vessels in the body, but all you want to treat is a quarter to an
 eighth of an inch.

   "Every drug you can give has side effects, and if somebody is taking pills
 in an attempt to treat something that is a quarter of an inch, it's a bit of
 overkill."

   Another alternative would be to deliver drugs precisely to the area where
 they are needed, but Dr. Gary Nabel says they would be washed away by the
 bloodstream before they had a chance to act.

   "You can never give enough drugs in an artery because they are washed away
 very, very quickly," he says.

   Altering the cells

   That left investigators with the gene therapy approach.

   Their aim was to alter the cells themselves so they would die, stop
 dividing or be uniquely susceptible to drugs that otherwise would not harm
 them.

   "We and probably 25 to 30 labs across the country are working on
 restenosis with a gene therapy approach," Dr. Swain says.

   Dr. Elizabeth Nabel says she began by looking at genes for substances that
 cells normally use to stimulate growth, reasoning that if the smooth-muscle
 cells activate just one of these genes, it might be possible to block the
 gene and so block the growth.

   But it turned out that cells use a variety of growth-stimulating genes.
 "There are multiple redundant pathways," she says, and it was not feasible
 to think of blocking them all.

   That led her to think of trying to simply destroy all proliferating cells
 in the area, regardless of what genes they were using to make themselves
 grow.

   Infecting the genes

   To do this, the Nabels and, independently, Dr. Finkel and Dr. Epstein
 infected the smooth-muscle cells with a genetically engineered adenovirus, a
 type of virus that ordinarily causes colds in humans. These adenoviruses
 were designed so that once they got into cells, they would not be able to
 multiply and spread to other cells.

   Instead, they would park their DNA in the cells' nuclei, next to the DNA
 in the cells. When cellular genes were turned on, so were the viral genes.

   One of the viral genes instructs the cells to make an enzyme, thymidine
 kinase, that normally would be completely innocuous. But if the cells are
 treated with a drug, ganciclovir, the enzyme converts ganciclovir into a
 poison that kills the cells as soon as they try to divide. In this way, gene
 therapy with a hobbled adenovirus can make cells commit suicide when they
 are exposed to ganciclovir. But cells that are not infected with the
 adenovirus are impervious to ganciclovir.

   Both groups of investigators found that when they treated injured artery
 cells with adenoviruses and then gave the animals ganciclovir, they
 prevented restenosis.

   Dr. Elizabeth Nabel says that the treatment spared healthy cells. And, she
 said, the gene therapy is effective only for a few weeks, after which the
 adenovirus dies.

   By a happy coincidence, the few weeks that the virus is active are exactly
 the few weeks when smooth-muscle cells would ordinarily grow and block the
 artery.

   "It has a lot of appeal," says Dr. Gary Nabel. "It's a one-time treatment
 for a one-time biologic response whose effects can be long-lasting."

   But before it can be tried on human, he says, several concerns have to be
 addressed. Among them are whether investigators can add adenoviruses to
 enough smooth-muscle cells to make a difference. "We know we can get genes
 in, but gene levels are another story," he says.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994


                             690 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     August 9, 1994, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 619 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE CALENDAR:  L.A. TO BE LINKED BY SATELLITE TO AIDS

BYLINE: By NONA YATES

BODY:

   Symposium in Japan

   The UCLA AIDS Institute will host a symposium in Japan, broadcast live by
satellite to the Biltmore Hotel in Los Angeles on Thursday. "Treatment of HIV
Disease: Advances and Future Challenges," will be presented in Yokohama in
conjunction with the 10th International Conference on AIDS.

   Panelists will provide information on HIV-related topics including
pathogenesis, AIDS malignancies and novel HIV therapeutic approaches, such as
cytokines, vaccines and gene therapy.

   Moderated by Dr. Ronald T. Mitsuyasu, associate director of the institute,
panel members will include Dr. Martha Rogers, chief of epidemiology, division of
HIV/AIDS, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Dr. Steven A. Miles,
assistant professor of medicine, UCLA CARE Center, and other experts in the
field.

   Advance registration for the symposium at the Biltmore is required, call
(800) 535-1307, between 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m.

   ASTRONOMY

   * The annual Perseid meteor shower may be unusually intense this year, says
the Griffith Observatory, climaxing about 3 a.m. Friday. At the minimum,
observers in dark locations can expect to see about one meteor per minute. If a
so-called meteor "storm" occurs, up to several hundred meteors per hour could be
visible.

   The observatory will not be open late for this event. The observatory's Sky
Report, (213) 663-8171, gives additional information on celestial events.

   The Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History will hold a Perseid Meteor shower
party at 9 p.m. Friday, immediately following a planetarium program at 8 p.m.
Call (805) 682-4711 or (805) 682-3224.

   SCIENCE FOR FAMILIES

   * Naturalist Lou Palermo will lead her students into the world of arachnids
in "Exploring the Secret World of Spiders," a field science program designed for
the whole family at the Madrona Marsh Nature Preserve in Torrance on Sunday at 2
p.m. Reservations are required. Call the Friends of Madrona Marsh at (310)
326-3840 or (310) 782-3989.

   * The Eaton Canyon Nature Center will host a "Bat Walk" on Friday at 7:30
p.m. Participants will learn about the three species believed to inhabit the
canyon and how these gentle mammals are beneficial to people. Call (818)
821-3246.

   * Machado Lake, in the Ken Malloy Harbor Regional Park in Harbor City and
Wilmington,
will be explored in a two-hour walk and clean-up effort on Saturday at 9 a.m.
Originally a saltwater marsh, the lake is now a freshwater system supporting a
variety of plant life, shorebirds and migratory birds using the Pacific Flyway.
Call the Palos Verdes Peninsula Land Conservancy at (310) 373-0202.

   * The William O. Douglas Outdoor Classroom will host two outdoor walks for
families at the Sooky Goldman Nature Center in Upper Franklin Canyon. On
Saturday, children ages 4 to 7, accompanied by an adult, can explore nature in a
"Canyon Tykes" hike at 10 a.m. On Sunday, families with children can join in
"Discovering Nature," a 2 p.m. outing. Reservations are required for both
events. Call (310) 858-3090.

   * Caring for the Earth and all its plants and animals is the focus of "Nature
Kids," a program offered Saturday from 10 a.m. to noon at the Santa Barbara
Botanic Garden for children ages 5 to 10. Advance registration is required. Call
(805) 563-2521.

   * Children 6 and older can explore force, energy and light with science
educator Michelle Sullivan in "Magnets, Batteries and Bulbs," workshops offered
by Kidspace Museum on Friday at 2:30 and 3:30 p.m. Call (818) 449-9144.

   * Visitors to the Los Angeles Zoo on Saturday and Sunday can satisfy their
curiosity about cats in a weekend of "Cool Cats," programs offered by the zoo on
the fabulous felines found there. Call (213) 666-4090. NONA YATES

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1994


                             691 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 9, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A2-12

VATICAN PRESSURE ON U.N.

   The Vatican issued a detailed attack on the United States and participants in
the upcoming United Nations conference on population, saying their policies
would promote abortion. A1


   CHINA-TAIWAN BREAKTHROUGH

   China and Taiwan agreed to end a recent string of hijackings. The accord is
the first formal cooperation between them. A1

FEARS AS FRENCH LEAVE RWANDA

   As the French prepare to leave Rwanda, many who have taken refuge in their
safety zone and even the United Nations fear what might happen without them and
have asked them to remain. A6

PROBLEMS OF RETURNED REFUGEES

   Rwandan refugees who have returned home feel some fears, and some loneliness,
but for the most part their biggest problem is how to get enough food.  A6

The Rwandan Government agreed to a U.N. war-crimes tribunal. A6

HISTORIC VISIT TO JORDAN

   After opening a new border crossing, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin made the
first visit of an Israeli leader to Jordan. Washington also sought debt relief
for Jordan in return for its peace moves. A3

ISRAELI PRAISE FOR SYRIA

   Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin praised Syria for its role in pressing militants
in southern Lebanon to halt violence, and he appeared upbeat about the
possibilities for success of peace talks. A2

Observers left Hebron after mixed results in stemming violence. A2

TURNAROUND IN SERBIA

   The news media in Serbia under the control of the President have dramatically
changed their position on the Bosnian Serbs, reflecting his recent decision to
withdraw his support for them. A12

India is seeking a middle course with Kashmir dissidents. A9

Lyubertsy Journal: Getting tough with the Russian mob.  A4

National A14-21, B8

READYING FOR AN HISTORIC DEBATE

   The Senate prepared to open formal debate on restructuring the nation's
health care system, the most ambitious social legislation to face Congress in 30
years.  A1

A COSTLY BASE FOR SATELLITES

   Senate intelligence committee members were shocked at the cost of a huge spy
satellite headquarters, saying that the Pentagon and C.I.A. had concealed the
expense.  A1

MUTUAL FUND FRUSTRATIONS

   Securities regulators and investors say they are frustrated by a lack of
cutting-edge tools and information to help them monitor the fast-growing mutual
fund industry.  A1

CITIES WIN RULING ON CENSUS

   A Federal appeals court ruled that the Bush Administration was wrong to
accept a 1990 Census that undercounted black and Hispanic residents, reducing
the political clout of many major cities.  A1

MORE CRITICISM OF NEW COUNSEL

   The President's personal lawyer and Congressional Democrats stepped up their
criticism of the naming of Kenneth Starr as the new independent counsel on
Whitewater.  A14

TEACHING THE ELDERLY ABOUT AIDS

   As the number of AIDS cases among the elderly rises, AIDS educators are
trying harder to reach older people, particularly those in South Florida's
retirement communities.  A14

HEALTH RECORDS FOR RESEARCH

   Insurers, drug companies and H.M.O.'s are using medical data to decide which
treatments, doctors and health plans are the best; critics say the data are
biased.  A20

CHILDREN AND WELFARE CHANGES

   The President's welfare plan would force mothers of young children to leave
them in day care to go to work or training, but how this would affect the
children is uncertain.  B8

Officials discovered an unusual lobster-smuggling operation.  B8

Alabama school board replaced principal in prom dispute.  A18

Metro Digest B1

A CHALLENGE FROM POWELL

   Adam Clayton Powell 4th is giving Representative Charles B. Rangel, the dean
of the state's Congressional delegation, his first real re-election challenge
since he took office. A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-22

Seaport Museum cuts staff.  C13

A composer's musical plans.  C13

Music: "Battle Royale" at Classical Jazz.  C13

Two Masses in full presentation.  C17

Dance: A muse for Eliot Feld.  C16

Books: Collection of stories.  C22

Television: David Caruso likely to leave "N.Y.P.D. Blue." C22

Fashion B11

 Bare midriffs, snug fits.

Science C1-12

What secrets lurk in mounds around deep ocean vents?  C1

Anthropomorphism may help scientists understand animals.  C1

A winding tunnel under old Jerusalem turns out to be natural.  C1

Gene therapy may help stop closing of arteries after angioplasty.  C3

The global impact of El Nino turns out to last for a decade.  C4

Physicists reflect on a gloomy outlook for the profession.  C5

Possible rescue attempt for volcano robot considered.  C6

Sports B12-17

Baseball: Yankees win in 11 innings. B13

Mets take Phillies, 3-2.  B13

Prospects for settlement aren't good.  B13

Columns: Berkow on baseball owners.  B13

Chass on baseball.  B15

Smith on pro football.  B16

Hockey: Campbell to get Ranger coaching job.  B13

N.H.L. adopts tough stand.  B17

U.S. hurdler hits his stride.  B17

Obituaries B10 Harold Delaney, ex-president of Manhattanville College.

Eric Warner Johnson, a Quaker educator and author of children's books.

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Improving the Mitchell bill.

South Korea's self-inflicted wound.

Haircut.

Letters

Russell Baker: The usual suspects.

A. M. Rosenthal: The ghost people.

Jack Sheinkman: When children do the work.

Susan C. Rosenfeld: So you want to join an H.M.O.? Good luck.

Sharon Sayles Belton, Norm Coleman: Coming -- an urban primary.

Chronicle A24

Chess C9

Crossword C22

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1994


                             692 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 9, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Science Desk;  Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1282 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Approach to Preventing Regrowth of Arterial Plaque

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   EVERY year, about 400,000 Americans have a procedure called angioplasty, in
which tiny balloons are inflated in their coronary arteries in an attempt to
push artery-clogging plaque against the blood-vessel walls. And every year,
one-third to one-half of these operations fail within six months: the plaque
comes back with a vengeance.

   Cardiologists have tried about 50 drugs to stop this process, called
restenosis, but none have worked.

    Now two groups of investigators have shown that in animals at least, they
can use gene therapy to prevent plaque from growing back. The technique involves
inserting a suicide gene into the cells that proliferate to clog the arteries.

   One group, led by Dr. Elizabeth G. Nabel and Dr. Gary J. Nabel of the
University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, who are married, worked with pigs, a
species that closely resembles humans in the size of their blood vessels and in
their propensity to develop atherosclerosis. The balloon angioplasty was done in
the pigs' groin arteries. The Nabels' work is published in the current issue of
the journal Science.

   The second group, led by Dr. Toren Finkel and Dr. Stephen E. Epstein of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., did virtually the
same experiment with the same results in the neck arteries of rats. Their paper,
based on work with 70 rats, will be published next month in The Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   Cardiologists were enthusiastic about the results, but said that more work
must be done before the method can be tried in human patients.

'Like the First Car'

    "It's exciting," said Dr. David Hathaway, director of the Krannert Institute
of Cardiology at Indiana University in Indianapolis. "It is definitely the wave
of the future." But, he added: "It's a little bit like the first car or the
first airplane. There is a long way to go before it becomes standard therapy."

   Dr. R. Sanders Williams, the chief of cardiology at the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, said, "This work is quite high-tech and
futuristic, but it's also extraordinarily promising." Nonetheless, he added,
"it's probably overly enthusiastic to think that it will move directly to the
clinic."

   The reclogging of an artery after it has been opened with a balloon is caused
by a tumorlike growth of the smooth-muscle cells that line the artery wall. The
balloon scrapes off the lining of the artery, leaving a raw surface and exposing
the smooth- muscle cells underneath. Then these cells start to divide, and may
pile one on top of another until they form a mass large enough to block the
artery.

   The conventional approach has been to try to treat patients with drugs to
prevent the cells from proliferating. But even if researchers had found a drug
that worked, said Dr. Judith Swain, chief of cardiovascular medicine and
professor of medicine and genetics at the University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine in Philadelphia, it would be far from an ideal approach: "There are
miles of blood vessels in the body, but all you want to treat is a quarter to an
eight of an inch. Every drug you can give has side effects, and if somebody is
taking pills in an attempt to treat something that is a quarter of an inch, it's
a bit of overkill."

   Another alternative would be to deliver drugs precisely to the area where
they are needed, but Dr. Gary Nabel said they would be washed away by the
bloodstream before they had a chance to act. "You can never give enough drugs in
an artery because they are washed away very, very quickly," he said.

   That left investigators with the gene therapy approach. Their aim was to
alter the cells themselves so they would die, stop dividing or be uniquely
susceptible to drugs that otherwise would not harm them. "We and probably 25 to
30 labs across the country are working on restenosis with a gene therapy
approach," Dr. Swain said.

   Dr. Elizabeth Nabel said she began by looking at genes for substances that
cells normally use to stimulate growth, reasoning that if the smooth- muscle
cells activate just one of these genes, it might be possible to block the gene
and so block the growth.

   But, it turned out that cells use a variety of growth-stimulating genes.
"There are multiple redundant pathways," she said, and it was not feasible to
think of blocking them all.

   That led her to think of trying to simply destroy all proliferating cells in
the area, regardless of what genes they were using to make themselves grow.

   To do this, the Nabels and, independently, Dr. Finkel and Dr. Epstein,
infected the smooth-muscle cells with a genetically engineered adenovirus, a
type of virus that ordinarily cause colds in humans. These adenoviruses were
designed so that once they got into cells they would not be able to multiply and
spread to other cells. Instead, they would park their DNA in the cells'
nucleuses, next to the DNA in the cells. When cellular genes were turned on, so
were the viral genes.

   One of the viral genes instructs the cells to make an enzyme, thymidine
kinase, that normally would be completely innocuous. But if the cells are
treated with a drug, ganciclovir, the enzyme converts ganciclovir into a poison
that kills the cells as soon as they try to divide. In this way, gene therapy
with a hobbled adenovirus can make cells commit suicide when they are exposed to
ganciclovir. But cells that are not infected with the adenovirus are impervious
to ganciclovir.

   Both groups of investigators found that when they treated injured artery
cells with adenoviruses and then gave the animals ganciclovir, they prevented
restenosis.

   Dr. Elizabeth Nabel said that the treatment spared healthy cells. And, she
said, the gene therapy is effective only for a few weeks, after which the
adenovirus dies. By a happy coincidence, the few weeks that the virus is active
are exactly the few weeks when smooth-muscle cells would ordinarily grow and
block the artery.

   "It has a lot of appeal," said Dr. Gary Nabel. "It's a one-time treatment for
a one-time biologic response whose effects can be long lasting."

   But before it can be tried on human, Dr. Nabel said, several concerns have to
be addressed. Among them are whether investigators can add adenoviruses to
enough smooth- muscle cells to make a difference. "We know we can get genes in,
but gene levels are another story," he said.

   A second concern is the treatment's possible effects on the endothelial cells
that seal the artery, covering the smooth-muscle cells and protecting them.
Balloon angioplasty rubs off these endothelial cells, Dr. Nabel says, and it
ordinarily takes a few weeks, at least, for the cells to grow back. But some of
the endothelial cells on the outer edges of the wound will probably be killed by
the gene therapy, prolonging the time it takes for the wound to heal.

   "It's not that we think this is prohibitive, but it's something we want to
watch," Dr. Nabel said.

   In addition, said Dr. Swain, adenoviruses elicit inflammation. And, she said,
"the last thing you want in an injured artery is an inflammatory response." But,
she added, second- and third-generation adenoviruses are currently being
engineered that will produce less inflammation.

   Dr. Swain anticipates that the method will eventually work. The treatment may
involve several genes, some to prevent blood clots, others to prevent platelets
in the blood from aggregating at the site of injury and still others to prevent
the proliferation of smooth-muscle cells.

   Dr. Swain said that the two new reports have shown that gene therapy can be
effective. The problems that remain, she said, "are engineering problems, not
conceptual problems."

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "Trying to Keep Arteries Open"
Balloon angioplasty, which crushes artery-blocking plaque against artery walls,
can damage the walls, making smooth muscle cells proliferate and cause new
blockage. In animal experiments, a genetic approach has prevented this. Double
balloons are inserted; in the protected space between them, a harmless virus is
released, delivering new genes to the damaged area only. The genes make the
smooth muscle cells produce an enzyme to activate a drug that prevents cell
proliferation.
(Source: Dr. Elizabeth G. Nabel/University of Michigan at Ann Arbor)

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1994


                             693 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      August 9, 1994 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 345 words

HEADLINE: GENES USED TO SPARK SOME IMMUNE SYSTEMS

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   Scientists say they have been able to jump-start the immune systems of three
people infected with the AIDS virus by inserting viral genes into their skin
cells.

   The experiment represents the first trial of the technique of transferring
genes into a patient's body to combat HIV, the AIDS-causing virus.

   Steven J. Mento, head of research at Viagene Inc., of San Diego, told the
10th International AIDS Conference yesterday that while the experimental
technique holds promise, it is still in its infancy.

   The scientists took millions of skin cells from four HIV-positive patients.
They then inserted two HIV genes into the cells, grew them in a laboratory
culture and put the altered cells back into the patients.

   In effect, the HIV genes, which were not in themselves harmful, stimulated
the patients' immune systems by mimicking a new infection. In response, three of
the four patients began producing a special type of white blood cell that homes
in on HIV-infected cells and kills them.

   These cells, known as cytotoxic t-cells, are believed to play a critical role
in fighting HIV. Studies have shown that many people who survive with AIDS for
an unusually long time have large numbers of these cells.

   The four patients, all from the Los Angeles area, were relatively healthy
when they entered the study. They had not yet developed symptoms of AIDS and had
relatively low levels of HIV in their blood.

   While three patients produced more cytotoxic t-cells during the 23-month
study, one did not.

   Mento said the therapy did not appear to reduce the amount of HIV virus in
the patients. But he said the study was too short to measure the potential
impact on the virus. To learn more about long-term effects, Mento said, the
patients will get more injections and be observed over the course of their
illness.

   Scientists are turning to gene therapy because the drugs developed so far to
attack the virus have not panned out. While AZT and some similar drugs can hold
the virus in check temporarily, it eventually develops drug-resistant strains.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             694 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     August 9, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; Discovery; THE WAR ON CANCER; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1537 words

HEADLINE: Genes are at the center of the battle

SOURCE: Knight-Ridder Newspapers

BYLINE: ROBERT S. BOYD

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Second of two parts

   It starts so innocently - on a sunny day at the beach, around a back yard
grill, in the friendly warmth of a smoky bar.

   But swiftly, stealthily, the temple of your body is violated as if by a
thief in the night.

   A silent intruder - perhaps an ultraviolet ray, or a byproduct of carbon
from broiling steak, or a whiff of tar in tobacco - sneaks into one of the
trillion cells that make up a human being.

   Once inside, the invader targets a single gene out of the 100,000 coiled in
the nucleus of each cell. It zaps one of the microscopic chemical units that
form the gene and determine its function in DNA, the biological codebook for
every living creature.

   The tiny wound seems trivial - nothing like the havoc caused by a knife or  a
bullet. But the first step has been taken down a long road that may lead to
cancer and death.

   Fortunately, the first step, by itself, is not enough to cause cancer. Many
other genetic alterations must follow to produce a malignant tumor. During  that
process, nature has ways to repair damaged genes and halt the growth of
cancerous cells. Increasingly, doctors do, too.

   Scientists have learned in immense detail how cancer begins, grows and
spreads. As a result, they are far better armed for battle now than when
President Richard Nixon launched the war on cancer 23 years ago.

   "There have been breathtaking advances in the fundamental understanding of
how a normal cell becomes a cancer," the National Cancer Advisory Board says  in
a report being prepared for delivery to Congress later this summer "An
unparalleled opportunity now exists to apply rapidly to clinical practice the
knowledge gained from basic research."

   Since the traditional tools against cancer - surgery, drugs and radiation
(sometimes mocked as "slash, poison and burn") - have failed to conquer the
disease, cancer warriors now hope to add genetic weapons to their arsenal.

   Government scientists, academic researchers and drug companies are racing  to
find ways to detect, prevent and correct gene damage. Nearly 70 gene  therapy
trials have been authorized, 50 of them for cancer.

   Since 1992, 16 brain cancer patients have been injected with a gene that
makes their tumors respond to chemotherapy.

   "Five patients who failed all previous therapy showed significant
improvement," said Dr. Michael Blaese, a leading gene therapist at the  National
Cancer Institute. "We're very encouraged."

   Scientists have known for years that cancer is not one disease, but many
diseases, each marked by the uncontrolled growth of cells. But now it is clear
that all cancers have something in common - one or more defective genes.

   In most cases, genes are injured by an external force, such as sunlight or  a
chemical in food, air or water. In other cases, a genetic flaw is inherited
from a parent.

   The genes involved in cancer are those that govern cell division. About 100
such genes have been identified, and about 20 have been linked to specific
cancers so far.

   A colon cancer gene was discovered in December, a kidney cancer gene in  May.
Half a dozen scientific teams are competing to be the first to pinpoint a
breast cancer gene.

   "When we find the gene, we can test women to see if they are at risk,"  said
Mary-Claire King of the University of California, leader of one of the  research
teams. Cancer fighters are eager for such tests because early  detection is one
of the best ways to reduce the death rate.

   Scientists have determined that there are two types of cancer genes:

   One set, first identified in the mid-1970s, is known as oncogenes (onco is  a
prefix meaning cancer). Oncogenes are normal growth genes that have turned  bad.
Oncogenes make cells multiply wildly, forming malignant tumors.

   The other type, labeled tumor suppressor genes, were discovered in the late
1980s. When healthy, their role is to stop cells from dividing.

   Oncogenes are often likened to the accelerator on a car, and suppressor
genes to the brakes. When either malfunctions, trouble follows.

   "A cancer cell's growth may derive from a stuck accelerator or a defective
braking system," said Robert Weinberg, a leading researcher at the Whitehead
Institute in Cambridge, Mass.

   The growth of a cancer cell differs drastically from that of a healthy  cell.

   Normally, an adult cell divides only when it receives a chemical
"OK-to-grow" signal from its neighbors, for example, in the skin to heal an
injury.

   The growth signal is recognized by a "receptor" molecule on the surface  of
the cell. The receptor relays the message through a series of chemicals  into
the nucleus. The last messenger attaches itself to the DNA and turns on  one or
more genes that direct the cell to divide.

   In a cancerous cell, however, the oncogene doesn't wait for instructions,
but forces the cell to reproduce willy-nilly.

   The first human oncogene to be discovered is known as "ras" because it  was
originally spotted in a rat sarcoma (a type of tumor). The ras gene  normally
sits quietly, awaiting instructions to launch the process of cell  division.

   But a damaged ras gene sends a constant stream of chemical signals to the
cell nucleus, stimulating it to multiply. Altered ras has been found in 90
percent of cancers of the pancreas, 50 percent of colon cancers, 40 percent of
lung cancers and 30 percent of leukemias.

   The most common tumor suppressor gene, known as "p53," is found in more  than
half of all human cancers. In some cases of lung cancer, for example, p53  is
altered at a vulnerable point by benzopyrine, a substance in cigarette  smoke.
That single event can start the slide toward malignancy.

   Another tumor suppressor gene discovered this spring may be as important as
p53. Known as MTS1 (for multiple tumor suppressor), it produces a protein that
inhibits cell division in a normal cell.

   A failure in MTS1 is implicated in cancers of the brain, bladder, breast,
bone, lung, kidney, ovary and skin, according to its discoverer, Alexander  Kamb
of Myriad Genetics, Inc., of Salt Lake City.

   Some tumor suppressor genes act like grammarians, correcting spelling  errors
in DNA. Last December, scientists reported that a tiny failure in a
spell-checking gene called msh2 can lead to a common form of colon cancer.

   "It was like finding a single misplaced comma in a 300-volume  encyclopedia,"

 said Jeffrey Trent, a researcher at the National Center for  Human Genome
Research.

   Scientists say most cancers are not caused by a single genetic flaw.
Instead, they are the result of a complex cascade of events that may take
decades.

   "A single altered gene only suffices to push a cell part of the way down  the
road to full-blown malignancy," Weinberg said. "The entire process can  only be
completed when multiple, successive changes occur in distinct cellular  genes."

   For example, at least three suppressor genes must fail and one oncogene  must
run amok to turn a benign polyp into colon cancer.

   The fact that most cancers require repeated genetic injuries may make them
easier to block.

   "By erecting multiple hurdles in the road, the circuitry inside our cells
ensures that only the rare cell will sustain the requisite number of changes
for making a cancer cell," Weinberg said.

   Thus the new understanding of genes like ras, p53 and MTS1 may open the  door
to prevention, treatment and even cure for cancer.

   For example, a gene therapy trial is getting under way to insert good  copies
of p53 into patients with advanced lung cancer. Pharmaceutical  manufacturers
are rushing to find drugs that can repair p53 or imitate its  braking effect.

   In all, at least 124 cancer drugs and vaccines are under development,
according to the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers Alliance of  America.

   "The War on Cancer has a number of different fronts," said Dr. John  Laszlo,
vice president for research of the American Cancer Society.

   "On one front, the number of cases is up, but on the front of basic
understanding, we're gaining tremendously. Our knowledge growth has been
revolutionary...

   "It's a very long story, and we're not done by any means."  How a normal cell
becomes cancerous

Scientists now say genes that cause cancer are defective versions of those  that
control cell division and growth. Here's how bad genes transform a cell:

How a normal cell divides

1. Normal cell divides when it receives a chemical signal from its neighbors

2. Signal is relayed down to the DNA in the cell's nucleus, where it turns on
one or more genes that direct cell to divide

3. Two copies of original cell are produced

What a bad cell does

1. External forces (like smoking, bad diet) or inherited flaws can damage
growth genes

2. Gene loses ability to regulate growth

3. Cells have many safety mechanisms so most cancers develop only when several
genes are damaged and malfunction

New drugs would repair or compensate for damaged genes

Sources: National Cancer Institute, American Cancer Society, Ohio State
University Comprehensive Cancer Center

GRAPHIC: COLOR DRAWING, Knight-Ridder Tribune / JAMES SMALLWOOD and JUDY
TREIBLE; Illustrates how a normal cell becomes cancerous.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1994


                             695 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1994 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        August 8, 1994 Monday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-02

LENGTH: 604 words

HEADLINE: No quick fix for AIDS World conference warned against 'naive optimism'

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, The Associated Press

BODY:

   YOKOHAMA, Japan - The 10th International Conference on AIDS opened yesterday
on a somber note, with a leading health official warning against "naive
optimism" that science will control the epidemic any time soon.

   Dr. Peter Piot, president of the International AIDS Society, a sponsor of the
meeting, noted that efforts to create drugs to treat AIDS and vaccines to
prevent it have largely failed.

   Piot's comments reflect the concern among many researchers gathered for the
annual meeting that breakthroughs are unlikely.

   This is far different from the enthusiasm that prevailed in the early days of
the epidemic. Many thought then that vaccines, treatments and perhaps even cures
might come quickly.

   "After an era of naive optimism about what science and technology can achieve
overnight, and after a period of equally unfounded pessimism, it is time for
this conference to be one of realism," Piot said.

   He said the world should face the fact that AIDS is no longer simply an
outbreak. It has become entrenched and "will be an integral part of the human
condition for a very long time to come."

   Scientists have come to appreciate just what a powerful foe HIV, the AIDS
virus, truly is. It mutates quickly and within months finds ways to elude the
killing power of new drugs. Furthermore, the experimental vaccines created so
far seem unlikely to protect people from catching the virus.

   For these reasons, much of the emphasis now is on preventing people from
catching the virus. This meeting is the first major AIDS conference to be held
in Asia, where AIDS is spreading fastest.

   HIV already has intruded widely into India, Thailand and Burma. Health
officials fear it will become established in many other Asian countries, such as
China and Indonesia, where it is now rare.

   Worldwide, an estimated 17 million people are infected with HIV. The World
Health Organization predicts that if the virus continues to spread the way it
has been, the total will reach 30 million to 40 million by 2000.

   Health officials believe a few basic strategies can stop this spread. The
fundamentals are education on safe sex, promotion of condoms and treatment of
venereal diseases, which make AIDS easier to catch and transmit.

   Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, the director-general of the World Health Organization,
told the conference that "fear, indifference and denial, along with poverty,
have been our main enemy" in controlling AIDS.

    The disease is still almost unknown in Japan. However, the gathering of AIDS
scientists, doctors and patients has captured wide attention here. The opening
ceremony was attended by Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama and crown prince
Naruhito.

   NEW APPROACHES

   One of the hottest areas of research is long-term survivors. Between 5% and
10% of HIV-infected men have now carried the virus for 13 years with no sign of
damage to their immune systems. Learning what keeps them healthy should provide
new treatment strategies.

   AIDS destroys the body's natural immune defenses and some researchers are
working on a seemingly odd way of treating it: suppressing the immune system.
HIV reproduces in overactive blood cells called T cells. The idea is to use
steroids and other drugs to rein in these cells so they are less hospitable to
the virus.

   Gene therapy is another tool. Scientists hope to insert genes into the cells
that ordinarily become infected with HIV so they will resist the virus.

   New antibiotics are being developed to fight off opportunistic infections.
These are assaults by otherwise benign bugs that only harm people when their
immune defenses have been destroyed by AIDS.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1994


                             696 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     AUGUST 8, 1994, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 759 words

HEADLINE: Crown Prince Greets AIDS Scientists
 Pessimism dominates conference

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

DATELINE: Yokohama, Japan

BODY:

    In an extraordinary link between ancient tradition and modern science, the
scion of a royal dynasty 15 centuries old welcomed yesterday nearly 10,000
fighters against AIDS, the world's most recent and deadly disease epidemic.

   Imperial Highnesses are traditionally sheltered behind palace walls here. To
a Japan conscious of its status as Asia's most advanced and Westernized nation,
the symbolism of Crown Prince Naruhito, accompanied by his Crown Princess
Masako, speaking out on the scourge of AIDS was of major political significance
as the Tenth International AIDS Conference began against a backdrop of both hope
and despair.

   ''It is important for us to grasp leadership in this fight that is destroying
so many millions of our Asian friends,'' said a government official as the crown
prince and princess were joined at the colorful ceremony by Japan's Prime
Minister, Tomiichi Murayama, who also addressed the scientific and advocacy
delegates from 128 nations.

   It was significant, too, that Crown Prince Naruhito acknowledged the
increasingly close link between the scientific world seeking vaccines and
virus-killing drugs and the world of people with AIDS, whose leaders play major
roles in planning conferences and organizing clinical trials.

   In a brief speech whose words were carefully crafted by the Royal Palace to
refer both to the disease and the widespread virus that causes it, the prince
acknowledged that defeating the AIDS epidemic demands a ''multidisciplinary
approach'' joining scientists with the ''people living with AIDS and HIV, their
families and those who care for them.''

   The afternoon's most powerful wave of applause followed moments later when
Toshihiro Oishi, representing the Global Network of People Living with AIDS,
asked all those with AIDS or HIV infections to stand among the audience in
Yokohama's immense National Convention Hall. The Crown Prince and Princess
joined in the ovation as scores of young men and women stood silently.

   Earlier in the day, Canadian Richard Burzynski spoke for people in the ''AIDS
community'' as the leader of the International Council of AIDS Service
Organizations and described that community in the starkest of terms -- terms
quite clearly designed to shock the complacent into reality:

   ''We are prostitutes, homosexuals, heterosexuals, drug users, men and
women,'' he declared. ''We are hemophiliacs, Africans, Asians, Europeans and
Latin Americans, we are rich and we are poor. But we have a common thread.  We
are here to voice our fears over the lack of progress in dealing with
intolerance, with discrimination based on HIV status, gender, sexual
orientation, with public policies that impede our work. We are here to continue
no matter what the cost.''

   There was little optimism about the epidemic in the largely formal talks that
marked the opening of the conference.

   Meeting chairman Dr. Yuichi Shiokawa of Japan lamented the fact that 10 years
after the AIDS virus was discovered ''we have not yet developed a drug or a
vaccine,'' and warned of the ''serious threat to humanity as the 21st century
draws near.'' And Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, director-general of the World Health
Organization, expressed regrets that ''fear, indifference and denial, along with
poverty, have been our main enemy.''

   Dr. Peter Piot, president of the sponsoring International AIDS Society, said
the world should face the fact that AIDS is no longer simply an outbreak but
''will be an integral part of the human condition for a very long time to
come.''

   Still, hopeful news will emerge in the next few days as scientists report on
new advances they have made: drugs that may be able to attack the AIDS virus in
new and different ways; a few promising vaccines now entering trials in Brazil,
Thailand and Uganda; and approaches to gene therapy that are just now emerging
from basic research.

   There are lessons to share, too, from front-line workers who are developing
prevention programs geared to the cultural imperatives of their own countries:
Helping prostitutes -- ''commercial sex workers'' is the preferred term -- to
persuade their clients to use condoms; changing cut-and-dried methods of AIDS
counseling to meet the varying needs of teenagers, drug users or those whose
lifestyles invite other sexually transmitted diseases.

   This international conference is the last of the annual events that began in
Atlanta a decade ago. The next, two years from now, will be held in Vancouver
but no one here is betting that a cure or a vaccine will even be close by then.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Japan's Crown Prince Naruhito spoke to the international AIDS
conference, calling for a multilevel approach to curing the disease , BY
ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994


                             697 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 7, 1994, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 897 words

HEADLINE: Optimism for AIDS cure wanes;
Annual confab on virus convenes as reality finally sets in

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   YOKOHAMA, Japan -- The annual International Conference on AIDS
began a decade ago in the optimistic belief that a cure could be
found quickly.

   Perhaps a symbol that those hopes have dimmed can be found
in the fact that this is the last annual meeting of politicians,
scientists and social workers.  The next meeting is not scheduled
until the summer of 1996.

   ""People in the past have been optimistic and not
realistic,'' said Dr.Peter Piot, who heads the International AIDS
Society.

   Many of the presentations on new treatments for AIDS and
diseases related to infection with the human immunodeficiency virus
will be promising.

   But Piot, interviewed before the conference, said, ""I doubt
there will be anything spectacular. ''
 What is spectacular is the spread of the disease in Asia,
which as late as 1988 was considered largely untouched by AIDS.

   This is the first international conference held in Asia.

   None have been scheduled in Africa, where the central region is
being ravaged by the steady march of HIV.

   But the hopes that early knowledge would boost preventive
efforts on that continent have proven futile.

   The disease is now rampant in Burma, Thailand and parts of
India.  It is increasing in other areas of Southeast Asia where drug
use and the sex trade are integral parts of an entrepreneurial
subculture.

   ""We have seen in Thailand, first and foremost, how fast the
epidemic will spread in Asia,'' said Dr.Michael Merson, director
of the global program on AIDS for the World Health Organizations.

   In one major province there, Merson said half of the
hospital beds are occupied by AIDS patients.

   With that specter looming before them, public health
officials in countries like Japan and China are mounting a holding
effort, hoping to gain the support of their traditionally
conservative governments in mounting prevention campaigns.

   Japan has reported 700 cases of AIDS so far and identified
3,000 people with HIV infections, said Dr. Nayoko Yamamoto, deputy
director of the AIDS section of the Japanese Ministry of Health and
Welfare.

   However, she said the health ministry estimates there are as
many as 13,000 HIV-infected people in this nation of 120 million
people.  Yamamoto said that officially 60 percent of cases are
attributed to contaminated blood products.  She estimated there are
no more than 10 infants infected with the virus in the entire
country.

   Merson is optimistic that Asian nations are beginning to
make a priority of preventing the spread of HIV.  ""Our hope for
Asia is that we won't have countries get as bad as what we are
seeing in Thailand,'' he said.  ""Just about every Asian country has
made AIDS a priority and launched a national program.

   ""We have a good chance of avoiding a major epidemic in
other countries, but we don't have a lot of time,'' he said.

   Even those countries already hard hit are working to stop
the disease's spread, he said.

   ""The best example is Thailand,'' he said during a
pre-conference interview.  ""There is an enormous national effort
there led by the prime minister.  They are spending $ 60 million (on
prevention and education) this year and $ 100 million next. ''

   While prevention can slow the spread of the disease, the
greatest hope is in research into a vaccine, treatment and cure.

   Experts in the United States and elsewhere were disheartened
last year when a major study of the effects of the anti-viral drug
AZT on patients with early HIV showed that the medication did not
appear to prolong life.

   In recent years, studies in people have concentrated on AZT
and its cousins -- DDI, DDC and d4T.  These drugs all interrupt the
life cycle of the virus at one major point -- where an enzyme
translates the virus's code into language that can be integrated
into the DNA of the cell it infects.

   Now it appears that new drugs and treatments will have to be
found that will stop the virus at different points.

   Great hopes are pinned on the work of Dr.Flossie Wong-Staal
at the University of Southern California who intends to begin gene
therapy in the near future.

   Wong-Staal hopes to interrupt the action of the genes
themselves, preventing the virus from subverting immune-system
cells into mini-factories of death that spew out more and more HIV.

   But as Piot said in his pre-conference interview, work that
has no direct patient application as of yet is also important.  Dr.
David Ho of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York City
has been concentrating on factors that cause some people with HIV
to live longer than a decade without exhibiting symptoms of the
disease.  He and Wong-Staal will update scientists on their work at
the conference.

   Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md., also will discuss
his studies of where the virus hides during the period when it
causes no visible symptoms.

   And the issue of AIDS vaccines also will gain major attention
as researchers discuss disappointing early results in tests on
patients as well as the ethical considerations of testing such
immunizations in Third World countries.

   In little more than a decade, AIDS has spawned new science,
new understanding of viruses and a whole new class of biotechnical
entrepreneurs.  All that remains is to find a viable way to stop it.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Anthony Fauci will discuss his studies of where the virus
hides during the period when it causes no visible symptoms (p.32, 3-star
edition)

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994


                             698 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 7, 1994, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 897 words

HEADLINE: Optimism for AIDS cure wanes;
Annual confab on virus convenes as reality finally sets in

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   YOKOHAMA, Japan -- The annual International Conference on AIDS
began a decade ago in the optimistic belief that a cure could be
found quickly.

   Perhaps a symbol that those hopes have dimmed can be found
in the fact that this is the last annual meeting of politicians,
scientists and social workers.  The next meeting is not scheduled
until the summer of 1996.

   ""People in the past have been optimistic and not
realistic,'' said Dr.Peter Piot, who heads the International AIDS
Society.

   Many of the presentations on new treatments for AIDS and
diseases related to infection with the human immunodeficiency virus
will be promising.

   But Piot, interviewed before the conference, said, ""I doubt
there will be anything spectacular. ''
 What is spectacular is the spread of the disease in Asia,
which as late as 1988 was considered largely untouched by AIDS.

   This is the first international conference held in Asia.

   None have been scheduled in Africa, where the central region is
being ravaged by the steady march of HIV.

   But the hopes that early knowledge would boost preventive
efforts on that continent have proven futile.

   The disease is now rampant in Burma, Thailand and parts of
India.  It is increasing in other areas of Southeast Asia where drug
use and the sex trade are integral parts of an entrepreneurial
subculture.

   ""We have seen in Thailand, first and foremost, how fast the
epidemic will spread in Asia,'' said Dr.Michael Merson, director
of the global program on AIDS for the World Health Organizations.

   In one major province there, Merson said half of the
hospital beds are occupied by AIDS patients.

   With that specter looming before them, public health
officials in countries like Japan and China are mounting a holding
effort, hoping to gain the support of their traditionally
conservative governments in mounting prevention campaigns.

   Japan has reported 700 cases of AIDS so far and identified
3,000 people with HIV infections, said Dr. Nayoko Yamamoto, deputy
director of the AIDS section of the Japanese Ministry of Health and
Welfare.

   However, she said the health ministry estimates there are as
many as 13,000 HIV-infected people in this nation of 120 million
people.  Yamamoto said that officially 60 percent of cases are
attributed to contaminated blood products.  She estimated there are
no more than 10 infants infected with the virus in the entire
country.

   Merson is optimistic that Asian nations are beginning to
make a priority of preventing the spread of HIV.  ""Our hope for
Asia is that we won't have countries get as bad as what we are
seeing in Thailand,'' he said.  ""Just about every Asian country has
made AIDS a priority and launched a national program.

   ""We have a good chance of avoiding a major epidemic in
other countries, but we don't have a lot of time,'' he said.

   Even those countries already hard hit are working to stop
the disease's spread, he said.

   ""The best example is Thailand,'' he said during a
pre-conference interview.  ""There is an enormous national effort
there led by the prime minister.  They are spending $ 60 million (on
prevention and education) this year and $ 100 million next. ''

   While prevention can slow the spread of the disease, the
greatest hope is in research into a vaccine, treatment and cure.

   Experts in the United States and elsewhere were disheartened
last year when a major study of the effects of the anti-viral drug
AZT on patients with early HIV showed that the medication did not
appear to prolong life.

   In recent years, studies in people have concentrated on AZT
and its cousins -- DDI, DDC and d4T.  These drugs all interrupt the
life cycle of the virus at one major point -- where an enzyme
translates the virus's code into language that can be integrated
into the DNA of the cell it infects.

   Now it appears that new drugs and treatments will have to be
found that will stop the virus at different points.

   Great hopes are pinned on the work of Dr.Flossie Wong-Staal
at the University of Southern California who intends to begin gene
therapy in the near future.

   Wong-Staal hopes to interrupt the action of the genes
themselves, preventing the virus from subverting immune-system
cells into mini-factories of death that spew out more and more HIV.

   But as Piot said in his pre-conference interview, work that
has no direct patient application as of yet is also important.  Dr.
David Ho of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York City
has been concentrating on factors that cause some people with HIV
to live longer than a decade without exhibiting symptoms of the
disease.  He and Wong-Staal will update scientists on their work at
the conference.

   Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md., also will discuss
his studies of where the virus hides during the period when it
causes no visible symptoms.

   And the issue of AIDS vaccines also will gain major attention
as researchers discuss disappointing early results in tests on
patients as well as the ethical considerations of testing such
immunizations in Third World countries.

   In little more than a decade, AIDS has spawned new science,
new understanding of viruses and a whole new class of biotechnical
entrepreneurs.  All that remains is to find a viable way to stop it.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994


                             699 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      August 7, 1994, Sunday, Home Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 4126 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
SEEKING A CURE: FAITH, FRUSTRATION;
ONCE RESEARCHERS FOUND THE VIRUS THAT CAUSES AIDS, THEY WERE SURE THEY COULD
SOON STOP THE DISEASE. 'FIND THE BUG, FIND THE DRUG,' THEY SAID. A DECADE LATER,
THEY ARE EMPTY-HANDED AND THINKING OF STARTING OVER.

SERIES: AIDS RESEARCH: WHAT WENT WRONG? The quest for a "magic bullet" is chosen
over basic research. First in a series

BYLINE: By SHERYL STOLBERG, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Bob Gallo's black address book is filled with crossed-out names -- the names
of the dead.

   It has been 10 years since the controversial cancer researcher proudly
announced to the world that he had found the virus that causes AIDS, a discovery
for which he now shares credit with French scientists. It was a heady time for
Gallo, and he was flush with optimism, confident that soon there would be a drug
or a vaccine to cripple the galloping plague.

   "Find the bug, find the drug," the theory went.

   Now, over a glass of lager in the oak-paneled bar of New York's Plaza Hotel,
Gallo broods about what might have gone wrong. He contemplates the destructive
swath of a disease that, like a familiar enemy, he and countless others have
spent too many years trying to outwit.

   He did not expect it to be this way.

   Villages in Africa are being wiped out. AIDS is racing through Asia, where
more than 10 million infections are expected by the year 2000. In the United
States, 92 people die of the disease each day.

   For Gallo, who trained as a doctor before turning to research, there are
faces to these numbers. He recalls having dinner last year with Jesse Dobson, a
well-known AIDS activist. Two weeks later, Dobson was dead.

   Another name crossed out of the black address book.

   "I feel like we should have solved problems sooner," the virologist said
somberly. "Would've, should've, could've."

   But didn't. Thirteen years after AIDS made its first appearance in this
country and a decade after "the bug" was found, just a handful of drugs that
directly attack the virus -- AZT and three others -- are on the market. None of
them work very well, and doctors are confused about how to use them. Other new
medicines have either been slow to emerge from drug company laboratories or
abandoned altogether.

   The prospects for a vaccine are equally dim. The wizards of genetic
engineering have been unable to work their magic into a shot that prevents AIDS
neatly and efficiently. The most promising candidates have flunked laboratory
tests, and six volunteers who got the high-tech injections became infected
anyway, prompting the government to abandon plans for large-scale studies.

   The best hope for a vaccine, many scientists now say, lies with an
old-fashioned method that uses a weakened but live form of the human
immunodeficiency virus -- a method that paradoxically may be too dangerous to
test in humans. This formula worked with polio.

   But HIV is not that simple. It is a retrovirus, meaning it inserts its own
genes into the cells of the person it infects. And it mutates rapidly, raising
fears that a vaccine containing live virus could transform itself to infect the
person it was supposed to protect.

   It is no wonder then that the days of talking about a cure for AIDS are long
gone. There isn't a cure in sight.

   Instead, as scientists gather in Yokohama, Japan, for the 10th annual
International AIDS Conference this week, most use words such as crisis to
describe the state of AIDS research.

   Among researchers, a consensus has emerged: After 10 years, it is time to go
back to the drawing board.

   "Over the past decade, ever since the discovery of the virus, there was a
great deal of effort put in place to see if we could quickly hit a home run,"
said virologist David Ho, director of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Institute
in New York. "I think, in retrospect, that strategy is not going to work, and
did not work."

   Indeed, the silver bullet Gallo once hoped for has not materialized. And
although government and drug company scientists have spent the last decade
trying to find one, they have yet to answer some of the most fundamental
questions about HIV. Those answers may hold important clues to developing just
what everyone wants -- better treatments and a vaccine.

   "We probably know more about this virus than we do most other viruses," said
AIDS researcher Steven Wolinsky of Northwestern University's Medical School.
"But many of the basic issues are still begging to be answered."

   New York AIDS activist Mark Harrington puts it a bit more bluntly. "We are
standing," Harrington said, "at the edge of a scientific black hole."

   Researchers do not fully understand how the AIDS virus crosses the body's
mucous membranes -- the linings of the mouth, vagina and anus -- to infect
cells. They do not know precisely how HIV spreads inside the body. Nor do they
know if certain strains of the virus are more deadly than others, nor why some
people die quickly while others live for years.

   Also lacking is a good animal model that scientists can use to study AIDS --
a monkey, perhaps, or a chimp that could be infected with HIV and would develop
the disease just as humans do. However, in Yokohama, UC San Francisco researcher
Jay Levy is expected to report that he has solved this problem by using baboons.

   These issues are the nitty-gritty of AIDS research. If AIDS had been cured by
now, there would be no need to address them; after all, who cares about the
intricacies of a disease that can be rendered powerless with drugs?

   But that is not the case. And so, researchers say, they will have to learn a
lot more about HIV -- perhaps the cagiest, most formidable of viruses -- before
they come up with a way to conquer it.

   To that end, the federal government is shaking up its AIDS research machine.
Officials are planning to revamp the $1.3-billion annual AIDS budget to devote
more money to laboratory studies -- basic research, in the lexicon of science --
and less to clinical research to test new treatments.

   It will be a plodding process, and -- barring any silver bullets -- it will
probably take decades.

The Activists

   Faced with this grim outlook, AIDS activists -- once spitting out fire and
rage -- are downtrodden, more tired than angry. Most of the movement's fathers
are dead, and their work has been turned over to a younger generation.

   Marty Majchrowicz typifies this new breed -- articulate, well educated, more
realistic than optimistic. The first time he heard about AIDS he was in the
eighth grade and already aware of his sexual identity. He saw the disease
featured on the cover of Time magazine, saw pictures of people dying. He
remembers feeling scared. He remembers thinking: "I am going to die from this
one day."

   That was in 1981, when AIDS was still called "gay cancer." Majchrowicz
obtained an undergraduate degree from USC and a master's degree in public health
from UCLA. He puts his knowledge to good use, working as a treatment advocate at
AIDS Project/Los Angeles. The slender, fair-skinned activist gives advice from a
dimly lit office in APLA's cavernous Hollywood headquarters.

   Sometimes he thinks the approved AIDS drugs -- AZT, DDI, DDC and D4T -- are
no better than herbal remedies; the only difference is that these nucleoside
analogues, designed to cripple the virus by keeping it from copying its genetic
blueprint, have been tested. Looking back, he said, maybe the activists
themselves are to blame.

   "We forced them into a corner," Majchrowicz said, referring to scientists and
politicians. "We told them, 'We want a drug.' They gave us AZT. They put the
fastest thing on the market that they could. We pushed them again and we got
DDI. So here we are screaming, 'We need drugs, we need drugs, we need drugs.' We
screamed for something and we got it. But it wasn't good enough."

   Although the expected survival time for someone diagnosed with AIDS has
doubled since 1986 -- to 24 months -- this falls short of the five-year survival
rate by which most diseases are measured. Rather, the longer survival time is
mostly the result of better treatments for the various infections, such as
pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, that kill people whose immune systems have been
destroyed by AIDS.

   By contrast, government tests have failed to demonstrate conclusively that
the nucleoside analogues prolong life for more than a few months, alone or in
combination with one another. They work for only so long and then people develop
resistance.

   One day, Majchrowicz knows, he will have to turn to these medicines. Like so
many AIDS activists, he is HIV-positive. He is especially hopeful about an
up-and-coming class of drugs -- "protease inhibitors," which attack a crucial
enzyme that enables HIV to reproduce inside the body. It has not yet been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

   Still, he worries that his adolescent nightmare, that he is "going to die
from this one day," may come true before his own work does him any good.

   "I feel old," he sighs. He turned 26 in March.

The Researchers

   In a sense, the story of AIDS research is a product of a uniquely American
belief: Science can do anything. Doctors have all the answers.

   "For decades, and maybe even half a century, the American medical machine has
tried . . . to put a myth over the public that everything is within our ability
to control," said Dr. Michael Wilkes, a UCLA professor of medicine.

   This myth has been debunked before, but faith runs deep. When President
Richard Nixon declared a "war on cancer" in 1971, some said the cure would be
found within five years. And when, with a beaming Gallo at her side, U.S. Health
and Human Services Secretary Margaret Heckler announced in 1984 that the AIDS
virus had been isolated and a vaccine would be produced within two years, people
believed that too.

   Today, significant strides have been made in preventing and treating certain
types of cancers. Some childhood leukemias, for instance, have a cure rate of
more than 80%. The advances have come as doctors learned how to put seemingly
ineffective drugs together to work wonders. Even so, cancer remains the nation's
second-leading cause of death. Nobody expects there will be a single "cure for
cancer" anymore.

   Many scientists think AIDS may follow the same pattern.

   Among them is Dr. Harold Varmus, the new director of the National Institutes
of Health. With an annual budget of $11 billion, NIH is the seat of medical
research in this country. Its 17 institutes and six scientific centers and
divisions are spread over a hilly campus in Bethesda, Md.

   Varmus, a soft-spoken, slightly rumpled man who favors Oxford-cloth shirts
and argyle socks, has been in charge for eight months. He speaks thoughtfully
and candidly when asked about AIDS.

   "Right now," he said, "it's hard for me to be optimistic about feeling that
AIDS will disappear in 20 or 30 years." But, he adds, "I do think that we will
have drugs that are reasonably effective and that people who develop the disease
AIDS will live a lot longer than they live now, but I think it is fair to say
that it won't be so different than (cancer)."

   But there is a crucial distinction, he notes, between the two diseases. The
causes of cancer, with the exception of environmental factors such as smoking,
diet and radon, are largely unknown. But there is nearly universal agreement
that HIV causes AIDS. "If you could eliminate the virus, you could eliminate the
disease," he said. Translation: "Find the bug, find the drug" should have
worked.

   "That," Varmus said, "is haunting us."

   Under his watch, NIH is shaking up its AIDS bureaucracy. Four months ago,
Varmus ousted the well-known scientist who has been the government's point man
on AIDS since the epidemic began -- Dr. Anthony M. Fauci -- and brought in Dr.
William E. Paul to head NIH's Office of AIDS Research. Paul is a highly regarded
immunologist, but he has no experience in AIDS.

   "I was looking for somebody who would inspire a lot of confidence, who would
do new things, who was well liked," Varmus said. "I was very much attracted by
the idea of his being somebody who was interested in AIDS but not in the middle
of it."

   Paul has a big job ahead. He is re-creating the Office of AIDS Research from
the ground up; the tiny agency never had any real power until last year, when --
in one of the many remarkable twists that characterize AIDS research today --
Congress reconstituted it at the urging of activists who charged that the
federal research program was a mess.

A Litany of Complaints

   This was nothing short of a revolution.

   It was orchestrated by a tiny band of activists/dissenters in New York. Their
leader was a 33-year-old former Wall Street bond trader named Peter Staley.
Several years ago, he and his friends broke away from ACT UP, the group known
for in-your-face protests.

   Figuring they could accomplish more from the inside, they formed their own
group, Treatment Action Group, or TAG. They buddied up to researchers, read
grant abstracts and learned about funding streams. Then they issued three
reports that caught the attention of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) and his
colleagues in Congress.

   The reports contained a litany of complaints: Money was being spent on
studies that were redundant or failed to bear fruit. No one person was in charge
of the federal AIDS budget. Top scientists in immunology and virology -- fields
that have relevance to AIDS -- were not encouraged to join the fight. Promising
young researchers were staying away.

   The AIDS Clinical Trial Group, the arm of the NIH that tests AIDS drugs, had
studied AZT and the other nucleoside analogues nine ways to Sunday and had yet
to come up with good guidance for doctors, the reports said. (The best AZT news
to come out of the government studies is that it helps prevent transmission from
pregnant women to their infants.) The research effort, the group asserted,
lacked coordination and direction.

   "It's written off as, 'Well, that's the way science works," Staley said. "I
don't see why it has to be that way."

   To Staley's astonishment, Congress agreed.

A New Game Plan

   As a result, for the first time, one central authority -- the Office of AIDS
Research -- controls federal AIDS research purse strings. With this new power,
Paul is drafting a plan that will put more money into basic research and less
into clinical trials.

   The NIH spends about twice as much on clinical tests as it does on basic
science. About 42% of the government's AIDS budget is spent developing and
testing new drugs, and 9% is spent on vaccine research. Just 25% is devoted to
basic laboratory work. (The remainder goes toward prevention, education and
other activities.)

   Paul's plan has not been made public, and in an interview, he declined to
provide specifics, although he may do so in Yokohama. But he and Varmus
acknowledged that change will take time. Much of the government's AIDS budget is
locked up, committed through grants that will remain in place for the next three
to five years.

   In the meantime, he is struggling to build up his staff -- a job fraught with
obstacles because of an NIH hiring freeze -- and to familiarize himself with the
disease he is supposed to help conquer. He has sought counsel from the great
minds of science, among them Dr. Bernard Fields.

   Fields is a Harvard University virologist who was a candidate for Paul's job
but withdrew for health reasons. Like Paul, Fields has no experience in AIDS. At
56, he has spent three decades studying reovirus, a member of the family of
viruses that causes diarrhea. He never got into AIDS, he said, because he did
not want to abandon an established career.

   In May, Fields published a commentary in the scientific journal Nature that
brought the crisis in AIDS research to public attention. Titled "AIDS: Time to
Turn to Basic Science," the piece reads like a blueprint for Paul to follow.

   Ten years ago, Fields said, it was reasonable for AIDS researchers to shoot
for the moon -- a drug, a vaccine, a cure. After all, it worked with polio: The
first vaccine was developed by Jonas Salk long before scientists fully
understood the virus that causes the disease. With a vaccine in hand, basic
research into polio was all but abandoned. It wasn't necessary anymore.

   That approach, Fields said, hasn't worked for AIDS. He argues that it is time
to broaden AIDS research. Scientists must learn general principles about the
immune system, he said, if they are to fully understand how AIDS attacks the
body.

   And the way to glean such insights, Fields said, is not necessarily to study
HIV. Other viruses -- rotovirus, which infects the intestines, herpes virus and
perhaps even reovirus -- might yield equally important nuggets, helping
scientists to understand, for instance, how antibodies and other molecules work
together to regulate immune responses.

   He notes that it is easier to get grants for AIDS than any other disease. At
the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which conducts most
of government-funded AIDS research, 14% of basic research grant requests in AIDS
are approved. Only 8% of grant requests in other diseases are funded.

The Skeptics

   Not everyone thinks Fields, Paul and the Treatment Action Group activists are
on the right track.

   Dr. Robert T. Schooley is the incoming chief of the AIDS Clinical Trials
Group. He thinks the criticisms of the AZT studies are too harsh. He worries
that his program will be gutted just when it is on the verge of studying new and
better classes of drugs, as well as gene therapy and other innovative approaches
to treating AIDS.

   "If they kill this system . . . we may end up killing trials that many of us
think have a lot of potential," Schooley said. "Then, three years from now
you'll have people saying, 'Why didn't we study this?' "

   Schooley is also skeptical of Fields' argument that AIDS money should be
given to scientists who don't work with HIV.

   "Bernie Fields is a reovirologist," he said. "Bernie's thesis all along has
been reovirus is a great model for AIDS. Well, HIV is a great model for AIDS.
Reovirus is reovirus. I worry a lot about this back to the basics (philosophy)
coming from people who would like to have funds used on what they were doing all
their professional lives. . . . I think a lot of this is kind of self-serving."

   Larry Kramer is another skeptic. The playwright and AIDS activist wrote a
prologue to one Treatment Action Group report, calling it "one of the most
important documents about the AIDS plague." Now he is furious with the
organization and other activists, saying they "have become so bureaucratized as
to be embarrassing."

   Kramer is pushing for a "Manhattan Project" for AIDS -- a highly focused
scientific effort like the one used to develop the atomic bomb. Cloister the
nation's best minds out in the desert, this argument goes, and they will
undoubtedly come up with the answer. He calls the appointment of Paul "a bad
joke" and said the NIH is unfit to guide scientific research.

   Although many AIDS researchers -- with the notable exception of Gallo --
think the "Manhattan Project" is unworkable and unnecessary, they do worry that
the public will begin to think of AIDS as a chronic, incurable problem that goes
on the back burner. And with it, they fear, will go the urgency -- and funding
-- that characterized the first decade of research.

   "This has to be viewed as a national emergency," said Ho of the Aaron Diamond
institute. "Everyone senses there is a complacency setting in, a willingness to
accept the situation. But this is a transmissible disease that could get worse
if we take that attitude."

An Insider's View

   Standing outside the fracas, watching with bemused detachment, is the
consummate AIDS insider: Anthony Fauci.

   He has played several crucial roles in the battle against AIDS. He is
director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which
conducts 40% of government-funded AIDS research. (The remainder is spread over
the other institutes.)

   He is a respected laboratory scientist who performs the kind of basic
research Paul advocates. Thanks to Fauci, the theory that the AIDS virus was
inactive after infecting people has been debunked. His research proved the virus
can "hide" for years in the lymph nodes, multiplying rapidly before waging its
ferocious attack.

   And, until Paul's appointment, Fauci headed the Office of AIDS Research.

   If anyone can take the long view of the epidemic, it is Fauci. The walls in
his spacious office are covered with photographs that speak to his spot in the
AIDS limelight. There is Fauci with George Bush, who once hailed him as a hero.
There he is with Elizabeth Taylor, well known for her AIDS fund-raisers. And
there he is peering from behind a collection of test tubes, in People magazine,
which named him one of the "25 most intriguing people of 1990."

   In the business of laying blame for the failures of AIDS research, Fauci has
become an easy target. Staley, the founder of the Treatment Action Group, calls
him "a brilliant scientist and a miserable manager."

   Gregg Gonsalves, a founding member of the Treatment Action Group, said: "When
Tony walks in the room, you feel like the king is here. It's like Frank Sinatra,
the chairman of the board. Bill Paul is very collegial. Tony never pulled in
people and said, 'OK, tell me what's wrong and how we should fix it.' He was
stubborn and driven. . . . 'This is my epidemic and what I say goes.' "

   Fauci has heard the criticism before, and he shrugs it off.

   "There is a natural tendency to blame," he said. "You blame the Reagan
Administration, you blame the Bush Administration, and now people are blaming
Bill Clinton. Except that I have been at it longer than all of them."

   He said he pushed years ago for more basic science. But nobody wanted to hear
it.

   "I wish someone would go back to my congressional testimonies when I was
saying that we need to do more to understand how the virus works, and I was
getting beaten up by the activists as well as the congressional committees. . .
. Now those same people are . . . saying, 'Ah, I have seen Jesus. What we really
need is more basic research.' No kidding."

Slow Progress

   As these debates continue, science grinds forward, step by agonizingly slow
step.

   On the drug frontier, pharmaceutical manufacturer Hoffman-LaRoche is seeking
FDA permission to market its protease inhibitor under a special program that
allows AIDS drugs to be made available to patients before they are proven
effective. The Treatment Action Group is fighting against the approval, arguing
that it is unfair to put another drug on the market until the company can show
that it works.

   Although tests of another new class of drugs -- the "tat inhibitors" -- have
been shelved permanently, some scientists believe it will be possible to develop
yet another type, called "integrase inhibitors." All these drugs, like AZT, are
antiretrovirals, designed to stop the AIDS virus from multiplying inside the
body. Each targets the virus at a different stage of its replication process.

   Meanwhile, research continues on more innovative therapies. Among the most
promising work is that being conducted by UC San Diego researcher Flossie
Wong-Staal, who is exploring the possibility of gene therapy. In San Francisco,
a think tank called Project Immune Restoration is bringing scientists together
to examine ways of repairing HIV-damaged immune systems.

   At the National Cancer Institute, Gallo and his colleagues are studying
everything from the composition of HIV's genes to new treatments for Kaposi's
sarcoma, a cancer that is common among AIDS patients. He is also working on an
HIV vaccine that is being tested in France -- one of 29 vaccines in various
stages of experimentation here and in Europe.

   There is no telling where this effort will lead. The miracle breakthrough,
the magic bullet, may still be just around the corner. Then again, it may not.

   Gallo puts it this way:

   "You could know everything about the Himalayan mountains -- evolution, caves,
grounds, geography -- but you might not be able to climb them until somebody
developed a new technique called a helicopter. Knowing everything there is to
know about AIDS may not make us solve the problem. It may be unsolvable. I don't
believe that, but that is possible. Maybe we need a whole new technological
development from elsewhere, maybe not even from biomedical science. God knows
from where.

   "For some things, knowing everything may not be enough."

   In the meantime, Gallo is planning his annual fall lab meeting, a seven-day
retreat that functions as a mini-AIDS conference and is attended by the world's
greatest scientific minds. The title of the opening talk, to be given by Nobel
laureate and molecular biologist David Baltimore, is "AIDS Research in Crisis."

   Each year, Gallo also invites a guest lecturer, someone from outside the
scientific community, to deliver a provocative speech. This year's speaker is
Pulitzer Prize-winning author Richard Rhodes.

   He wrote "The Making of the Atomic Bomb," the definitive book on the
Manhattan Project.

   NEXT: The deadliest virus of all.

CORRECTION-DATE: August 10, 1994, Wednesday, Home Edition

CORRECTION:
FOR THE RECORD

   AIDS research -- A story in Sunday's editions of The Times said that Dr.
Harold Varmus, the new director of the National Institutes of Health, had
recently ousted Dr. Anthony Fauci as head of the Office of AIDS Research. A
spokeswoman for Varmus says Fauci withdrew from the job because keeping it would
have required him to give up his other duties.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Dr. Robert Gallo, co-discoverer of virus that causes AIDS; in
photo, he prepares to leave for Tokyo Associated Press; Photo, Marty
Majchrowicz, AIDS Project/Los Angeles LAWRENCE K. HO / Los Angeles Times; Photo,
Dr. Harold Varmus, National Institutes of Health director Agence France-Presse;
Photo, Dr. Anthony M. Fauci, former director of Office of AIDS Research,
commenting on why people now blame him STEVE JAFFE / For The Times; Photo, Dr.
Robert T. Schooley, AIDS researcher Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994


                             700 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       August 7, 1994 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: ARTS & LIVING; Pg. 4I

LENGTH: 448 words

HEADLINE: AIDS TIMELINE

BODY:

   1977: First recorded AIDS death, in Copenhagen, Denmark.

   1981: Centers for Disease Control first receives evidence of a mysterious
virus killing gays; 80 cases of AIDS confirmed in United States, 26 deaths.

   1983: Public Health Service urges gays, drug users and Haitians to refrain
from giving blood because AIDS might be transmitted through blood transfusions.

   1984: Scientists working independently in France and the United States
announce they have isolated the virus that causes AIDS.

   1985: Blood banks begin testing blood after 28,000 Americans are put at risk
by AIDS-tainted blood transfusions.

   1986: Surgeon General C. Everett Koop issues a report urging AIDS education.

   1987: Food and Drug Administration approves sale of AZT.

   United States and France settle dispute over discovery of AIDS virus and name
it HIV.

   Epidemic reported in Africa. U.S. rate slows among gays; rises among
intravenous drug users and heterosexual infection rate doubles.

   1988: National Institutes of Health establishes Office of AIDS Research.

   AIDS informational brochure sent to 114 million American households.

   World Health Organization reports 5 million HIV infected in the world.

   Justice Department rules that AIDS patients and people with HIV are covered
by federal law that bars discrimination against disabled people.

   1990: Centers for Disease Control reports 9% rise in AIDS cases in 1989, the
lowest increase since CDC began tracking AIDS in 1981.

   AIDS spreading faster among American women than men, 29% rise for women,
opposed to an 18% rise in men.

   1991: Los Angeles Laker basketball star Earvin (Magic) Johnson discloses he
has HIV. New cases in United States linked to heterosexual sex increased 40% in
1990, compared with 12% increase in overall incidence. Of all new cases of AIDS,
75% were contracted through heterosexual sex.

   1992: National Research Council reports that AIDS epidemic has little impact
on the lives of most Americans, principally because most victims come from
marginalized sectors. "If public attention faded," the report said, "AIDS could
become accepted as one of the synergy of plagues endemic in vulnerable
communities: blacks, homosexuals, drug addicts and the poor."

   1993: Centers for Disease Control predicts AIDS deaths would reach 330,000 to
385,000 by 1995, up from the 160,000 estimate in September 1992.

   National Commission on AIDS reports that blacks and Hispanics account for 46%
of AIDS cases in the United States, while they are 21% of the population.

   1994: Researchers propose approaching AIDS through gene therapy and molecular
biology, as though it were a disease of the DNA instead of an ordinary virus.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1994


                             701 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     August 4, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1334 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH CARE SHOULD BE MEASURED IN VITAL SIGNS, NOT DOLLAR SIGNS

BYLINE: By THOMAS B. TOMASI,

BODY:

    President Clinton proposes a health-care system that guarantees affordable,
accessible, and high-quality care for all Americans. I believe that President
and Mrs. Clinton have done this country a great service by bringing this concept
to the table.

   But fast forward a few years. You are retired and living on a small pension.
You have metastatic cancer. Your best chance for survival is an investigational
treatment available at a comprehensive cancer center.

   Ask yourself: Under the new healthcare system, will I be guaranteed access to
this center? Who will pay for the treatment?

   Even with a crystal ball, the details of health-care reform are murky. As
administrator of one of the nation's first comprehensive cancer centers, I am
keenly aware of the problems facing cancer specialists and of the potential
consequences of forcing 27 National Cancer Institute-designated facilities --
square pegs, if you will -- into the round holes of health-care reform.

   One in three Americans will be diagnosed with cancer. Half will survive.  The
number of cancer patients in 1990 will double by 2030. By the year 2000, cancer
will surpass heart disease as this country's leading cause of death, and 25
percent of the U.S. health-care dollar will go to cancer care.

   Reducing health care's mounting cost is a universal concern. But cancer's
highly complex nature makes its costs -- which currently exceed $ 104 billion --
difficult to analyze and therefore to cap.

   Cancer encompasses more than 100 diseases and can affect many parts of the
body. An accurate diagnosis is reached only after a number of sensitive tests
and high-tech procedures are completed. Cancer's unpredictable course often
demands for optimal care a multidisciplinary team of specialists. Treatment and
follow-up last a minimum of five years. Even among patients with identical
diagnoses, prognoses vary. Of the cancer treatments available, only 25 percent
are considered "standard" enough to produce predictable outcomes.

   Comprehensive cancer centers, such as Roswell Park, have been doing their
part to reduce costs without sacrificing quality. Most offer same-day surgery
and outpatient chemotherapy programs. Most make judicious use of expensive, but
essential diagnostic and treatment technology. All emphasize cancer prevention
and early detection, and research efforts in these areas have accelerated.

   Breakthroughs in immunotherapy and gene therapy confirm that although
progress has been sluggish, cancer researchers have not been tilting at
windmills. As cancer's cellular mysteries are unlocked, more effective,
patient-friendly, cost-effective treatments will be designed, potentially
supplanting invasive procedures such as bone marrow transplantation or
mastectomies. To paraphrase a passage in an article in "The Wall Street
Journal," chemotherapy may one day be a matter of swallowing a pill, as harmless
as aspirin, to switch on poisonous genes to kill tumor cells. Cancer vaccines
too may not be as far off as we think.

   But musings about the future will be more science fiction than science if
patients do not have universal access to specialists and specialty centers; if
health care is measured by dollar signs not vital signs; and if research comes
to a halt because no one wants to pay for it.

   Patients enrolled in managed care plans must be guaranteed the right to
choose the appropriate specialist at the appropriate time -- regardless of the
stage or type of disease. Health plans should promote patient referral to
designated "centers of excellence," and the patient care (non-administrative)
costs of clinical research, approved under National Institutes of Health
guidelines, should be reimbursed.

   Additional primary-care physicians will be needed to treat the 37 million
uninsured Americans who will be entering the new health-care system. However, at
the same time, surgical and medical specialists should not be shunned as primary
care's rich, ugly stepsisters. An adversarial "specialist versus generalist"
environment must not be created for health-care providers; nor should patients
have to grapple with difficult "either-or" decisions. A partnership of care must
exist in which quality of care and quality of life are bottom-line objectives.

   Specialty centers are not the lone rangers of health care. Traditionally,
they have worked with community physicians to ensure continuity of care, to
mount effective prevention and early detection programs, to provide consultation
and second opinions, and to accommodate referrals.

   Primary-care physicians need to feel confident they are entrusting their
patients to "centers of excellence," where health-care professionals devote 100
percent of their work life to studying, diagnosing, treating, and preventing one
disease.

   How can I justify reimbursement for clinical research? Since 1971, clinical
research has contributed a full 20 percentage points -- from 30 percent to 50
percent -- to every American's chance of surviving cancer for five years. At
Roswell Park, over 35 percent of patients have voluntarily entered clinical
trials, testing promising new drugs against the best available standard therapy.
Battling a disease whose triumphs are gauged one patient at a time, we have seen
a significant percentage of our clinical trial participants experience extended
survival, enhanced quality of life -- and even complete remissions -- not
afforded by "standard" available therapies.

   Without adequate reimbursement, clinical research will not survive -- nor
will those patients whose treatment options have been exhausted. There will be
no new "standard" treatments, new diagnostic tests, prevention strategies nor
cures. In the long run, medical advances will be "frozen" in time. Research is
the sharpest blade we have to cut healthcare costs -- and directly impact the
morbidity and mortality of present and future diseases.

   We also cannot restrict access of investigational treatments to only those
who can afford supplementary insurance to cover the non-routine costs of
non-standard care. Without a diverse patient pool -- representing men and women
of all ages, and of every ethnic, racial and socioeconomic background and stage
and type of disease -- what clinical researcher would confidently apply the
results to the general population?

   If economic factors alone should drive our actions, then specialty centers
will be out of business. If you believe that specialized care may benefit
patients who will not otherwise survive their diagnosis, and that research will
ultimately reduce suffering as well as the cost of health care, then the types
of programs provided by academic centers and nationally recognized specialty
centers of excellence such as Roswell Park are essential and justifiable.

   THOMAS B. TOMASI, MD, is president of Roswell Park Institute

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1994


                             702 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 3, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: Hawking foresees genetically edited superhumans

BYLINE: By Usha Lee McFarling, Globe Staff

BODY:

    It's a vision worthy of a sci-fi novel. A handful of humans defy laws that
forbid tampering with their own genes and resculpt themselves into brilliant,
age-defying "superhumans" who take over Earth - then move on to colonize other
planets.

   That's the prediction of one of the most prominent theoretical physicists of
our time - Stephen Hawking, whose best-selling book, "A Brief History of Time,"
brought the complexities of black holes and the beginning of the universe into
living rooms around the world. Yesterday, he offered his view of life on Earth -
for the next few centuries - to several hundred computer aficionados in town for
the Macworld Expo.

   Hawking, who has Lou Gehrig's disease and can move only a few muscles,
communicates through his computer. Yesterday, he wheeled onto a darkened stage
at the Park Plaza Hotel, his face illuminated only by the glow of the computer
screen attached to his wheelchair, and gave a speech prerecorded in the
computer-generated voice that has become his trademark.

   Much of his speech focused not on his usual scientific topics - the
beginnings of the universe, the nature of black holes - but on a relatively puny
subject: the human species and its history on Earth.

   "We are entering a new phase: self-designed evolution," Hawking said. The
ability to redesign ourselves genetically, he predicted, will be irresistible.
Scientists are working on the human genome project to pinpoint where genes
contributing to certain diseases or traits lie. "Once we have read the book of
life," Hawking predicted, "We will start writing the corrections."

   The beginning of such a change will start with genetic therapies for defects
linked to single genes like cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy. But
eventually, humans will devise ways to modify complex human traits like
intelligence and aggression. In Hawking's scenario, wary governments trying to
rein in the technology will pass laws banning genetic engineering.

   But some people won't be able to resist the temptation to improve memories or
lengthen lifespans.

   "Once such superhumans appear, there are going to be political problems with
the humans who won't be able to compete. They will die out or become
unimportant."

   Hawking, backed by his equations, called many other sci-fi themes - such as
time travel, or using time warps to beat the speed of light - plain hogwash.
After all, he said, as he displayed a drawing of large-brained humans toting
cameras, we haven't seen any tourists traveling backward from the future.

   Hawking sees us colonizing space through machines that can land on distant
planets and mine resources to reproduce themselves, then traveling to nearby
stars within the next two centuries. But this future is endangered, he said, by
an aggressive human race whose behavior "has been pretty stupid, and not
calculated to aid the survival of the species."

   Hawking also demonstrated an interactive CD-ROM version of his book available
this fall. Hawking had avoided creating an electronic version of the book until
now, he said, because "I was afraid it would just be a computer game in which
one avoided falling into black holes."

   The CD-ROM allows a computer user to explore black holes, quantum theory,
even the Big Bang. An opening screen shows Hawking, in his wheelchair, in an
office. On the walls are photos of Galileo, Newton and Marilyn Monroe. "People I
admire," Hawking noted.

   The program demonstrates Hawking's boyish sense of humor. On one screen
Hawking is shown on the starship Enterprise, playing poker with Einstein and
Commander Data of "Star Trek: The Next Generation." In another scene, Marilyn,
in her trademark billowing dress, plays with toy trucks on the floor as she
explains relativity to Einstein.

   And in one of the physicist's favorite scenes, Hawking's image is
superimposed on a picture showing Monroe lounging against a black sedan. "I tell
people it's not her body, I'm interested in," Hawking said. "It's her car."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, A UNIVERSAL FORECAST Beneath a photo of Jupiter, theoretical
physicist Stephen Hawking outlines his view of life on Earth over the next few
centuries to hundreds of computer aficionados in Boston for the annual Macworld
Expo. Page 17. An Apple analyst, meanwhile, gave exhibitors a warning on the
company's prospects. Page 25. / GLOBE PHOTO / MICHAEL ROBINSON-CHAVEZ (Photo,
page 1)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1994


                             703 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 2, 1994, Tuesday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 1

LENGTH: 371 words

HEADLINE: GLENDALE / BURBANK FOCUS:  GLENDALE;
SALON RAISES $4,000 TO FIGHT CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By MAKI BECKER

BODY:

   Don't hate Glendale residents because they're beautiful.

   They had their hair styled and nails manicured not in pursuit of high
fashion, but to raise money in the name of a 2 1/2-year-old Burbank girl who has
cystic fibrosis, the No. 1 genetic killer of children and young adults.

   Gail Becker of Signatures Styling in Glendale partnered with Linda and Kevin
Muldoon, parents of Madeline, for a 12-hour haircut-a-thon Sunday to raise money
for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in Hacienda Heights. Just over $4,000 was
raised thanks to the 150 clients that dropped in at the Signatures Styling
salon.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation divides all donations between research, health
care and public education for this cureless disease that attacks the respiratory
and digestive systems of its victims, according to its director of development,
Mary Schraeger. Currently, researchers are experimenting with gene therapy,
Schraeger said.

   Linda Muldoon said that she wanted to raise funds for cystic fibrosis
research, but was searching for a creative way to get her community excited
about getting involved. "Instead of just writing a personal check, we thought of
a cut-a-thon," said Muldoon, who contacted Becker about her idea.

   Having gathered 20 stylists for the event, Becker said she was especially
excited to see the members of her industry come together. "There's no
competition here. It's all for the same cause," Becker said.

   "It's a good cause," said Christina Olesijuk of Glendale, as she had her
bangs trimmed.

   Becker said she also had a client come in to have her hair cut Sunday who had
come in for an appointment earlier that week. "She said, 'It just grew so much
in three days,' " Becker chuckled.

   The $4,000 collected through the haircut-a-thon will not go directly toward
Madeline's bills, but Muldoon said she wants to have another fund-raiser to set
up a foundation to buy her daughter a $20,000 air machine that insurance will
not cover.

   At present, Muldoon has to help Madeline clear her lungs of the tar-like
mucus that builds up and put her on an aerosol machine, a process that takes
three hours every day. The air machine would cut physical therapy time in half,
said Muldoon. MAKI BECKER

GRAPHIC: Photo, Madeline Muldoon, 2 1/2, who has cystic fibrosis, gets her hair
cut.  ROSE HOWERTER / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1994


                             704 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     August 2, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z10

LENGTH: 2724 words

HEADLINE: The Littlest Donor;
Umbilical Cord Blood Is a New Source of Marrow

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Don Colburn

BODY:

   When 2-year-old Callie Longo of Rockville had a bone marrow transplant last
September, her donor never felt a needlestick or lost a drop of blood.

   The healthy blood cells Callie received to replace her own diseased marrow
came from the umbilical cord and placenta of her infant sister, Jennie. The
cells had been stored for more than three months in a deep freeze in the blood
bank at Children's National Medical Center.

   "She's been thriving," said Patricia Dinndorf, a bone marrow transplant
specialist at Children's. "She's had very nice recovery of her immune function."

   Callie was diagnosed 17 days after her first birthday with a rare and deadly
form of leukemia, a disease of the marrow, the body's blood factory. Her best
hope was a bone marrow transplant from a sibling donor with the right
immunological match, which her half-brother Jeffrey could not provide.

   With no match available, doctors broached another possibility. Callie's
mother, Ann Longo, was nearly eight months pregnant. If the baby turned out to
be a perfect match for Callie, they could try a still-experimental alternative
to bone marrow transplant. Instead of drawing the baby's marrow -- too risky in
a newborn -- they would use fetal blood from the normally discarded umbilical
cord, which is rich in the blood-forming stem cells that are the key ingredient
in a marrow transplant.

   To treat this type of leukemia, "the first thing you look for is a
matched-sibling bone marrow transplant," said Gregory Reaman, chairman of
hematology-oncology at Children's. "In this case, we were looking at a
sibling-on-the-way."

   Cord blood transplants had been attempted only a couple of dozen times in the
world -- and never in Washington.

   At barely 1 year old, Callie didn't know enough to be scared.


   Encouraging Results

   In the search of alternative sources for the precious blood-generating cells
of bone marrow, doctors have found an unlikely candidate: the umbilical cord.

   Cord blood soon will be "at least an adjunct to the bone marrow transplant
effort," said Pablo Rubinstein, head of the immunogenetics lab at the New York
Blood Center and a leading cord blood researcher. "And if it works as well as we
think it does, it may well become the mainstay of the national registry."

   "This is a very exciting field," said Ronald Sacher, director of transfusion
medicine at Georgetown University Medical Center. He said use of cord blood
holds promise not only for marrow transplantation but also for the rapidly
growing field of gene therapy and the future of blood banking itself.

   The use of umbilical cord blood has several possible advantages over a
traditional transplant of bone marrow. Most important, the cord blood is loaded
with stem cells, a kind of master blood cell involved in the making of blood and
the tuning of human immunity.

   Since cord blood stem cells are not fully developed -- doctors sometimes call
them "immunologically naive" -- they are less likely than marrow cells to be
contaminated with viruses or tumors, and more likely to accept the new host's
immune system without attacking it as "foreign." That may reduce the chance of
so-called graft-versus-host disease, the leading cause of illness and death in
patients who undergo marrow transplants.

   Cord blood is also readily available. It is easily retrieved after birth at
no risk or pain to mother or newborn.

   "You're taking something that would otherwise be thrown away -- but turns out
to be a very valuable resource," Dinndorf said.

   Collecting cord blood is remarkably simple, said the New York Blood Center's
Rubinstein. The placenta and umbilical cord are cleaned and hung -- clothespins
work best, he said -- from a plastic trellis-like frame. A sterile needle
punctures the umbilical vein, and blood drains into a standard transfusion bag.

   By contrast, conventional marrow donation, in which marrow is extracted by
needle from inside the donor's hip bones, is a surgical operation requiring
general anesthesia.

   Worldwide, 50 cord blood transplants have been done since the first
successful one in France six years ago, according to John Wagner, a
hematologist-oncologist at the University of Minnesota Medical Center who runs
the International Cord Blood Transplant Registry.

   "So far the results look very encouraging," said Wagner, who performed the
first cord blood transplant for leukemia at Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore in 1990. At Minnesota, he has participated in eight more cord blood
transplants, including one last Friday.

   All 50 cord blood transplant recipients were children with leukemia or other
life-threatening blood diseases. More than 70 percent are alive. The donor in
most cases was a newborn sibling, but six cord blood transplants have been done
on patients unrelated to their donors.

   When Wagner compared the cord blood transplant cases with 75 similar patients
who received conventional bone marrow transplants, he found a lower risk of
graft-versus-host disease in the cord group. Since the two groups were not
identical and included patients at many different centers, the comparison does
not prove that cord blood works better than bone marrow. "But it makes me
believe there is truly a lower risk of graft-versus-host disease with cord
blood," he said.

   Any bone marrow transplant requires a close match between donor and
recipient. Fewer than 30 percent of patients needing a marrow transplant have a
matched donor in the family. Another 20 to 30 percent find a match through a
computerized registry of volunteers compiled by the National Marrow Donor
Program. But an outside-the-family donor search can take months and cost
thousands of dollars. Minorities face longer odds because they are
underrepresented in the national donor registry. Those odds would be improved if
cord blood banking became more common, enlarging the donor pool.

   The main drawback to cord blood is volume. The placenta and umbilical cord
typically contain about 100 cubic centimeters of blood -- a little more than
three ounces, or six tablespoons. Even though it is rich in stem cells, that
amount may not be enough for an adult patient.

   In the first known adult case, doctors at Mt. Sinai Medical Center in New
York tried in March to transplant cord blood cells into a 47-year-old woman with
leukemia. The woman died after developing a severe reaction to an antibiotic --
and too soon to tell whether the transplant itself had worked.


   Battling Time

   The day after her diagnosis was confirmed, Callie Longo began receiving
chemotherapy at Children's Hospital. She had a fast-growing type of acute
myeloid leukemia that attacked her platelets, the blood cells needed for
clotting.

   The first goal in leukemia treatment is to bring the disease into remission
-- a lull in the symptoms that allows for more aggressive treatment, such as a
bone marrow transplant. If the cancer relapses, it may be too late for a
successful marrow transplant.

   "With any kind of cancer, you're always battling time," said Lisa Kenney, a
hematologist-oncologist at Children's who helped treat Callie. "We knew the best
chance to cure her was in her first remission" -- as soon as chemotherapy
brought her leukemia under control. That probably would happen within three
months, when the new sibling would be only 2 months old at most.

   "Even if the baby was a match, she wouldn't be old enough to be a [marrow]
donor," Kenney said.

   But the infant's cord blood might serve the same purpose -- if it were
collected and frozen, and if it matched Callie's immune system.

   When Kenney first raised the possibility of a cord blood transplant, she did
so partly to offer the Longos a hint of hope and control at a time when they
were still reeling from the devastating news that their 1-year-old daughter had
an often-fatal disease. Kenney didn't actually know how feasible the idea would
prove in Callie's case. After all, the chance of a match was only one in four.
And Children's Hospital had never tried a cord blood transplant.

   The team at Children's consulted experts from other medical centers with
experience in cord blood transplants. With the Longos' consent, they decided to
collect cord blood as soon as the new baby was born and store it in a deep
freeze. If it matched Callie's, they would transplant the stem cells into her,
probably within a few months. If not, they would go back to square one -- either
more chemotherapy alone or more chemotherapy followed by an "autologous"
transplant of Callie's own marrow, purged of disease in the laboratory and
returned to her body.

   For the time being, the Longos -- and their doctors -- could only hope and
wait.


   Specialized Blood Banks

   The idea of using cord blood as a source of transplantable stem cells
originated in the early 1980s with a group of doctors led by Edward Boyse, Hal
Broxmeyer and Lewis Thomas at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New
York.

   It was clear that fetal blood contained high concentrations of stem cells.
And laboratory experiments showed that mice whose immune systems had been
destroyed by a lethal dose of radiation could be saved by injections of fetal
mouse blood.

   But would it work in humans? Were there enough stem cells in a human
umbilical cord to make a transplant?

   The first human cord blood transplant was performed by an international team
in Paris in 1988. The patient was a 5-year-old boy with a rare nonmalignant
blood disease called Fanconi's anemia. The donor was his baby sister, delivered
six months earlier. The patient recovered fully (and his blood type switched
from B to the donor's O).

   That initial success led to several other cord blood transplants in patients
with Fanconi's anemia before the technique was tried against other diseases
where marrow transplantation is standard treatment. "It's really taken off in a
short period of time," Minnesota's Wagner said. All of the cord blood
transplants in the United States have been covered by insurance, he noted.

   Georgetown hematologist Sacher also expects scientists eventually will be
able to use cord blood stem cells as "seeds" in the laboratory to grow huge
supplies of blood to be banked for transfusions. That could replace the
cumbersome current system of relying on millions of individual donations by
volunteers.

   "We're a couple of decades away from that, but it's going to happen," he
said.

   For now, cord blood's main value is for families -- like the Longos last year
-- in a relatively rare set of circumstances: With one child in need of a bone
marrow transplant, they happen to be expecting another child who might provide a
match. For them, cord blood offers one more chance to find a donor quickly.

   That possibility is likely to expand, experts said, with the growth of
specialized blood blanks that can store frozen samples of cord blood
indefinitely. Several cord blood banks exist already.

   The largest, funded by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, is run
by the New York Blood Center in conjunction with Mt. Sinai Medical Center. It is
more than halfway toward its goal of 5,000 samples, Rubinstein said.

   There's also a commercial cord blood bank in Pittsburgh, founded by Biocyte
Corp., a company with patents on cord blood preservation technology. For a fee
of $ 1,500 plus $ 75 per year, parents can have their newborn's cord blood
collected, processed and preserved in case the infant or another family member
needs a marrow transplant.

   Whether cord blood becomes "a major player" in marrow transplantation depends
on compilation of a large bank of donor samples and further study of its ability
to reduce graft-versus-host disease, said Edward Ball, chief of the division of
hematology and bone marrow transplantation at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center.

   Ball sees sure-fire potential for use of cord blood in gene therapy, to treat
patients whose illness is caused by a defective or missing gene. Last year,
doctors at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles used genetically altered cord
blood stem cells to treat three children born with a genetic immune deficiency
that left them at constant risk of death from infection. The children's missing
gene was inserted into their own cord blood cells, which were then put back into
their bodies to help restore their immune systems.

   "These cells appear to be ideal targets for inserting genes," Ball said.


   High Stakes

   When Jennie Longo was born on May 30, 1993, at Shady Grove Adventist Hospital
in Rockville, the scene in the birthing room was routine, except perhaps for the
extra nurse and the cardboard box with a big red cross on it.

   For weeks, not knowing exactly when she might go into labor, Ann Longo had
never left home without that box, which contained a sterile cord blood
collection kit concocted by the marrow transplant team at Children's.

   Obstetrician Stephen Lakner had his own kit, in case the Longos somehow
arrived at the hospital without theirs. It consisted of a plastic blood
transfusion bag, some tubing, an anticoagulant to keep the blood from clotting
and a syringe.

   Moments after Jennie was born, as soon as the umbilical cord had been clamped
and cut, Lakner collected her cord blood. He pierced the umbilical vein with a
needle and drained about three or four ounces of cord blood into a transfusion
bag.

   They packed the bag of blood in the carton with the red cross on it and
handed it to Bob Longo, who kept it with him for the next hour or so until his
wife was settled in her room.

   Then Longo lugged the box to his car and couriered it down I-270 toward
Children's Hospital. As he turned the package over to the technician at the
blood bank, Longo couldn't help thinking of the transaction's high stakes. His
daughter's life might well depend on the contents of this cardboard box. He
half-considered asking for a receipt.

   No one knew yet whether Jennie's cells matched Callie's -- making a
transplant possible. It would be several days before the test results came back,
but meanwhile the stuff had to be prepared and preserved.

   First the white cells were separated out, and then the stem cells that give
rise to all other blood cells. The stem cells were mixed in a solution with
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), a dehydrating compound, and supercooled in liquid
nitrogen at a temperature of minus 196 degrees Celsius and stored in a deep
freeze.

   Two days later, the Longos got encouraging news: Jennie's blood appeared to
be a near-perfect match with Callie's. As soon as Callie went into remission,
they would try for the transplant.

   Callie went back into the hospital last Aug. 30 to prepare for the
transplant. For 10 days she received extra-high doses of chemotherapy to wipe
out her remaining diseased bone marrow. Her blood counts plummeted to near zero,
a condition that she couldn't survive for long without being rescued by a
transplant of healthy stem cells. If the transplant "took," those cells would
home in on her marrow and begin producing new blood cells.

   The actual transplant, dire as it was, looked like an ordinary blood
transfusion. Three syringefuls of Jennie's thawed-out stem cells flowed through
a catheter into a vein in Callie's chest.

   "Within 10 minutes, the whole thing was over," Ann Longo recalled.

   It took about three weeks for Callie's blood counts to climb back to a safe
level. She was in the hospital nearly eight weeks, much of it in an isolation
room to protect her still-fledgling immune system from infections. Since then,
she has stayed healthy, gradually recovering strength -- and a full head of hair
-- and returning to the hospital only for periodic tests.

   "She's like a regular, normal kid," Ann Longo said. "Both my kids are hams."

   Baby sister Jennie, oblivious to her heroic role as donor, turned 1 on May
30.

   It has been more than 10 months since Callie's transplant. There is still a
worrisome chance that Callie's leukemia could relapse, but that risk declines
with each passing month. The chance of relapse is low after two years and near
zero after five.

   Ann and Bob Longo are wary of the word "cure." In the past two months, they
have attended two funerals of children who were on the same unit with Callie at
Children's. But after a harrowing, scary year, they have reason to hope, and
they have their daughter home.

   "She's doing great now," Bob Longo said. "Just great."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, IN THE FIRST TRANSPLANT OF ITS KIND IN WASHINGTON, BOB AND ANN
LONGO AGREED TO USE UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD FROM THEIR DAUGHTER JENNIE, SEATED, TO
TREAT OLDER DAUGHTER CALLIE. FRANK JOHNSTON; ILLUSTRATION, KAREN VISSER FOR TWP;
ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1994


                             705 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    July 31, 1994 Sunday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: WWL; Pg. 1J

LENGTH: 4115 words

HEADLINE: THE RACE OF A LIFETIME SCIENTISTS COMPETE IN A HIGH-STAKES DRIVE TO
FIND THE BREAST CANCER GENE

BYLINE: NANCY ROSS-FLANAGAN Free Press Science Writer

BODY:

   They know they are close.

   It is there, somewhere within their reach, but neither luck nor genius has
put it in their hands.

   Others elsewhere are getting closer, too. There is no time to waste.

   In Lab 5514, the tension is building. Sometimes the pressure is enough to
make tempers explode. Usually, though, the strain shows itself only in the
scientists' faces -- expressions of unbroken concentration and an intensity of
purpose few people ever experience.

   Working night and day, over weekends and straight through holidays, the team
of University of Michigan researchers in Lab 5514 is racing toward a goal that
could bring prestige to them -- and hope to others.

   Like the searches for the top quark or black holes in space, this lab's quest
is for something tantalizing and just out of reach. But unlike obscure subatomic
particles or cosmic mysteries, this find could change lives.

   The Michigan scientists are closing in on a gene -- a chunk of DNA -- thought
to be responsible for most cases of inherited breast cancer. Finding it will
help identify the hundreds of thousands of women who almost certainly will
develop the cancer -- long before it starts. Researchers also hope it will lead
them to the causes, treatments and cures for many other cancers.

   The Michigan team could find the gene today. Or tomorrow. Or next week or
next month. The scientific world expects someone, somewhere, to do it this year.

   But as close as the U-M group is, it could lose the race to one of several
other teams around the world rushing just as madly to find the gene first.

   If everyone were working together, the elusive gene that affects more than
600,000 American women might already have been found. But that's not the way
big-time science works. Although there's cooperation and sharing of data within
research groups, there's secrecy and fierce rivalry among competing groups.

   Winning, in the world of high-stakes genetic research, propels the victors'
careers and makes grant money flow. Coming in second means the same as coming in
last. It means you lost the race.

   * * *

   The race took off four years ago when, after a decade of searching, a
California research team led by geneticist Mary- Claire King finally found
evidence that a single gene is involved in the most common type of inherited
breast cancer. Until then, other scientists had doubted that just one defective
gene passed from parent to child could lead to the disease.

   But when King reported the approximate location of the gene at a 1990 meeting
of the American Society of Human Genetics, the announcement "electrified the
community," medical geneticist Francis Collins told Science magazine.

   Collins, then at the University of Michigan, where his lab recently had
discovered the gene involved in cystic fibrosis, struck up a collaboration with
King. U-M cancer specialist Barbara Weber and geneticist Anne Bowcock of the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas jumped in.

   Since then, the U-M team has been led by Weber and Collins, whose contrasting
personalities seem to mesh as perfectly as their areas of expertise.

   Weber, 37, is crisp and no-nonsense. Everything about her signals precision,
from her neat, brown pageboy and perfect lipstick to her polished black loafers.
She wastes no words; she makes no parenthetical remarks.

   The breast cancer gene hunt attracted her because it seemed an intriguing
scientific puzzle, she says. Unlike some other cancers, breast cancer acts
differently in different patients. Some women develop a tiny tumor that speeds
through the body and kills within a year. Others live for years with huge tumors
that never spread. When breast cancer does spread, it may blanket one woman's
skin, never touching her internal organs, while in another woman, it invades the
bones.

   Figuring out what makes breast cancer cells behave so unpredictably could
help researchers design more precisely targeted treatments. And Weber, a
physician who has watched women die of breast cancer or suffer harsh side
effects of treatments designed to save them, can think of nothing more
satisfying than finding more effective -- and less devastating -- ways to make
women well.

   If only that were all she had to do.

   Perhaps because of breast cancer's emotional impact, this gene search has
attracted unprecedented attention. Camera crews from "60 Minutes" and "48 Hours"
have tramped through the lab and trotted around after Weber. Reporters call for
progress reports.

   "That's one of the reasons my life is so crazy," says Weber, sighing as she
glances at the long "to-do" list on her desk. "If I was just trying to run my
lab, and that's all I had to do, I would be fine."

   Instead, she spends hours answering calls and letters from doctors and
patients around the country, talking to reporters and flying off to conferences.
It's necessary if women are to remain hopeful, but not falsely hopeful, about
the progress and potential of the search.

   Doing research that has implications stretching from "the most basic
molecular genetics right on through public policy" is fascinating, but "somewhat
overwhelming," she says. "It certainly makes a mess of my day."

   Lately, Weber's days have been even messier, as she prepares to leave U-M in
mid-August for a new job at the University of Pennsylvania, where she'll
continue to collaborate on the project with Collins, King, Bowcock and the
Michigan group. One of the junior U-M researchers will follow her, while two
others will continue the work in Ann Arbor.

   Cut to the chase

   Team co-leader Collins had a major role in discovering the genes involved in
neurofibromatosis and Huntington's disease, as well as the cystic fibrosis gene.
He took a leave from Michigan last year to head the National Center for Human
Genome Research at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., but he
still advises the U-M group through frequent phone calls and monthly meetings.

   He's a folksy 44-year-old, comfortable in jeans and western boots, who breaks
the tension during five-hour lab meetings by affably teasing the other
researchers and calling for brownie breaks when eyes begin to glaze over around
midafternoon.

   But he won the races for three other hotly pursued genes by not cracking
jokes and passing out snacks. Even though he meets with the U-M lab group only
once a month, Collins has a way of pinpointing exactly what needs to be done
next, keeping the team on course and steering them away from pitfalls.

   In a recent lab meeting, during a long discussion of an experiment that
hadn't panned out, Collins asked pointed questions about exactly how the work
was done and how conclusions were reached.

   "Can we see some of the data that you're referring to?" he asked Sofia
Merajver, (pronounced mir-EYE-vur) an assistant professor of internal medicine
who has worked as a research fellow in Weber's lab for the past two years. "How
dense were your plates? Were these streaked or diluted out? How good were your
positive to negative differences?"

   Several days after the meeting, Merajver still shakes her head in amazement.

   "You think you know everything about your own experiment, but here you're
showing him the data and he immediately can zero in and say, 'This is
inconsistent; I don't see how this could happen,' " she says. "You've been doing
this for a month, and you didn't notice it yourself!"

   Ordinary surroundings

   Peeking into Lab 5514 of U-M's Medical Science Research Building I, you'd
never suspect it's the scene of one of the world's most competitive scientific
searches. The cramped laboratory looks just like all the others that line the
building's maze of corridors.

   Over there, a lab technician picks up a pipette and begins transferring
samples into bullet-shaped plastic tubes. At the next lab bench, someone uses
forceps gently to place circles of blotter paper on gel-filled lab dishes.
Another white-coated woman sits motionless, staring at a computer screen covered
with multicolored peaks. The only sound is the soporific hum of the massive,
gray freezer where DNA samples are kept.

   The day-to-day work of searching for genes looks like drudgery -- endless,
repetitive tasks to be crossed off impossibly long lists of "things to do
today."

   But step in a little closer, and you start to pick up hints of urgency.

   Foreheads are furrowed in concentration. Workers walk purposefully from lab
bench to freezer, pausing only to decide what needs to be done next. There's
little idle chatter and no music blaring from radios.

   Even though it's quiet, "it's a really stressful environment, because you're
trying to get ahead all the time, and there's a lot of competition," says Fergus
Couch, a 27- year-old postdoctoral fellow who describes himself as the most
intense member of the group of graduate and undergraduate students, technicians,
"post-docs" and faculty on the project.

   Sometimes the tension boils over and tempers flare.

   "It's rare that it happens, but sometimes it just gets so tight that people
say, 'Awww, to hell with this!' and they blow up," says Couch, who grew up and
got his early scientific training in Ireland, where science is a more relaxed
pursuit. "But you know, everybody realizes in the back of their mind that it's
just the stress."

   Ever since 1990, when King told the world that the gene known as BRCA1 was
situated somewhere in a long stretch of DNA on chromosome 17, scientists have
been using all sorts of genetic research techniques to close in on the gene.
Now, they have narrowed down the location to somewhere in a much shorter stretch
of DNA. But to figure out exactly which gene in that stretch is BRCA1, they must
analyze each of the 25 or more genes in the region.

   Weber and her colleagues talk about "pulling out the genes and taking a look
at them," but it's hardly that simple. Strands of DNA are too small to see,
except with an electron microscope. Even then, it's impossible to see individual
genes.

   So scientists must rely on indirect evidence -- conclusions drawn from graphs
on computer screens or from stripes on X-ray film -- for clues to the functions
of the genes in the region they're studying.

   That's what goes on day after day in Lab 5514. The Michigan team and their
collaborators are on the brink of finding the BRCA1 gene, but they know that
teams in Utah, Canada, Japan and England may be just as close.

   "From what we can tell, we're pretty much in the same place they are," says
Weber. "It's always very hard to tell, because nobody ever wants to say where
they are. But we think we're roughly where they are."

   The rivalry -- and the secrecy it spawns -- leads to intricate dances of
diplomacy when competing research teams come face to face at scientific
meetings.

   In June, several of the U-M researchers traveled to a genetics conference at
Cold Spring Harbor, a 95-acre research retreat on the north shore of New York's
Long Island. The meeting was a weeklong science fest, where notable researchers
and their proteges presented results during scientific sessions and swapped
information informally at picnics on the lushly landscaped grounds.

   But scientists involved in high-stakes research agonize for weeks before such
meetings about how much of their progress to reveal. No one wants to be accused
of hiding information, yet they don't want to tip off their competitors.

   At this summer's Cold Spring Harbor meeting, as the U-M team was setting up a
poster explaining the results they had chosen to present, someone from a rival
lab pulled up a chair, studied the poster and started grilling the Michigan
group.

   "Well, surely you tried this, didn't you? And if you did, you must have found
this, didn't you?" he asked, trying to piece together what the U-M team had been
careful not to spell out.

   "There are three reasons for not presenting data," Merajver explains. "You
don't know, you're not sure, or you know but don't want to say. He was trying to
figure out what our reason was."

   Merajver laughs about the episode and says it's just the way the science game
is played nowadays. But in a more reflective moment, she admits she wishes it
didn't have to be that way -- that all the rival teams could cooperate instead
of competing.

   "You can't help but have this feeling that if you could just get all of us in
one room together sometime, and we'd all blurt out everything we know, that
maybe . . ." she says, not needing to finish the thought.

   The same thought has crossed Weber's mind.

   "If we were all working together, it's likely the gene by this time would
already have been found," she says.

   No matter how Weber and Merajver wish it could be, "science is an inherently
competitive activity," says Dr. Arthur Caplan, a medical ethicist at the
University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   "Rewards are given out to those who make the discoveries and breakthroughs .
. . salary increases go to those who are the first authors of the landmark
papers. That's true no matter what the structure and organization of science
is."

   The benefits of competition

   And maybe that's not all bad.

   Researchers may try harder to come up with creative solutions to research
problems if they know they have to compete for funding with other scientists
trying to tackle the same questions. Without big grants to keep the labs
operating, gene searches would slow down considerably, if not grind to a halt.
Each of the major U.S. groups searching for the BRCA1 gene has gotten about
$150,000 a year from the National Institutes of Health for the the past four
years to keep their projects going.

   And competition "does lead people to stay up later, work more hours, put more
effort in," perhaps finding answers sooner than if they felt no pressure, Caplan
says.

   Without competition, the very structure of DNA might not have been discovered
in 1953.

   Knowing that master scientist Linus Pauling and X-ray crystallographer
Rosalind Franklin were closing in, mavericks James Watson and Francis Crick
frantically brainstormed and played with cardboard-and-metal-rod models until
they figured out the DNA molecule's double-spiral shape. They made the discovery
within a few weeks of getting their hands on a key piece of Franklin's data.

   Even the secrecy and redundancy that competition breeds may have positive
sides.

   "Scientists need to be protected from the herd mentality," says Raymond
White, who heads one of two University of Utah labs involved in the BRCA1 gene
race. "If we don't tell each other everything, chances are some of the groups
will be doing things differently. If we're all part of the same soccer team, we
will all be following the same game plan." And if that single plan is flawed, no
one makes any progress.

   "Competition keeps your teeth sharp. We need to be a little bit scared," says
White. Then he laughs. "But I don't know if we need to be this scared.

   Ups and downs

   Back in the lab, Couch sits at a computer screen, tapping out a message to a
collaborator in another state. It's these little moments of having something to
share -- as much as the pressure of competition -- that motivate him.

   "Every day or every couple of days, we find a new piece of information about
some gene in the region," he says. "And it's that impression that this might be
the gene, I think, that keeps people going . . . It's like that every day --
we're just moving on an extra little bit."

   When there's a small success, "everybody's perked up for a day or so -- it's
great," says Couch. "Then it's just a matter of moving it on to the next
experiment to see if it really means anything." That can stretch on for weeks,
as euphoria fades to tedium and, finally, disappointment when they realize the
gene they've picked isn't the right one.

   As the team closes in on the gene, "it gets scarier," Weber says. "The more
you work on it, the more each person has invested in it, the more they want to
feel like all their last three years' worth of work hasn't been for nothing if
somebody else finds it."

   Even on successful days, when spirits are high, you won't find the lab crew
knocking off work early to hit happy hour at a nearby bar. There just isn't time
to goof off.

   Most days, there's barely time for lunch. Posted on a wall beside a
"Universal Blood and Body Fluid Precautions" chart is a take-out menu from
Angelo's sandwich shop, just down the street from the lab.

   "If it weren't for this place, we'd starve," laughs Merajver, whose usual
lunch from the restaurant is turkey on homemade-style bread and a double
cappuccino made with skim milk. After lunch, she'll work until dinner time, then
go home for a few hours with her family. When her two youngest children, David,
7, and Anna, 9 months, are in bed, she'll slip back to the lab and work until
after midnight. Couch and another post-doc, Kenneth Abel, often are there, too.

   Even on Saturdays and Sundays, the lab isn't empty. Over one glorious June
weekend, when everyone else in the world seemed to be loafing, Merajver squeezed
in just enough time at home to throw a birthday party for David. Then she was
back in the lab. With Weber leaving soon, Merajver and Abel are busier than
ever, setting up their own labs to keep the project going at U-M.

   A native of Argentina who decided at age 5 that she wanted to "discover
something completely new that no one else knows about," Merajver has spent her
whole life gearing up for the kind of career she now has.

   "I confess that even though I have many other things that interest me
tremendously -- the arts and music and literature -- I have made such a
commitment to research, it is so important, that I have consciously neglected
those things," she says.

   But it's not a sacrifice, she insists, because she's so "very, very happy"
when she's busy in the lab.

   Out of the ivory tower

   An outsider could sit through a lab meeting or spend a day in Lab 5514 and
never figure out that the research being done and discussed has anything to do
with breast cancer.

   There's talk of "contigs" (continuous stretches of DNA, pieced together from
smaller lengths) and YACs (yeast artificial chromosomes -- used for reproducing
long pieces of DNA), but on most days, no mention of the disease and its
consequences for the women who develop it.

   But spend even a few minutes in the U-M Breast Care Center, where Weber and
Merajver see patients weekly, and the realities of breast cancer -- devastating
diagnoses, debilitating treatments, doubtful futures -- are impossible to
escape.

   Doctors in white coats sit around a long table in the staff room, studying
the files of patients they're about to see and conferring about the cases.

   "Biopsy . . . mastectomy . . . breast-conserving therapy . . . radiation . .
. chemotherapy," are words that buzz around the table again and again.

   It's clear just how welcome any discovery would be that might make it
possible to catch cancer earlier, sparing women the anguish of losing a breast
and the discomfort of treatment side effects.

   Most of the patients Merajver sees know her only as a caring doctor who
decides whether they need chemotherapy and if so, may oversee their treatment.
She listens compassionately to their fears and patiently answers their
questions, acting as if she had no other demands on her time. Few patients
realize she and her coworkers are putting in grueling hours doing research that
could lay the groundwork for ways of diagnosing and treating cancer when it
involves only a few thousand cells in the body. Today, doctors feel fortunate if
they find a tumor as small as a few hundred million cells.

   Once in awhile, someone picks up a clue to Merajver's other life.

   They'll ask why she looks tired or why her eyes are red, and she'll answer,
"Oh, I worked in the lab late last night."

   "They say, 'The lab?' Then, if they ask me, I tell them about it, and they're
always very excited," often asking if there's any way they can help with the
research, says Merajver.

   The women's altriusm humbles Merajver and fuels her determination.

   "There are a lot of people at risk, a lot of people affected. I just feel
that if you can make even a very small contribution, it affects potentially so
many people, it's just too tempting to do anything else," she says.

   Yet Merajver and her colleagues know that finding the gene -- for all the
fanfare it will get -- will still be a small contribution.

   "This isn't going to change anybody's life overnight," Weber cautions. "I
mean, it will be very exciting, but all it will do is open up a whole new phase
of work that needs to be done."

   Although breast cancer strikes one in 10 American women and kills about
50,000 a year, most breast cancer is not the inherited form. Scientists believe
the BRCA1 gene is involved only in about 2 to 4 percent of all breast cancer.

   Everyone is born with two copies of the BRCA1 gene, and in most people, both
copies are normal. But some people are born with one defective copy. If the
second copy gets damaged somehow, cancer develops -- at least this is how
scientists think it works.

   Women who carry the defective gene have an 85-percent chance of developing
breast cancer, ovarian cancer or both, usually before age 50. The gene also may
play a part in colon and prostate cancer.

   Finding BRCA1 would make it possible to test people to see if they carry the
defective gene. But such a test probably will never be used to screen all women
-- only those with a family history of breast cancer, says Weber.

   Winner's circle

   It's late afternoon in Lab 5514. Outside, thunder is cracking. Lightning
flashes like strobe lights, rain pelts the windows and the sky has taken on an
ominous, greenish cast. Merajver doesn't even glance outside. The only glow
she's aware of is the one from her computer screen, where she's poring over
data.

   She takes off her glasses, rubs her eyes, then rubs them again. It's been a
long day, and it isn't over yet. Even though she's tired and has been feeling a
little dizzy this afternoon, she'll either return to the lab or work at her
computer at home tonight.

   Yet for all the dedication of Merajver and her colleagues -- today and every
day -- she insists she won't be crushed if the their team isn't first to find
the BRCA1 gene.

   "Let's face it," she says, "I am such a small player in such a big group that
I will be extremely, extremely happy -- it will be one of the happiest days of
my life -- if anybody around the world finds the gene."

   She pauses for a moment, then lets out a playful laugh.

   "Well, maybe I'll be a percentage happier if we win."

   THE PLAYERS

   University of Michigan scientists and physicians, vying with at least five
other teams of researchers around the world.

   THE COMPETITION

   To be first to find the cause of an inherited form of breast cancer that
strikes an estimated 3,600 to 7,300 American women annually.

   THE QUARRY

   A gene called BRCA1 that, if defective, leads to breast and ovarian cancer
and may play a role in colon and prostate cancer.

   THE STAKES

   For researchers, prestige, career advancement and grant money for future
projects.

   For people who may carry the defective gene, tests to show who has the gene
and, possibly, earlier detection and treatment of cancer.

   CUTLINE:

   Breast cancer researchers Dr. Sofia Merajver and Dr. Junzhe Xu study film
showing filters containing hybridized DNA that has been radioactively labeled,
in the lab at the University of Michigan.

   Dr. Sofia Merajver stands on tiptoe, to get close to her work. At right,
Martha Chen, a U-M undergraduate majoring in biology, does some work in the lab.

   Genetic material is put onto plates at the lab. At meetings, the team reviews
techniques.

   Like the rest of the team, Dr. Sofia Merajver (above) puts in long, wearying
hours at work. Left, she talks with Elizabeth Petty, who works in another U-M
lab.

   Dr. Ken Abel, center of photo at left, and Dr. Fergus Couch, post-doctoral
fellows at U-M working to find the breast cancer gene, meet with Dr. Sofia
Merajver. Merajver, above, believes the gene might be found faster if all
scientists shared their knowledge, but that's not the way it works.

   In her other role as Mom, Dr. Sofia Merajver hugs her son, David, 7. Once her
kids are in bed, she often returns to the lab.

   Georgia Shultz works for Comprehensive Breast Centers in Ann Arbor, but her
interest in breast cancer goes beyond her job: She's a high risk because the
disease runs in her family.

   Dr. Francis Collins and Dr. Barbara Weber lead the research team at U-M,
Collins from his office at the National Institutes of Health in Maryland.

   ***

NOTES: SEE CHART IN MICROFILM

GRAPHIC: Photo PAULINE LUBENS; Map; Chart

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             706 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 31, 1994, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: City Times; Page 9

LENGTH: 544 words

HEADLINE: COMMUNITY NEWS: EAST:  BOYLE HEIGHTS;
RESEARCH CENTER TO AID MINORITIES

BYLINE: By MARY ANNE PEREZ

BODY:

   U.S. Surgeon General M. Joycelyn Elders visited County-USC Medical Center
last week to celebrate the opening of a research center that she said will help
future clinical studies include more women and minorities, groups that have been
neglected or underrepresented.

   "The opening of this center is very important not only for this city and this
county, but for this country to train young people in research that will help
develop the treatments of the future," Elders said before cutting the ribbon to
the new ward Tuesday.

   General Hospital's new General Clinical Research Center will continue the
hospital's research efforts of the last 30 years, but is now a designated ward
which will help researchers have more control over their studies.

   Funded by a $2-million grant from the National Institutes of Health, the
14-bed facility will explore treatments for AIDS, diabetes, other metabolic
disorders and gene therapy. The center also has an outpatient service,
laboratories, nutrition service and a computer center to track research data.

   Elders stressed the importance of getting more new drugs on the market as
quickly as possible to help fight HIV, AIDS and other diseases.

   The new center is just feet away from the hospital's AIDS ward, which will
enable researchers to more closely study drugs used in the treatment of the
disease, said lab director Carole Spencer.

   County-USC researchers alone examine 28,000 blood specimens and 3,000 urine
samples a year to track the changes in response to new drugs, Spencer said.
"That's why we need the center," she said. "We can't do that sort of thing in
the rest of the hospital because it has to be controlled."

   Patients in clinical studies must be put on a strict diet so researchers can
gauge how different foods affect patients' reactions to medicines. Even the
meals must be studied to determine how much sodium, for example, is being
consumed by a patient; so for every meal a patient eats, the kitchen cooks an
identical meal for the lab to study.

   Even after medicines have been proven to be effective in laboratory studies,
clinical trials must be conducted before they can be given to the public. The
National Institutes of Health has established 74 specially designed clinical
research centers -- including the center at County-USC -- in teaching hospitals
and universities nationwide.

   Elders said that research centers have become a more vital part of medicine
as health care has changed over the years. No longer are hospitals the main
source of medical care, she said, because technology and payment policies have
allowed services to be provided in community clinics and as part of in-home
care.

   "There is no question that in order to meet the future demands of a reformed
health-care system, primary care must play a central role in correcting the
existing inequities in access to health care and also in improving the health of
all Americans," Elders said.

   "Today, there is a significant gap between the importance of these crucial
services and the research under way that is designed to improve the practice and
organization of primary care.

   "The work you are doing here at the Clinical Research Center now and in the
future will serve to close this gap." MARY ANNE PEREZ

GRAPHIC: Photo, U.S. Surgeon General M. Joycelyn Elders cuts the ribbon to open
the General Clinical Research Center.  KYNDELL THOMPSON / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1994


                             707 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

BODY:

   What would happen if a disturbed genius figured out a way to infiltrate the
navigation systems of all American commercial aircraft in flight? That's the
plot of ALL FALL DOWN, a big, exciting book by Lee Gruenfeld (Warner, $21.95).
Mr. Gruenfeld, himself a pilot and computer specialist, has a great deal going
for him. He knows the field; he has thoroughly researched the role of the
various agencies that spring into action when there are airline problems; and,
best of all, he is an accomplished writer. The ending is one of the more
harrowing and suspenseful that anybody is going to encounter. But the story is
told in smooth reportorial fashion, with little hyped-up, artificial prose.

   The author is obviously in love with the romance of flying, but he seldom
gets sentimental about it. His characters are believable, and they talk
understandable and sometimes even literate English.

    During the course of the novel, one wonders if all the flashbacks are
necessary. Do they slow the progress of the main plot line? As it turns out,
everything is finally brought together in a way that clarifies not only the
action but also the psychological hang-ups of the various characters.

   Books about flying do not come much better than this one.

   How many novels have you come across in which the heroine is a girl under the
age of 4? That is the case in JUPITER'S DAUGHTER, by Tom Hyman (Viking, $21.95),
a thriller with elements of science fiction. A genetic researcher works to
develop a superior human being and actually succeeds. Needing money to complete
his project, he puts his work up for auction. An American financier captures the
project, but a German dragon lady is not going to let it get away so easily.

   The child who results from the union of the financier and his wife, aided by
the scientist's recombinant gene therapy, really is the next order of the human
race. What on earth -- or beyond earth -- will she become as she matures?

   In view of recent developments in genetic research, one can believe the basic
premise. Unfortunately, the characters -- aside from the child -- are
stereotypes. Yet the idea behind "Jupiter's Daughter" is gripping, and at the
end there is a big scare that will bring the reader up short.

   RED TRANCE, by R. D. Zimmerman (Morrow, $20), is the latest in the series
featuring Maddy and Alex Phillips. She is a blind, paraplegic forensic
hypnotist, and he is her brother and general factotum.

   The novel is narrated by Alex under hypnosis as he tells Maddy what happened
on his trip to St. Petersburg, where he looked up two old friends and met a
Russian hypnotist. One of his friends was killed, and Maddy tries to probe her
brother's mind to come up with the real story behind the murder.

   There is a lot about contemporary Russia, suffering from inflation, crime and
corruption. We have read much of this before. But the writing is deft, and the
characterizations are acutely observed.

   The former tennis champion Brad Smith returns in THE DAVIS CUP CONSPIRACY, by
Jack M. Bickham (Forge/Tom Doherty, $22.95). This time he is the captain of a
United States Davis Cup team playing in Venezuela. Once again the C.I.A. asks
him to do a small job. No danger, of course.

   So Smith finds himself mixed up in a revolution against a smarmy and hateful
dictator. The novel makes for nice reading and is presented with Mr. Bickham's
usual skill.

   DREAMER, by Scott Amour (Northwest Publishing, paper, $7.95), is a short,
pungent novel about a man who goes to Thailand to save his no-good younger
brother from a drug lord he double-crossed. There is an explosive and unexpected
finale, as well as sharp and sophisticated writing.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1994


                             708 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994, The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                      July 31, 1994, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SUN. MAG, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 3948 words

HEADLINE: A Life Lived To The Fullest

BYLINE: FLETCHER DOYLE

BODY:


   It was a day we knew would come, sooner not later -- the day my little
 sister died. The whole family knew the odds of survival. Doctors level with
 all patients with cystic fibrosis, a hereditary disease that slashes at the
 lungs until they are too scarred to work. It is a death sentence present at
 birth. There is almost no chance at clemency. The reward for good behavior
 is a little more time.

   Leslie Doyle Bowen had more time than most. She was first diagnosed at the
 U.S. Public Health Hospital in Baltimore at the age of 12 and she lived
 beyond her 32nd birthday. Life expectancy at the time of her diagnosis was
 17.

   The first comprehensive report of CF as a separate disease wasn't made
 until 1938, only 22 years be fore Leslie was born. Therefore, many doctors
 in the 1960s were unfamiliar with the particulars of the illness, and
 Leslie's childhood symptoms were so mild they might not have seen them had
 they known what to look for.

   The symptom that tipped off the public health doctor was pneumonia, a
 chronic problem for CF sufferers. Our mother said that, at the time, she was
 relieved to be given a reason for Leslie's difficulties, ignorant of the
 disease's consequences. After all, her daughter didn't appear to be in
 danger.

   However, there were many clues that she was. There were the hacking cough,
 the expanded rib cage on an otherwise skinny frame (a sign of chronic
 breathing difficulties), and the digestive problems (cystic fibrosis also
 hinders the work of the pancreas). Doctors couldn't piece together these
 puzzling symptoms, and prescribed only a change in diet to foods that didn't
 contain wheat. This change -- to bologna roll-ups (no bread) and rice cakes
 -- set her apart from the peanut butter-and-jelly crowd and brought ridicule
 in the school cafeteria.

   Her toilet troubles, brought on by the digestive problems, were pointed
 out to her in the not-so-gentle way children have of elevating themselves in
 the schoolyard pecking order. The effect was to make her maddeningly
 defensive and too embarrassed to use a public restroom for the rest of her
 life.

   Dr. Beryl Rosenstein, director of the Cystic Fibrosis Center at the Johns
 Hopkins Hospital, confirmed the diagnosis. But even when he spelled out the
 grim scenario she faced, there was no shattering of a preteen's belief in
 her own indestructibility. Leslie was going to beat this disease for which
 there is no cure, or at least live a full and normal life.

   Doctors helped her in her pursuit, giving her pills to replace digestive
 enzymes her body would not produce. She took them by the handful with each
 meal, leaning her head back like a hungry baby robin and swallowing as many
 as a dozen at a time. These allowed her finally to take sandwiches in her
 lunch box. Potato chips were devoured by the bag, her need for salt
 providing a handy excuse for overindulging. (CF sufferers secrete two to
 five times more salt in their sweat than those not afflicted.)

   Leslie gave herself a mandate to live, and cited it to waive off
 remonstrations that she should take care of herself. Rather than become
 melancholy over her outrageous fortune, she honed a sense of humor that
 would make her a delight to be around. She left no joke untold, no dance
 undanced, no curfew unmissed. That made her not atypical of other teens of
 the 1970s, except that others' indiscretions might not tear the pages off
 the back of a thin calendar.

   She had been taught to perform chest therapy -- pounding on her chest and
 back to loosen the thick, sticky mucous that clogs the CF patient's lungs
 and hinders breathing -- but in those years she rarely felt badly enough to
 do it.

   Leslie played her way through Towson High School, even spending two years
 on the badminton team -- proving our dad, a collegiate tennis player, passed
 something on to her besides the gene for CF. (He died of cancer in 1966,
 leaving our mother alone to raise two boys and two girls between the ages of
 5 and 15. This was before Leslie's illness was identified.) Her athletics
 were something others similarly afflicted could only dream about.

   She once told me she didn't set any long-term goals because she didn't
 expect to live long enough to see them realized. The gravity of her
 situation was impressed upon her during nearly every visit to the Johns
 Hopkins Hospital, as the number of her peers decreased. But still she
 carried on like a person with a future.

   She enrolled at Villa Julie College, a two-year school in Stevenson,
 studying to become a medical secretary. She also joined the disco craze,
 catching Saturday Night Fever several evenings a week.

   "She was my most disobedient child," our mother says affectionately. "She
 was just a fun lover."

   "She liked to party and used to tell us about it, show us pictures of her
 trips to the Caribbean," Dr. Rosenstein says. "Every experience was a wonder
 to her. She didn't let things keep her down. She wanted to do everything."

   One of two big breaks in her life happened at the end of her time at Villa
 Julie, when she interned in the office of a doctor who was not put off by
 her disease.

   "We were well aware of her physical condition," says Dr. Lee Gresser, a
 family practitioner in Towson. "The school told us about it, that she was a
 fair-to-good student who would need supervision for awhile, and would we
 take on such a person to train."

   Dr. Gresser hired Leslie after her internship and employed her the rest of
 her life, even though she took a lot of sick days and needed long lunch
 breaks so she could do her now-essential chest therapy.

   "There were times she would be ill and we would compensate for it," Dr.
 Gresser says. "We understood Leslie's problems and respected that."

   Leslie's problems allowed her to empathize with the doctor's patients, and
 so she treated them as she wished to be treated. "She thought she was Dr.
 Gresser," the doctor says. "She would treat people on the phone; she was
 trying to help people in her own way. She let people cry on her shoulder,
 never let her disease cry on theirs. She never talked to people about her
 disease. Patients wondered why she coughed so much.

   "Her one problem was she was so nice to patients she would spend too much
 time on the phone. . . . Despite Leslie's minor faults, she had such a great
 personality that we tolerated it."

   Her second big break was meeting Albert "Duke" Bowen when she was in her
 early 20s. Duke knew the sacrifices he would need to make to live with her,
 that there was no chance of growing old with her. Still, he says, "I didn't
 see it as an undertaking. I thought of it more as selfishness on my part. I
 loved everything about Leslie, she had such a strong spirit. She taught me a
 lot of things. I miss her so much. She was my everything, everything I see
 as positive in life."

   He picked the beach at Ocean City, one of Leslie's favorite places, to
 make his marriage proposal but she wouldn't cooperate. They were there with
 an other couple and she resisted his pleas to go off somewhere by
 themselves.

   "Why are you being so gooey?" she would cackle when telling others this
 tale.

   "She finally agreed to take this mysterious walk down to the water," Duke
 says. "On our way to the water I put the ring on the pinky finger of my
 right hand, and tried to flash it to get her to notice. As we sat by the
 water, I put my hand on her knee and thigh, but still no response.

   "I said, 'Do you notice anything?' " and said the ring was for her. I
 think she forgot to answer. . . . When I proposed, she just dropped her jaw,
 said, 'Oh my gosh,' " and took off up the beach . She wanted to spread the
 news. . . . She did remember to take the ring.

   They were married at Second Presbyterian Church in Guilford on June 18,
 1988, so Leslie had a chance to taste all of the flavors of adult life
 except parenthood. Her maternal instincts were lavished instead on animals.
 She would stop her car to admonish people who were too harshly disciplining
 their pets. Her boss would bring his golden retriever to the office, and the
 dog would spend the day at her feet. She adored the family dog, a black
 Lhasa Apso who returned her affection. On the morning of her wedding, the
 photographer tried to shoo the dog from his accustomed position at her feet,
 only to be told by the bride the pose was perfect. It was Leslie's favorite
 photo of the day.

   But not all was picture-perfect. In 1986, one of her lungs had collapsed,
 and with it her confidence in her ability to beat CF. If that were to happen
 to an otherwise healthy person, doctors would simply reinflate the lung.
 Leslie required surgery. Doctors created adhesions in the reinflated lung so
 it would stick to the chest cavity, then stapled the holes closed so it
 wouldn't collapse again.

   The lung collapse brought her face-to-face with her future, and with it
 the fear of the hardships she had seen her late friends suffer at the CF
 clinic. Worse yet was the removal of the tubes inserted through her chest
 during surgery. Leslie had asked to be tranquilized during the procedure.

   "She hated procedures as a patient. Hated most anything," Dr. Rosenstein
 says. "She admitted she was a coward."

   While one of the nurses was getting the medication, a tired intern grew
 impatient with the wait and yanked out the tubes without warning.

   Hurting and furious, Leslie cried and cried. "It was the worst experience
 she had," our mother remembers.

   A far more cruel blow was delivered just three weeks before her wedding.
 Her other lung collapsed. She required more surgery, and there was concern
 she wouldn't be healthy enough to make the walk down the aisle. When Leslie
 arrived at the rehearsal dinner, our family's worries multiplied. Her face
 was the color of cream sauce, the smile absent. She left while everyone was
 still on the entree; we finished eating subdued, without appetite.

   No one could have imagined then the joy of the next day. Mom said Leslie
 seemed to get a shot of adrenaline from having her attendants, which
 included our sister, Laurie, and my 3-year-old daughter, around her. Cliches
 such as "radiant bride" fit her as well as her wedding dress. When the new
 Mrs. Bowen triumphantly faced the rice-clutching crowd at the top of the
 church's steps, I greeted her with a shower of tears.

   "The circumstances around her wedding were unbelievable," says Dr.
 Rosenstein. "It was incredible she was able to recover from her surgery, get
 on her feet and walk down the aisle as a beautiful bride. It was amazing."

   The doctor attended almost as a proud father who had guided Leslie through
 life's trials. "Being able to go to her wedding was a reward," he says,
 "because years back patients didn't have weddings."

   The reception was held at the Baltimore Museum of Art. Leslie stayed until
 the end, requiring only a short rest to make it through the celebration.

   Leslie and Duke waited months to go on their honeymoon to the Caribbean,
 and in that time her condition worsened. She could hardly walk down the hall
 of their hotel without getting winded, but she pushed herself because she
 didn't want to spoil the occasion. She came home with pneumonia, which
 forced her to go on oxygen in early 1989; she could never get by without it
 again.

   She didn't allow her spirit to drop with her condition. Instead, she kept
 up the pleasant demeanor that gave patients such a good first impression of
 Dr. Gresser's practice.

   "She didn't dwell, or tried not to dwell, on the ultimate problem she
 would have to face," says Judy Gresser, the doctor's wife and Leslie's first
 office manager. "She didn't ask for sympathy. . . ."

   If there was tension in the office, Leslie broke it, carrying laughter
 with her, along with the oxygen bottle that perpetually hung on her
 shoulder.

   "Her facial expressions could just break you up," Mrs. Gresser says. "It
 was like a running comic strip, her wacky kind of offbeat humor. You could
 tell she was having a bad day if she was quieter."

   Sometimes even the bad days didn't slow her down. The family took Leslie
 to see "Alien 3," and she needed several rest stops just to navigate the
 theater lobby. The effort of the evening took its toll: By the end of the
 less-than-memorable movie, her skin had turned blue, and everyone's mood
 matched. Still, she delivered a comic critique of the film far more
 devastating than two thumbs down, contorting the family's looks of concern
 into convulsions of laughter.

   But inside, no one was smiling, because we knew the statistics. Cystic
 fibrosis is the most common fatal genetic disease in the United States.
 Every year, one in 2,000 babies are born with it, and a total of 3,000 cases
 are diagnosed annually, but there are only 30,000 people alive with the
 disease today. That number is much larger than in years past: When Leslie
 was diagnosed, the life expectancy was 17 years; when she died it was 27.
 The increase was brought on by the use of antibiotics that fight the
 damaging infections.

   The infections grow as the thick, sticky mucous clogs the lungs more and
 more. The CF patient submits to pounding of the chest and back to loosen the
 mucous enough to spit it into a bucket. There are drugs to thin the mucous
 so it can be expectorated faster. But all of the treatments so far only
 delay the patient's demise, they don't prevent it.

   In her late 20s, Leslie was spending as many as five hours a day doing the
 nauseating therapy. She reluctantly had a gastrotomy feeding tube inserted
 so she could keep on the weight needed to fight on. She required quarterly
 "tuneups" in the hospital, a two-week intravenous course of antibiotics --
 stronger than you can get by mouth or aerosol -- and more intensive chest
 therapy.

   There was no such thing as popping out of bed in the morning; she needed
 two hours for pounding and then time to force some breakfast into her
 roiling stomach. She worked a noon-to-10 p.m. shift that gave her two hours
 at lunch for more therapy.

   The good-time girlfriends from the disco days were gone now, leaving
 behind a loyal group that would gather at Leslie and Duke's apartment in
 Northeast Baltimore, play Monopoly, fix meals and watch the pets play while
 Leslie would go through her treatments.

   People were always waiting for her. She never ate a holiday meal with her
 gathered relatives. After work and more therapy, she would make a grand
 entrance during dessert and entertain us while eating our leftovers.

   We began gobbling up news of the latest medical advances, hoping that in
 the tortoise and hare race between research and the breakdown of Leslie's
 body, the tortoise would miraculously win. While we watched this race being
 lost, she won our hearts.

   "Leslie was a role model for the other patients who knew her; the nursing
 staff and medical staff had a lot of love for Leslie," Dr. Rosenstein says.
 "She wasn't just waiting for 32 years to die. She was determined to make
 something of her life and she did it."

   "She was intensely proud that she was a physician's personal secretary,
 proud this was her responsibility," Judy Gresser says. "If I felt the way
 she felt, I could never have dragged myself in to work . It had to be a
 tremendous effort."

   And then, in 1992, there was a ray of hope. There was a doctor at the
 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Medical Center who was having
 success with lung transplants. Leslie talked on the phone to a man in his
 late 20s who had undergone the procedure; he had just finished playing
 tennis and was having fun filling the time he used to spend in chest
 therapy.

   I begged her to apply for the surgery right away, but Leslie was leery and
 afraid of the rehabilitation. "She had more fear of pain and painful
 procedures than of dying," Dr. Rosenstein says. She also feared dying on the
 operating table and preferred to live all the days her lungs would allow
 rather than take a chance on giving up even one.

   She took months to gather her courage, but finally she, Mom and Duke
 headed for North Carolina. There, she was subjected to days of grueling
 tests to determine if she was a candidate for a transplant. In the worst of
 these, an incision was made in the femoral artery in her leg, where a
 catheter was inserted and pushed all the way to her heart. When the catheter
 was removed, the surgeon stopped the bleeding by applying so much pressure
 to the wound that it caused severe bruising. Then, a 10-pound bag of sand
 was placed on her leg and she was told to lie still, on her back, for eight
 hours. "This made it very difficult for her, because she didn't breathe well
 lying flat," Duke says. "That was very scary to her when she couldn't get a
 breath."

   This pain paled next to what she felt when the doctors turned her down.
 She was relieved at not having to go through the surgery, but devastated
 that there was nothing more that could be done for her.

   Surgeons had seen through the catheter a heart damaged by the stress of
 two lung collapses. Removing lungs attached to her pleura cavity would cause
 so much bleeding her weakened heart couldn't cope. The surgery she couldn't
 live without she wouldn't live through.

   I had a week off from my job as a sports copy editor at the Buffalo (N.Y.)
 News at Thanksgiving, a few months after her rejection, and drove with my
 family from Buffalo to Baltimore. My mother's four children used her home in
 Stoneleigh as a gathering point. This is where we usually saw Leslie, who
 because she was dependent on Mom, never lived more than a few miles away.

   But on this occasion, I made a point of taking my family for a long visit
 to her apartment. She showed it off proudly, and we spent hours watching our
 dogs play and laughing as if nothing was wrong. My wife, Tracy, a physical
 therapist, performed the therapeutic pounding for Leslie, who was exhausted
 by the holiday demands and too tired to do it herself.

   On the way back to Mom's house, recalling Leslie's tubes, her lack of
 color and her face made puffy by the drug Prednisone, Tracy and I wondered
 if this would be the last time we would see my sister.

   With the end of hope, Leslie's spirits drooped. She had longer and more
 frequent periods of depression. To combat this, Duke and their friends
 hatched a plan. The B-52's, a favorite band of Duke and Leslie's because of
 its upbeat style, would be in concert at Georgetown University's Smith
 Center on Jan. 16, 1993.

   "As soon as I heard they were on tour I ordered tickets," Duke says. "Then
 I worried Leslie wouldn't want to go; she didn't want to get too far from
 the hospital or her mother. She was self-conscious in public carrying the
 oxygen. It was against her nature to have those feelings because she still
 loved people and parties, but she felt isolated.

   "I wanted to make sure she felt comfortable so I called the Smith Center,
 got ahold of the production manager there, and made some special
 arrangements so we could be seated without a lot of walking; she wasn't
 strong enough to do all that maneuvering. They were very accommodating. He
 made sure we had a special entrance, he made sure we were escorted by the
 shortest route possible to our seats. He had reserved a spot for her on the
 floor, and made sure we didn't have to deal with any steps.

   "As Leslie put it, it was just like the old times. We hadn't really been
 out to any event, out on a date, in a long time. We just really had the best
 time. I was so happy to see her forget about things for awhile. She forgot
 about the oxygen, and was dancing."

   My mother called, ecstatic, to tell me the news, that Leslie had actually
 gone dancing, an act for which she had been admonished half a life ago.

   It was just nine weeks later that Tracy called me at work and said:
 "Leslie has died." The day was March 24, the 36th birthday of my sister
 Laurie.

   Our family, spread out from the Gulf Coast to the Great Lakes, began
 assembling in Baltimore on March 26. The mood was surprisingly upbeat.
 Leslie had feared lingering in the hospital, tied down by tubes and pinned
 down by needles. She didn't want to suffer, and at the end, she didn't.

   On her last morning, as Leslie was struggling to prepare for work, she
 began having trouble breathing. So she phoned Dr. Gresser's office to say
 she wouldn't be in.

   "The day that she died, I heard from her that morning and knew she was
 supposed to go to the clinic," Dr. Gresser says. "Two hours later they
 called us to tell us she was dead. We couldn't believe it; we had just seen
 her. We thank God she lived that long. She appreciated the fact that she was
 one of the oldest living CF patients."

   Leslie phoned Dr. Sandra Walden, head of adult CF patients at Johns
 Hopkins, and told her she was feeling worse than she ever had before. Dr.
 Walden told her to come right in. Our mother was in Florida; she had passed
 up many trips to stay near Leslie in those last years, but had allowed
 herself this pleasure. Leslie declined an ambulance ride so she could make
 the half-hour trip with Duke, who said later he assumed she just needed
 another tuneup.

   Doctors at Johns Hopkins recognized Leslie was deteriorating quickly and
 asked permission to intervene aggressively. When Leslie, who had been
 preparing for this moment for years, refused, the physicians got Dr. Walden
 on an emergency-room phone and asked for her support. She told them they
 were to keep their hands off.

   Dr. Walden then met with Leslie and told her she was dying. She accepted
 the news with a glance at Duke.

   "I was with Leslie the whole way, they kicked me out for just a few
 minutes," he says. "I was holding hands with her the whole time, trying to
 encourage her to stay with us."

   Dr. Rosenstein said blood gases often get out of whack for those with CF,
 causing them to get hazy, then comatose. This is what happened to my sister.
 Dr. Walden says Leslie was alert for about 15 minutes after arriving at the
 hospital, and then she just slipped away. She died about an hour after her
 arrival.

   And so we gathered to celebrate her life instead of her death. At Second
 Presbyterian Church, where the funeral was held, photographs were spread out
 on the church piano for us to laugh over. My brother, Steve, in delivering
 the eulogy, demonstrated for the mourners the face that only he and Leslie
 were talented enough to make -- top lip left, bottom lip right so that they
 draw a diagonal line. We all laughed in recognition.

   The gene that causes CF was discovered in 1989, but Dr. Rosenstein
 believes it will be at least seven more years before gene therapy can solve
 the pulmonary problems that killed Leslie. However, there are some CF
 sufferers for whom this cure may not be too late. And so we take part in the
 Great Strides walk, an annual fund-raiser for the CF Foundation; we donate
 money; we vow never to stop fighting this disease. Leslie never did.

   FLETCHER DOYLE is a sportswriter for the Buffalo News.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO 1, Photographs courtesy of Betty Doyle King, Leslie and her

 husband, Duke Bowen, in their Northeast  Baltimore apartment in January
 1993. They'd attended a concert  of the B-52's in Washington a few hours
 earlier.; COLOR PHOTO 2, Photographs courtesy of Betty Doyle King, Above:
 Leslie at age 1, being held by her mother, Betty. Left:  Leslie in a school
 photo at 12, the age at which she was  diagnosed with cystic fibrosis.;
 COLOR PHOTO 3, Photographs courtesy of Betty Doyle King, SAME AS COLOR PHOTO
 2; COLOR PHOTO 4, Photographs courtesy of Betty Doyle King, Blackie, the
 family's Lhasa apso, insisted on being included  in the photographs on
 Leslie's wedding day, June 18, 1988.; COLOR PHOTO 5, Photographs courtesy of
 Betty Doyle King, Erin Doyle, the author's daughter, shares a moment with
  Aunt Leslie at a family gathering on Thanksgiving Day 1992. It  was
 Leslie's last Thanksgiving.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994


                             709 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 29, 1994, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 803 words

HEADLINE: Dwarfism gene found; reaction is ambivalent;
Some 'little people' fear excess tests

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    A discovery of the gene for the most common form of dwarfism is sending
shivers through the nation's community of "little people," who fear it could
mark another step toward widespread testing aimed at ensuring that only "perfect
children" get born.

   And in another reflection of growing concern about the pace of advances in
genetic testing, even the scientist who found the gene for common dwarfism, or
achondroplasia, says it should be used only to detect the most severely affected
fetuses, who are certain to die.

   "I wanted to let people with achondroplasia know that nobody's going to try
to get rid of all the small people in future generations," said Dr. John Wasmuth
of the University of California in Irvine, whose discovery was announced today
in the journal Cell.

   The news has stirred "a vague kind of fear," says Ruth Ricker of Boston,
president of Little People of America, an organization of people of short
stature. Although achondroplasia falls under federal protections for
disabilities, she said, many "little people" do not consider themselves
disabled.

   In response to those fears, researchers emphasize that it would be virtually
impossible with today's technology to prevent the births of most achondroplastic
dwarfs.

   Most achondroplasia results from a mutation in the reproductive cells of a
parent of average height. Thus, 80 percent of such infants are born to
unsuspecting parents of average size. It would be necessary to test every
pregnant woman to identify most dwarf fetuses. Also, it takes an invasive test
to detect the mutant gene. The tests - amniocentesis or chorionic villus
sampling - are recommended only for women whose risk of an abnormality outweighs
the risk that the test itself will injure the fetus.  Prenatal diagnosis of
genetic conditions and birth defects, long employed for severe disorders such as
Down syndrome, has become increasingly tangled in controversy as new tests
become available, triggering debates over what constitutes a "defect" and what
is simply a variation from the average.

   That is the concern voiced by Marie Trottier, director of the Harvard
University Disabilities Office, who also has dwarfism. "I'm concerned about
people who look at this in a eugenic way, and say, 'This is one more thing that
we can rid you of so that we can produce the perfect baby.' "

   However, many "little people" are hailing the gene discovery, primarily
because it will enable couples to avoid bearing an infant so severely malformed
that it could not survive.

    Achondroplasia is the most common and best-known form of dwarfism. In cases
where dwarfs marry, each of their children has a 25 percent chance of being
unaffected, a 50 percent chance of inheriting one achondroplasia gene, resulting
in dwarfism, and a 25 percent chance of inheriting the gene from both parents
and being so severely affected that early death is certain. It is in the latter
cases the new test may be offered.

   Wasmuth cited one couple, both dwarfs, who had tried to have a child three
times. Each time the fetus inherited the double-dominant condition. "This may be
one of the first couples to benefit" from the test that will soon be available,
he said. It would be unethical to use the test to prevent the birth of a fetus
with only one copy of the gene, he said, but added that ultimately such choices
must be left up to the parents.

   Ricker, of Little People of America, agreed that the discovery is a cause for
joy as well as fear. There are no near-term prospects for gene therapy or for
relieving medical problems associated with achondroplasia, but the gene should
shed light on how the mutation interferes with development.

   Achondroplasia occurs in about 1 in 20,000 births. Affected adults grow to
between 3 feet 11 inches and 4 feet 6, with disproportionately short arms, a
large head and sometimes progressive limb and joint problems. Intelligence is
normal.

   Beth and Jimmy Loyless of Holliston are dwarfs who have an 11-year-old dwarf
son, Alex, and a 9-year-old daughter of average height. "Alex has done very
well," said Beth Loyless."He's active in sports and plays the cornet. So far
he's been able to keep up."

   Dr. Victor McKusick, considered by many the dean of medical genetics, hailed
the discovery of the dwarfism gene. McKusick, of the Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine in Baltimore, edits a compendium of genetic conditions, some
exceedingly rare, that now has about 4,000 entries.

   Wasmuth said he and his colleagues had studied the dwarfism gene about three
years ago when they were racing to find the gene for Huntington's disease.
Although it proved not to be involved in Huntington's, a lethal neurological
disease, the dwarfism gene was known to have a role in regulating tissue growth,
which implicated it in growth disorders.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Jimmy Loyless, his wife Beth (right) and son Alex (left), 11,
are dwarfs; daughter Emily, 9, is of average height.  GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/SUZANNE
KREITER

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1994


                             710 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 27, 1994 Wednesday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-5

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: Panic in the petri dish;
Why the biotechnology industry is in such a cash crunch

BYLINE: THE ECONOMIST

BODY:

   Every so often a cry goes up about the biotechnology industry's unquenchable
thirst for cash: "This just can't go on." It is hardly surprising.

   The industry has drawn in some $60 billion of investment capital over the
past quarter-century ($3.3 billion last year alone), yet still has annual sales
of only $5 billion to show for it. A mere 13 of the 250 publicly quoted biotech
firms in America make money. Yet, each time, after a brief period of downward
profit revisions and warnings about radical restructuring, investors somehow
regain confidence in the industry's prospects -- and the money-guzzling biotech
machine surges into action once again. This has happened at least three times in
the past 10 years -- in 1984, 1986 and 1988. This time, though, things could be
different. Biotechnology stocks have underperformed Wall Street for 18 months --
their longest sub-par performance ever.

   Even cash-rich biotech stars have suffered. After a 40 percent fall in its
share price over the past year, Genetic Therapy, a Maryland firm with a
particularly promising portfolio of drugs and $65 million in the bank, now has a
market capitalization of just $130 million. Even the recent launch of two
potentially blockbusting biotech drugs -- Chiron's Betaseron, to treat multiple
sclerosis, and Genentech's Pulmozyme, to treat the symptoms of cystic fibrosis
-- has done little to bolster biotech shares. Previously loyal investors are
defecting.

   Individual "angels," many of them doctors, have been taking profits by
selling shares; and biotech venture funds, which supplied 12 percent of the
industry's capital in 1993, are now talking of putting their money in other
health-care outfits instead -- medical-devices firms, for example. Biotechnology
has always been a high-risk business, with most investors betting that a few
brilliant products will pay for an enormous number of duds. Four factors make
the gamble seem less tempting now: [] Too many of the drugs are not working.

   In the past two years biotech products have suffered a series of clinical
disasters: They have turned out to cause unwanted side-effects or not to work at
all. Last week the share price of Synergen, a firm based in Boulder, Colo.,
halved after its septic-shock drug, Antril, failed another test and the firm
discontinued it. Other drugs shelved or ditched include Centocor's Centoxin and
Chiron's T-88 (both also septic-shock drugs), MedImmune's RespiGam (respiratory
infection), Magainin's MS-178 (skin disease) and Regeneron's CNTF (nerve
disease). In many cases the blame lies with inexperienced managers, often
ex-scientists, who have tried to rush products through the tedious regulatory
process to meet self-imposed deadlines. But the once-fond notion that because
biotech drugs are drawn from nature they will be easier to approve has also
taken a pasting. Biotech drugs interfere with the body's complex chemical
pathways in ways that the industry's early enthusiasts did not foresee and need
at least as much regulatory oversight as their synthetic cousins. [] The few
biotechnology drugs that have made it past the regulators have had narrower
applications than the industry promised. Most biotech firms were set up to
discover drugs that would eradicate common and hitherto untreatable diseases
like cancer and heart disease. However, the few successes have been much more
modest; they either cure rare diseases or merely treat the symptoms of common
ones. Roche, a Swiss pharmaceutical giant, which spent $2 billion in 1990 for a
60 percent stake in Genentech, now admits that biotechnology will not produce
any major disease-destroying drugs before 1997 at the earliest. [] Investors are
worried about drug price controls proposed in the Clinton health care package.

   Biotech firms say they need to charge high prices to recoup their huge
investments.

   The Clinton administration has also refused special tax breaks for biotech
research. [] Biotechnology patent law is proving particularly fraught.

   In June an appeals court in Massachusetts overturned a previous ruling and
decided that a drug made by Genetics Institute did not infringe Genentech's
patent on a drug called TPA. Sales of TPA, which dissolves blood clots, have now
climbed to $600 million a year -- even though disputes over the patent have been
raging since the 1980s. The signs are that patents will get harder to win, not
easier.

   With the poor record of biotech drugs, the American patent office has begun
to ask for more data about their usefulness before considering patent approvals
-- something it does not do for conventional drugs. A draft European Union
directive on harmonizing patent regulations throughout Europe contains
provisions that suggest ethical questions should be considered as well. The
result of all these problems is a cash crunch. The $3.3 billion raised last year
by the biotech industry was $1.1 billion less than the sum raised in the peak
year of 1991. However, as Steve Burrill, an industry analyst, points out, the
number of biotech firms has increased dramatically -- from 330 to 1,300 over the
past decade. And, as the industry ages, it gets thirstier.

   Setting up a biotechnology research laboratory can cost as little as $5
million.

   But around 50 American biotech firms are established companies with test-tube
ideas they want to turn into marketable products -- a process that can cost $250
million to $500 million. Robert Faulkner, an analyst at the New York office of
S.G. Warburg, reckons that this year the 100 publicly quoted American biotech
firms he follows may raise some $1.5 billion (slightly less than last year) but
will spend more than $2 billion. Faulkner thinks that more than 70 of these
firms could run out of cash within two years. This financial pressure has
already led to management changes that might not seem so extraordinary in less
extravagant industries. Biotech firms are contracting out more of their work,
including manufacturing and drug approvals.

   They are also "renegotiating their portfolios" -- i.e., weeding them out. For
instance, Genentech has transferred its marketing rights to a bactericidal drug,
BPI, to Incyte, a smaller biotech firm which had discovered the drug. Such
changes save money, but only for a while.

   In the past, one investor or another has always ridden to the rescue.

   This time hopes are pinned on traditional pharmaceutical firms, which need to
bolster their R&D. The drug firms have made some investments -- particularly in
biotech firms developing ways to screen molecules for possible new drugs.
Earlier this year Eli Lilly acquired one such biotech firm called Sphinx for $72
million.

   But Lilly is also trying to hive off two other biotech firms it had
previously acquired.

   In fact, the pharmaceutical firms' interest in biotechnology is too narrow
for them to make a convincing seventh cavalry. If they are to recapture the
affections of investors, biotech firms will have to change shape through
takeovers and other restructurings. Venture capitalists are already muttering
about merging firms in their own portfolios.

   On July 18 Synergen, after announcing the withdrawal of Antril, said it was
ready for a merger or a sale. A wave of takeovers may be no bad thing.

   Unlike, say, the semiconductor industry, which was built around one
invention, biotechnology is spread across a wide range of technologies. Too many
small biotech firms have only one piece of this R&D puzzle.

   By joining them together and stripping out the duplicate parts, a ruthless
bioconglomerateur might be able to assemble a whole that was greater than the
sum of its parts.

   With prices where they are now, it might even be a bargain.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: NANCY OHANIAN

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             711 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1994 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                          July 26, 1994, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: Mayo researchers start trials on gene therapy for cancer;
 Success could mean 'totally new' treatment method

BYLINE: Lewis Cope; Staff Writer

BODY:

    Mayo Clinic researchers have begun the nation's first trials of a gene
therapy in colon cancer patients that might open the door to saving many lives.

    Three patients have received a drug containing a specific gene that, if the
approach works, will trigger their disease-fighting immune systems to fight
their cancers. Twelve more patients are scheduled to get the treatment in coming
months as part of this highly experimental test at the clinic in Rochester,
Minn.

    Colon cancer is the nation's No. 2 cancer killer, taking the lives of about
50,000 people each year.

    "If gene therapy proves to be successful, it will be a totally new way of
treating cancer patients" that might be useful against many types of cancer,
said Dr. Joseph Rubin, who heads the Mayo study. Researchers elsewhere are
trying this approach with patients who have kidney or skin cancers.

    But Rubin cautioned that it's too early to know whether it will work, and,
even if it does help, whether it has the potential to cure. The trials also must
make sure that there are no unexpected side effects that would limit or prohibit
use of this approach.

    The patients in the Mayo study have colon cancer that has spread to the
liver, causing cancerous tumors to develop there. It's this spread of cancer
that so often kills. The drug with the gene will be injected into one of the
tumors in the liver. If the approach works as hoped:

    - The gene will change the genetic instructions in the tumor's cancer cells
so that they will develop new proteins on their outer surface. This will give
the cells a "foreign" appearance that will make them unlike any other cells in
the body.

    - The patient's own immune system will treat these cancer cells as foreign
invaders, launching an attack to destroy them.

    - Once the body's immune system starts fighting the cancer cells at the
injection site, the immune system may recognize and attack other cancer cells
wherever they are in the body. That has occurred in some animal experiments, but
it's one of the key things that the human trials must determine.

    The body's immune system normally fights another type of "foreign" invader,
germs. But the immune system also can attack donor organs in transplant
recipients. Rubin said that after receiving the drug the patient's body might
reject cancerous tumors much like "a transplant recipient rejecting a nonmatched
organ."

    Similar gene-therapy studies are underway with kidney cancer patients at the
University of Chicago and with malignant melanoma skin cancer patients at the
University of Arizona. And other researchers are exploring putting different
genes into cancerous cells, in hopes of suppressing the cancer process.

    Rubin said there is good reason to believe that the gene therapy may not
have the toxic side effects that can trigger hair loss and nausea when
conventional cancer drugs are used. And if toxic drugs are used in combination
with the gene therapy, smaller doses might be used, with fewer side effects. But
all this remains to be proved.

    The goals of Mayo's current Phase I study are to find the best dose of the
gene-carrying drug to use, to look for any possible side effects as well as
benefits to patients and to determine how best to conduct more advanced trials
in more patients. That might come as soon as next year.

    The drug that the patients are getting, Allovectin-7, is manufactured by
Vical Inc. of San Diego. It contains many copies of the special gene, plus tiny
bits of lipids (fats) that help the genes get into cancerous cells.

    Robert Zaugg, a researcher and official at Vical, said the lipid approach
had worked very well in animal experiments and might help with gene therapy for
other illnesses.  He said the price of the gene-therapy drug could be
competitive with those of other cancer drugs.



LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1994


                             712 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 25, 1994, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Life & Style; Part E; Page 4; Column 1; View Desk

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: RSVP / INTO THE NIGHT:  EVEN DURING HARD TIMES, THERE IS HOPE

BYLINE: By BRIDGET BYRNE, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:

   "I don't know about it being 'hard times,' but it's certainly an emergency
time so we must do all we can do," said Daphna Ziman.

   Ziman, whose husband, Richard, is chairman of the board of City of Hope, had
arranged for the screening of a film version of Charles Dickens' "Hard Times" to
benefit the medical center's AIDS research program.

   The movie, made for British television and being shown for the first time in
America, was directed by Peter Barnes, who received an Oscar nomination for his
"Enchanted April" screenplay. Barnes and Daphna Ziman are adapting the Anthony
Burgess book "One Hand Clapping" into a potential movie.

   Ziman enthusiastically praised Barnes' talents in "translating and creating
literature" for the screen. Also present at the Directors Guild of America,
where a reception followed the screening, were directors Peter Medak, for whom
Barnes wrote the 1971 movie "The Ruling Class," and John Landis, with whom
Barnes worked on a screenplay titled "Cast of Characters."

   "We are both film buffs and we can bore everyone with obscure trivia about
'50s B movies," Barnes said of his friendship with Landis. "Don't get me
started, I'll bore you."

   Ted Danson and Mary Steenburgen, (who found romance working on Medak's movie,
"Pontiac Moon"), British actor David Warner and Millicent and Bob Wise also were
among a crowd that was pleased to see a movie that raised moral issues and gave
actors such juicy roles.

   Filmed on a modest budget of about $1.2 million, the movie was created for
the BBC-TV schools program. "I couldn't have done one of those jolly numbers
with snow falling," said Barnes, who says he is not usually much of a Dickens
fan, but was attracted to the contemporary relevance of this stern critique of
Victorian industrialism.

   "We all say we care about education, so if we do we should do something about
it. The actors understood this was going to be shown to children and teen-agers,
so they were prepared to work for modest pay. That was heartening. That gives
hope," said Barnes, whose cast included such well-known actors as Alan Bates and
Richard E. Grant.

   The screening also gave the City of Hope's Beckman Research Institute another
$20,000 toward its work in using gene therapy in the fight against AIDS.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Ted Danson, Mary Steenburgen arrive for screening of "Hard
Times," which raised $20,000 toward gene therapy AIDS research.  SUNNY SUNG /
For The Times

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1994


                             713 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       July 25, 1994 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 2061 words

HEADLINE: MISUNDERSTOOD MINORITY THEIR APPEARANCE DRAWS THE KIND OF ATTENTION
THAT ALBINOS CAN DO WITHOUT. ABOUT 300 MET IN PHILADELPHIA TO SHARE HORROR
STORIES AND INFORMATION AND TO DISPEL MYTHS ABOUT THEIR INCURABLE CONDITION.

BYLINE: Sue Chastain, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Lee Ryan remembers the nicknames the other kids called her. There was "Casper
the Friendly Ghost." Or, "Tryyyyyy White Cap," they'd jeer, referring to a
cleanser commercial.

   She remembers vividly the winter afternoons riding the school bus back from
junior high to her home in Bucks County.

   "They'd take my hat and throw it all over the bus," said the 26-year-old
computer consultant, tucking a strand of her thick white hair into the French
braid that hung down her back.

   "They knew I couldn't get it back. They'd throw it to a kid by the window,
and by the time my eyes adjusted to the light, they'd throw it to somebody in
back, in the shadows. I lost more hats.

   " I could have pointed the finger at six or seven kids, but what do you do?"

   "I hate keep-away," she added suddenly, frowning. "Children can be so mean."

   Many people at the Adam's Mark Hotel last week could have told similar
stories. It was easy to pick them out from the others - the white or very light
hair, the colorless eyelashes, the pale skin, the thick glasses or hand- held
telescopes.

   They had come here to a conference on albinism, an inherited condition in
which the body produces little or no melanin, the pigment that gives color to
the eyes, skin and hair.

   They had come to share horror stories about living with the condition, dispel
the myths surrounding it, exchange information about it - and, maybe, learn
better ways of coping with a fact of their lives that, many of them say, causes
others to treat them like freaks.

   "Some people feel we're the last minority it's socially acceptable to
persecute," said Jennifer George, 31, product manager for a Chicago computer
consulting firm. George is president of NOAH (National Organization for Albinism
and Hypopigmentation), the Philadelphia group that presented the conference, the
fifth since its founding in 1982.

   The four-day conference attracted 300 people from several countries and
presented a gamut of programs, ranging from advice from a King of Prussia
psychologist on helping children with albinism improve their self-esteem to tips
on applying makeup. But its most important function, said George, was to dispel
the feelings of isolation that make many with albinism wonder if they're alone
in the world.

   "They get here, and find a family they never knew they had."

   *

   Albinism affects 17,000 to 20,000 Americans of all races.

   For nearly all types of albinism, both parents must carry an albinism gene to
have a child with the condition.

   If both parents do carry the gene, but don't have albinism, there's a one in
four chance their children will have it. Ironically, however, if one or both
parents have albinism, their children most likely will not have it.

   There is no cure; research so far has focused on identifying the genes that
cause the various types of albinism.

   That, according to Richard King, who heads the International Albinism Center
in Minneapolis, may eventually lead to some form of genetic therapy.

   There are two main types of albinism - oculocutaneous albinism, which
involves the eyes, hair and skin, and ocular albinism, involving primarily the
eye.

   Another, less common type is Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, and can include a
bleeding tendency, colitis, lung disease and kidney disease.

   Eye problems common in albinism include nystagmus, irregular rapid movement
of the eyes back and forth; strabismus, "crossed eyes" or "lazy eye," and
sensitivity to bright light and glare.

   People with the condition may be either far- or near-sighted and often have
astigmatism. It's the lack of melanin that causes those problems.

   "A critical amount of melanin has to be present early in development for the
optic nerve to develop normally," explained King.

   Surgery can be used to correct some of these visual problems, such as
strabismus.

   But for many with albinism, various optical aids - such as hand-held
magnifiers, special small telescopes, even glasses with small telescopes mounted
on regular lenses - are the only recourse.

   And the outcome is almost invariably low vision - a condition many with
albinism say the public finds mystifying.

   "People just don't believe you can't see," said George.

   "They think you have to either have a dog and a cane, or that there must be
some way to correct it. They say, 'Can't you get glasses? What about contacts?
What about an operation?'

   "They don't understand that for some of us, none of that helps much."

   Though the public seems to see albinism primarily in terms of appearance, to
many with the condition the visual limitations are its most trying aspect.

   Very few people with albinism, for example, have sufficient vision to drive a
car.

   "It's a huge issue for us," said George. "Driving is the quintessential act
of an adult; it allows one to be independent."

   "I don't care about the appearance thing," said Lee Ryan, who - like many
with albinism - is legally blind (she wears contacts and uses a variety of
optical aids).

   "But the vision thing - that's something else. I wish I could have my eyes
back."

   *

   The keynote speaker at the conference was Lawrence Shapiro, a King of Prussia
psychologist.

   His topic: self-esteem, and how it can be affected by a person's appearance.

   "It's an issue for everyone," he said. "We're all trying to look like Tom
Cruise or Julia Roberts. But if you look as different as people with albinism
do, it can be a significant issue."

   It was an all-too-familiar topic to the people here - the way society
discriminates against those who look "different," particularly when that
appearance has long been associated, in myth and legend, with evil or the
unnatural.

   "People subconsciously are scared of us just because of our appearance," said
George.

   "It's different. Let's face it, this is the day and age of the tanning bed.
People have told me, 'Why don't you get a tan? Then you wouldn't look so pasty.'
"

   Then, according to albinism activists, there's the way some movies and
television shows (they single out The Firm, The Princess Bride and Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine) have portrayed people with albinism.

   The usual impression a viewer gets, according to Matt Smutko, a 23-year-old
Long Island musician, is of "a violent, antisocial hit-man type of character
who's usually dead by the end of the movie."

   "Often this is the only exposure people have had to albinism, and when they
encounter one of us in reality, it leaves a lasting subconscious impression,"
Smutko said. "It's something I like to term albinophobia."

   The common Hollywood stereotype is "either an evil, sadistic villain or
somebody really stupid," agreed George.

   "I've never seen a positive or even a neutral portrayal. And the character is
usually just called 'the albino,' even in the credits. That's terribly
insensitive."

   The effects of the stereotype can permeate every aspect of life. "I've had
parents who have kept their children away from me," said Smutko.

   "In the job market, in relationships, you might as well come from a different
planet.

   " I find that most of my friendships are with left-of-center people - people
who find themselves attracted to that which is different in the first place."

   Then there are the many myths - some fairly harmless, others less so - that
have grown up around albinism.

   "They think we all have pink eyes, of course," said George.

   "They think you have to look like a bunny rabbit - white hair and pink eyes -
or you don't have it."

   People with albinism, in fact, generally have blue or grayish eyes. In some
types of albinism the irises appear to have a violet or reddish hue; that is
because the iris has very little pigment and allows light to reflect back from
the reddish retina in the back of the eye.

   Another common misconception is that people with albinism cannot go into the
sun. True, they are at greater risk for skin cancer, and many are sensitive to
glare; but with proper use of sunscreens, they can enjoy outdoor activities like
anybody else.

   "You do burn easily," said Ryan. "Some can get away with a 15 (SPF, or
sun-protection factor).

   "Personally, I crawl into a bottle of Coppertone Sport 30 at the beginning of
the summer and don't crawl out until fall. But a lot of people who tan use
sunscreens, too."

   Other myths about albinism are more bizarre.

   "I often get the question, am I going to die soon?" said Smutko. (People with
albinism live normal life spans.)

   And George said that in some parts of South Africa people believe that a
person with albinism will disappear when he dies.

   She has heard stories, she said, that people testing this theory have killed
children with albinism to see what happened.

   All of this can sometimes be overwhelming, said Smutko.

   "When you walk down the street and people yell 'albino,' it hurts. Sure it
does. The stigma is so strong that the word itself is enough.

   "It took me a long time to even be able to say the word, and hearing it in
certain contexts still makes me cringe."

   When the person with albinism is of African American descent, problems of
identity and self-esteem are only compounded.

   Virginia Small, 39, a legislative assistant for the Department of Labor in
Virginia, is an African American with albinism.

   She describes her skin as "evaporated milk color.' Her eyes are hazel, her
hair blond.

   "People see what they perceive to be a white person with black features, and
that's difficult to explain," said Small.

   "African Americans use skin color as a metaphor - when people say black, they
mean physically black. Having albinism in the black culture is like being in a
world between worlds."

   One of the most common myths that affects blacks with albinism is that the
condition must be the result of a mating between a black and a white person.

   "People have said to me that they knew for a fact that I couldn't be black -
I had to be mixed race or Creole or something else. Or that I was adopted.

   "I was not generally accepted by other black people," said Small.

   Recently, Small said, she was approached on the street by a man she had never
seen before who told her to go to the Social Security office. " 'They'll be able
to tell you who your real father is,' he said. 'He's white, he just doesn't want
to acknowledge you.'

   "I finally said, 'You have a good day,' and just kept walking," Small said.

   People with albinism have learned to deal in different ways with the public's
perceptions, and misperceptions, about their condition. Smutko tries to focus on
people who are important to him, not those who taunt him.

   Ryan concentrates on what she can do, and not the fact that she'll never be
able to fly a plane.

   "You just let it roll off your back," Small said. "You don't let it ruin your
day. You'd have a lot of ruined days if you did."

   *

   Lee Ryan is an outgoing and exuberant woman who roller-blades, skis ("I fake
it," she said with a laugh, "and I never ski alone"), has an active social life,
and works as a computer consultant in Boston; in August she will move to
Oakland, Calif., to start a new job.

   Ask her the person most responsible for her independence, and the answer
comes quickly: "My mother. The best thing she ever did for me when I was growing
up was let me find my own limits.

   "I played soccer and softball and rode a two-wheeler.

   "I tried synchronized swimming, and I was in the marching band all through
high school and college. I know my mother was chewing her fingernails up to the
elbows, but she never complained."

   School district officials were not always so willing.

   "They'd say, 'Oh, but she can't do that.' And my mother would say, 'How do
you know she can't do that? Let her try.' "

   Ryan remembers wishing in junior high that she looked more like everybody
else.

   "I wanted mousy brown hair, I wanted a tan. I wanted to crawl into a wall and
hide."

   These days she glories in the pale skin and white hair that make her stand
out in a crowd. "Actually, I play on that," she said with a chuckle.

   "You can't miss me, and that's turned into a positive."

   Not that there aren't still incidents. Ryan just handles them differently
today.

   "I walked out of a convenience store in Boston recently, and a homeless man
asked me for change.

   "When I didn't have any, he yelled, 'Albino bitch.' I turned around to him
and said, 'Damn straight!' And I just kept walking."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;

PHOTO (2)
1. "Some people feel we're the last minority it's socially acceptable to
persecute," said Jennifer George (left), with Lee Ryan. George is president
of the National Organization for Albinism and Hypopigmentation.
2. Participants in the albinism conference on a tour along Fifth Street. The
most important function of the conference last week, Jennifer George said, was
to dispel the sense of isolation that many with albinism feel. The condition
affects 17,000 to 20,000 Americans of all races. (The Philadelphia Inquirer
, SHARON J. WOHLMUTH)

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             714 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994, The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                      July 24, 1994, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 2228 words

HEADLINE: Fortunes made by stock options prompt scrutiny

BYLINE: Joel Obermayer, SUN STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   In February, when a top New York analyst was asked about Robert N. Elkins,
 he answered in three words: "Elkins is king."

   What he was referring to was Dr. Elkins' successful reign as founder and
 chief executive of Integrated Health Services Inc., one of the fastest
 growing, most profitable companies in Maryland.

   As it turns out, though, Dr. Elkins' Midas touch didn't stop there.
 According to documents filed by 95 public companies in Maryland, Dr. Elkins
 has also been crowned king of the stock option.

   Indeed, thanks to 1.65 million options granted to him last year alone, Dr.
 Elkins, 51, could reap as much as $ 74 million over the next decade,
 according to figures contained in filings with the Securities and Exchange
 Commission. That does not include the $ 3.2 million in cash and stock he
 took home in 1993.

   Dr. Elkins' stock option plan not only dwarfs that of the state's
 runner-up, Bruce L. Crockett of COMSAT Corp., but also exceeds the heads of
 IBM, Westinghouse and General Motors combined.

   While the case of Dr. Elkins is certainly the grandest local example of an
 extraordinary compensation package, it is but the latest instance of why
 stock options nationwide have become the target of increased scrutiny.

   Proponents of these delayed-pay packages say that they are the best way to
 link a CEO's pay directly to the future performance of his or her company's
 stock price. Beyond providing incentives to top executives, pay increases
 only come if the company, and shareholders, profit as well.

   But opponents counter that many of the option packages have grown so out
 of proportion that the logic behind them has been lost.

   "The numbers are obscene. I can't see why someone at that level should
 have the opportunity to make so much money," said Marvin J. Levine, a
 professor at the College of Business and Management at the University of
 Maryland in College Park. "There is no one who is ever going to convince me
 that the system that granted Dr. Elkins the options is a fair system."

   Whether fair or not, the idea behind stock options seems simple enough.

   A single stock option represents the right to buy one share of stock in
 the future at a particular price. If the stock rises beyond that price, then
 the person holding the option can profit. For example, if someone is issued
 a $ 10 option when their company's stock is trading at $ 10-a-share, and the
 stock rises to $ 15, they can make a sure $ 5 profit on paper by exercising
 the option. Of course, if a stock drops, options would be worthless.

   But that's about the only time their value is obvious. In general, it is
 impossible to predict the value of an option with certainty. But because of
 SEC regulations, when a company grants options to a top executive, it must
 now give projections of how much the executive stands to gain. One such
 projection, assuming the stock will appreciate 10 percent annually, states
 the gain for Dr. Elkins at $ 74 million.

   Mutual fund managers say a 10 percent stock appreciation is slightly below
 the average annual return of large stocks over the last seven decades. For
 midsized growth companies, like Integrated Health, the expected rate of
 return is higher.

   "To me, 10 percent is not much of a hurdle," said Robert J. Sanborn,
 portfolio manager for one of the country's top performing funds,
 Chicago-based Oakmark Fund. "You are saying that if you only perform in line
 with the market, you get a huge payoff."

   By the same 10 percent measure, last year's option package for Bruce L.
 Crockett, CEO of COMSAT Corp., could be worth as much as $ 16 million, GEICO
 Corp. co-CEO Louis A. Simpson's, $ 11 million, and USF&G Corp. CEO Norman P.
 Blake Jr.'s, $ 9 million. For comparison, Louis V. Gerstner, CEO of IBM
 Corp., received one of the largest grants last year among big industrial
 companies and it could be worth as much as $ 38 million.

   Other valuation methods, however, try to estimate the present-day value of
 the options, factoring in uncertainty about how the stock will perform.
 Using a second valuation widely used by compensation experts, Dr. Elkins'
 options were worth $ 16 million. Either way, Dr. Elkins is still the top in
 Maryland.

   Accounting standards

   Given the size of stock options these days, and their importance as part
 of compensation packages, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB),
 the organization that determines accounting standards for company reports,
 has been considering forcing companies to treat stock options as an expense
 and deduct them from earnings. The move has sent a shudder through the
 business community.

   Business leaders maintain the regulations would decimate start-up
 companies that rely on options to pay their best employees.

   "The net effect of the rule is the use of options will be severely
 curtailed. It will affect small companies disproportionately," said J.
 Carter Beese, a commissioner of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Mr.
 Beese said the proposal would take away about 6 percent of all profits for
 the largest companies, but for smaller companies the effects would be worse.

   "We are talking about an accounting change reducing the reported earnings
 of small firms by 50 percent overnight, and that will have serious economic
 consequences," he said.

   Too little cash?

   Opponents of the FASB rule, such as Mr. Beese, say smaller companies and
 start-ups have to pay with options because they have too little cash to pay
 big salaries. These companies also use stock options to motivate middle
 management and lower-level employees. The hope of a big payoff keeps
 talented people there, despite the risk the company will not survive, they
 said.

   Small biotechnology and high-tech companies in Maryland have a lot at
 stake in the debate. For example, Oncor Inc. CEO Stephen Turner earned $
 244,000 in cash compensation last year, but his stock option plan could be
 worth as much as $ 1.7 million. Similarly, Genetic Therapy Inc.'s Chief
 Executive M. James Barrett earned $ 296,000, while his stock options could
 be worth as much as $ 1 million.

   FASB officials, who have put off the rule changes for a year, say the
 reaction is overblown. They point out that options are the only form of pay
 that never appears on corporate income statements.

   Diana W. Willis, who was in charge of FASB's effort to account for stock
 options, argued that stock companies now lose profits when they account for
 every other kind of pay and even when they donate options to charity. The
 sole exception is when those options stay in the hands of an employee.

   "Whenever you start talking about people's compensation they get scared
 that it is going to require them to change the way they are doing business,"
 she said.

   Princely sums

   No matter what happens with the rules, many CEOs will continue to command
 top dollars whether through options or other forms of compensation. And a
 CEO who can start a company and manage it well after it is established is a
 rarity.

   "There is a very thin market for talent that can make high-stakes bets and
 make them right at every turn," said Michael A. Conte, director of the
 regional economics program at the University of Baltimore. "If we have a
 bidding contest for them with hundreds of companies and each with a lot of
 money to throw around, you can easily see how these people can command
 princely sums."

   Consider the case of Dr. Elkins, a broad, wavy-haired former Boston
 psychiatrist who has lined his conference room with pictures of himself and
 political figures, including Hillary Rodham Clinton.

   Integrated Health Services was once a struggling start-up. Dr. Elkins
 founded the company in 1986 and quickly came upon the idea of buying and
 converting nursing homes to handle patients who normally would be
 hospitalized long-term.

   By 1993, the company had grown to $ 282 million in sales and, thanks to
 acquisitions and expansions in the past nine months, could top $ 500 million
 this year. Profits have been increasing almost as rapidly.

   Charles W. Newhall III, a general partner with the Baltimore venture
 capital firm New Enterprise Associates and a member of the committee that
 set Dr. Elkins' pay, defended the stock options awarded him.

   He said Dr. Elkins has been the reason for the success of the Owings
 Mills-based health care firm and that his compensation package is in line
 with his contributions.

   "If he builds a $ 3 billion company, I hope he can make $ 50 million or $
 100 million, that's the way the world should work," Mr. Newhall said.

   Dr. Elkins declined to be interviewed for this article, citing concerns
 that he might affect recent company stock and debt offerings.

   Mr. Newhall points out that Dr. Elkins will only profit from the options
 if the company's success continues. "What you are doing is rewarding an
 entrepreneur through equity ownership in his company," he said.

   But consultants and others said that many other things come into play when
 setting stock options. The size of an options package, they said, may be as
 much a function of the CEO's ego as any objective standard.

   "What executives are looking at is the guy next door," said Jane T.
 Romweber, an Atlanta-based executive compensation specialist for Hewitt
 Associates. "There may be some company somewhere that has given its CEO a
 ton of options and then he says 'I have done just as well, I deserve that
 too.' What is enough in his eyes matters, and that often has no relation to
 the value of the company."

   More art than science

   Board members and former CEOs elsewhere say decisions inside the board
 room are more art than science. The compensation committee that sets pay is
 usually a three-person group of outside directors -- board members that do
 not hold executive positions with the company. They study compensation
 packages of other executives in the same industry with particular attention
 to those who head companies of a similar size and growth rate.

   Mr. Newhall said the Integrated Health board commissioned a study that
 showed Dr. Elkins' pay package was on par with founders of other
 fast-growing health care companies nationwide.

   The option package was designed to keep Dr. Elkins' percentage of
 ownership stable at a time when the company was engaged in large stock
 offerings, he said.

   Mr. Newhall warned that if the FASB proposal were adopted, "the incentive
 for people like Dr. Elkins to do what he is going to do will be destroyed.
 It will kill the desire of entrepreneurs to build businesses."

   But many of those who oppose the FASB proposal, still wonder whether the
 largest option grants are worth saving.

   "The question is how much is enough," said George Paulin a compensation
 consultant with Frederic W. Cooke & Co. Inc. in Los Angeles. "Often
 executives can make money on options from market timing and from the sheer
 size of the grant. If I grant you 1.6 million options and the stock price
 goes up $ 1, you make $ 1.6 million without doing anything."

   1. STEPHEN F. BOLLENBACH

   Total compensation: $ 7,457,994

   Company: Host Marriott Corp.

   Headquarters: Bethesda

   Business: Hotels, food

   Revenues: $ 1,354,000,000

   Earnings: Loss of $ 60,000,000

   2. NORMAN P. BLAKE JR.

   Total compensation: $ 4,459,336

   Company: USF&G Corp.

   Headquarters: Baltimore

   Business: Insurance

   Revenues: $ 3,249,000,000

   Earnings: $ 127,000,000

   3. GEORGE T. JOCHUM

   Total compensation: $ 3,706,771

   Company: Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc.

   Headquarters: Rockville

   Business: Managed Care

   Revenues: $ 646,777,000

   Earnings: $ 25,496,000

   4. NORMAN R AUGUSTINE

   Total compensation: $ 3,598,922

   Company: Martin Marietta Corp.

   Headquarters: Bethesda

   Business: Defense aerospace

   Revenues: $ 9,435,689,000

   Earnings: $ 450,289,000

   5. A.B. KRONGARD

   Total compensation: $ 3,409,251

   Company: Alex. Brown Inc.

   Headquarters: Baltimore

   Business: Brokerage, investment banking

   Revenues: $ 628,203,000

   Earnings: $ 89,226,000

   6. ROBERT N ELKINS

   Total compensation: $ 3,185,851

   Company: Intregrated Health Services Inc.

   Headquarters: Owings MIlls

   Business: Medical services

   Revenues: $ 282,160,000

   Earnings: $ 15,147,000

   7. WILLIAM A. HASELTINE

   Total compensation: $ 2,972,745

   Company: Human Genime Sciences Inc.

   Headquarters: Rockville

   Business: Genetic medical research

   Revenues: $ 22,000,000

   Earnings: $ 1,794,00

   8. TIMOTHY F. FINLEY

   Total compensation: $ 2,719,313

   Company: Jos A. Bank Clothiers Inc.

   Headquarters: Hampstead

   Business: Clothing retail, manufacturing

   Revenues: $ 147,711,00

   Earnings: $ 1,643,000

   9. RAYMOND A. MASON

   Total compensation: $ 2,131,597

   Company: Legg Mason Inc.

   Headquarters: Baltimore

   Business: Brokerage, investment banking

   Revenues: $ 397,534,000

   Earnings: $ 36,048,00

   10. HERBET H HAFT

   Total compensation: $ $ 2,043,000

   Company: Dart Group Corp.

   Headquarters: Landover

   Business: Specialty retail

   Revenues: $ 1,376,543,000

   Earnings: Los of $ 6,737,000

HOW SWEET IT IS

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO 1, (STEPHEN F. BOLLENBACH); COLOR PHOTO 2, (NORMAN P. BLAKE

 JR.); COLOR PHOTO 3, (GEORGE T. JOCHUM); COLOR PHOTO 4, (NORMAN R.
 AUGUSTINE); COLOR PHOTO 5, (A.B. KRONGARD); COLOR PHOTO 6, (ROBERT N.
 ELKINS); COLOR PHOTO 7, (WILLIAM A. HASELTINE); COLOR PHOTO 8, (TIMOTHY F.
 FINLEY); COLOR PHOTO 9, (RAYMOND A. MASON); COLOR PHOTO 10, (HERBERT H.
 HAFT); CHART 1, Company reports, JEF DAUBER/SUN STAFF GRAPHIC,  JOEL
 OBERMAYER/RESEARCH, OPTIONS: WHO GOT WHAT; CHART 2, Company reports, JEF
 DAUBER/SUN STAFF GRAPHIC,  JOEL OBERMAYER/RESEARCH, CEOs ELSEWHERE:
 COMPANIES WITH MAJOR  OPERATIONS IN MARYLAND

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994


                             715 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            July 23, 1994, Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Section E; Page 1

LENGTH: 1103 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE 'AZT isn't whole ballgame anymore' Promising therapies likely
topics at AIDS conference

BYLINE: By Anne Rochell STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In a laboratory test a decade ago, researchers created the first drug that
stopped the spread of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. In the ensuing clinical
trials, the drug - AZT - worked so well that the federal government ended the
study prematurely and licensed the drug for widespread use.

   With unprecedented haste, AZT became the mainstay of AIDS treatment.

   Today, however, the drug is seen as highly toxic and effective only
temporarily - and only in some people. It can prolong life in certain patients
for about a year, at the most. But for many patients, its devastating side
effects outweigh its benefits.

   It has been a dismal year for the drug once considered so indispensable that
AIDS patients would do anything to get their hands on it. With the 10th
International Conference on AIDS about to convene in Yokohama, Japan, next
month, researchers are facing facts:

   While people are living years longer with HIV than they did in the early days
of the disease, no drug exists that can stop or even significantly stall its
progression. And although drugs are being developed that may stop the virus -
when used in combination with one another - such a therapy still lies many years
in the future.

   "In treatment, there's been a lot of disappointment," said Cornelius Baker of
the National Association of People With AIDS. "However, the AIDS community knows
a lot more now about the virus and other ways to prolong life. AZT isn't the
whole ballgame anymore."

   Lingering hopes shattered

   Last spring, lingering hopes that AZT could delay the progression of the
disease from HIV to AIDS were shattered by the results of a three- year study of
1,700 HIV-positive people. The Anglo-French Concorde Trial, published in April,
concluded that AZT does not prolong life or slow the disease in those patients.

   Only unborn babies seem truly protected by AZT. In a large study published
last winter, researchers found giving AZT to HIV-infected pregnant women
dramatically reduced transmission of the virus to their infants.

   AZT does appear to have some fleeting benefits for people who are actually
ill with AIDS. But doctors and patients are in a quandary about the best time to
begin treatment.

   "It's not easy knowing we may not be able to answer the question of exactly
when to use it," said David Gold of the New York-based Gay Men's Health Crisis.
"And it's not easy accepting that AZT may not be appropriate therapy for some
people."

   AZT is a "reverse transcriptase inhibitor," and it works by stopping the
virus when its genetic material - RNA - is being copied into DNA, the chemical
that contains a person's genetic blueprint. As DNA, the virus can sneak into the
host cell's genes, using the cell as a factory to reproduce itself - ultimately
compromising the body's immune system.

   The benefits of AZT are transient, in part because the virus quickly mutates
and becomes resistant to the drug's effects. Once that happens, a patient can
try one of a handful of other drugs approved for the treatment of AIDS: ddC, ddI
and d4T. D4T, or stavudine, was licensed in June.

   These drugs work like AZT, crippling the virus before it gets into a cell's
genes. But all have side effects, and all can be outsmarted by HIV.

   Atlanta resident Gerard Babin, 41, took AZT for a year, until the virus
"figured it out," he said. Then he tried ddC and finally ddI. He could only take
ddI, the most toxic of the three, for four days.

   Two years ago, Babin enrolled in one of the first clinical trials of d4T
sponsored by its manufacturer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and he still takes it
today, saying it gives him more energy than the other drugs. But he doesn't
harbor illusions about it saving his life.

   Syd Adams also has used all four AIDS drugs. He's on d4T now and says he's
doing "pretty good."

   "It doesn't pose a problem for me and I think that's all anyone can ask of an
AIDS drug," said Adams, 33, an Atlanta resident. "Sometimes I ask myself, 'Why
am I taking medication at all?' But then I think that it is beneficial at this
stage and it may prolong my life."

   Optimism elusive

   Dr. Steven Marlowe, a leading infectious disease specialist in Atlanta and a
private physician at West Paces Medical Center, is very optimistic about d4T.

   "It seems to have a very low toxicity and its anti-HIV effect seems to be
more prolonged," he said.

   Still, considering there are 4 million AIDS cases worldwide and only four
mediocre drugs to treat them with, it's hard to be optimistic.

   "People are frustrated, some are angry," Marlowe said. "They say these drugs
aren't helping and so they don't want to take them. But that's not what the data
from the studies suggest. They're clearly better than nothing."

   And those four drugs are not the whole story; new classes of promising drugs
and combinations of drugs are being studied in hundreds of trials in the United
States and elsewhere.

   "We're going to need more than the AZT-like drugs to keep HIV latent," said
Dr. Jim Curran, head of the Division of HIV/AIDS at the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. In the meantime, efforts should be focused on education
since behavior changes can completely prevent HIV transmission, Curran said.

   "People's attention has been refocused on prevention as the hope because
right now we can't depend on technology to save us once we are infected," Curran
said.

   What lies beyond AZT in the search for therapies is likely to be a major
topic at the upcoming International Conference on AIDS. Among the most promising
therapies under development:

   Other reverse transcriptase inhibitors: These drugs work like AZT and may
someday be used in combination with AZT-like drugs to outsmart HIV's ability to
develop drug resistance. Government-sponsored clinical trials are studying
several versions of these drugs, including nevirapine and a group of drugs
called BHAPs.

   Protease or proteinase inhibitors: These inhibit or cripple a protein called
protease that HIV needs to make copies of itself. There are at least a dozen
clinical trials of this class of drugs, and experts believe these, in
combination with AZT-like drugs, might be a formidable opponent for HIV.

   Gene therapies: These would work to stimulate the immune system and trick it
into creating material that would kill HIV. Again, this strategy in combination
with drugs that cripple viral replication may be the way AIDS will be fought.

   Acyclovir: A study published this month suggests that the anti- herpes drug
acyclovir slightly prolonged life in patients already taking AZT. It did not,
however, delay the onset of AIDS in men who were HIV- positive.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1994


                             716 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 20, 1994 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 188 words

HEADLINE: Immune Response unit to relocate in Carlsbad

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Immune Response Corp. will consolidate operations of its Connecticut
subsidiary to its Carlsbad headquarters, bringing as many as 15 additional
employees into the county. Immune Response said that shifting operations of
TargeTech Inc. from Meriden, Conn., to San Diego will save about $2 million in
operating expenses over the next 12 months. Co-founded by Dr. Jonas Salk, Immune
Response is attempting to develop a treatment for HIV infection. Immune Response
acquired TargeTech in 1993. The subsidiary is seeking to develop gene therapy
technology for the treatment of hepatitis, cardiovascular disease and
hemophilia. The parent company is offering a relocation benefit package to 15 of
TargeTech's 20 employees, said Charles Cashion, vice president of finance for
Immune Response.

   Those not offered the relocation package have previously indicated they will
not consider moving. Positions not filled by transferees, will be filled slowly
because of the company's interest in conserving cash, Cashion added. Immune
Response reported a net loss in the first quarter of $4.6 million or 28 cents
per share on revenues of $1.2 million.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             717 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 19, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 122 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme buys Sygena;
Business Briefly

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    GENZYME CORP. said yesterday it acquired Sygena Ltd., a privately held
pharmaceutical manufacturing company near Basel, Switzerland, in a transaction
valued at $ 14.5 million. The deal is designed to bolster Genzyme's European
manufacturing capacity, particularly high-value synthetic phospholipids,
peptides and amino acid derivatives which are used in gene therapy and some new
drug delivery formulations. In addition, the purchase is also aimed at
attracting European drug and biotech companies seeking manufacturing
capabilities for clinical testing and, ultimately, final product sales. Genzyme,
based in Cambridge, said the transaction is the first acquisition of a Swiss
firm by an American biotechnology company.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1994


                             718 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      July 19, 1994 Tuesday THIRD EDITION

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 039

LENGTH: 416 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFCASE

BODY:

   NEW TEAM Wellfleet Communications Inc. of Billerica and California-based
SynOptics Communications Inc. yesterday publicly named four individuals to the
new management team of the merged company. The team includes Gary Bowen,
executive vice president of field operations and marketing; R.S. Cheheyl,
executive vice president of business operations; William Ruehle, executive vice
president and chief financial officer; and Ronald Schmidt, executive vice
president and chief technology officer. These four executives, along with
Chairman of the Board Paul Severino and President and CEO Andrew Ludwick, will
be responsible for defining the strategy and direction for the new firm.

   SHAWMUT Shawmut National Corp. said its newly formed Shawmut Bank FSB unit
acquired Guardian Bank FSB, of Boca Raton, Fla., from the Resolution Trust Corp.
for $ 3.8 million. In a press release, the company said it purchased all $ 25
million in deposits. Loans were not part of this transaction.

   NORPLANT A suit seeking class-action status was filed against Wyeth-Ayerst
Laboratories, manufacturer of the female contraceptive Norplant, on behalf of a
Florida woman and an undetermined number of plaintiffs for personal injuries
caused by the manufacture and distribution of the device. The suit seeks
compensatory damages for each plaintiff. Norplant, introduced in 1991, consists
of six capsules surgically inserted in the upper arm which continuously release
a synthetic hormone to prevent pregnancy.

   CREAGEN Neurex Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif. completed its acquisition of all
the outstanding stock of Creagen Inc. for about 1.95 million shares of Neurex.
Creagen is a privately held company based in Boston. In a press release, Neurex
said Dr. Roberto Crea, currently chairman and chief executive of Creagen, will
assume the role of senior vice president, research and technology development.
GENZYME Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge said it bought Sygena Ltd., a privately held
Swiss pharmaceutical manufacturing company, for about 19 million Swiss francs,
or $ 14.5 million. Genzyme said Sygena will provide it with increased capacity
to make pharmaceuticals and pharmaceutical intermediates, particularly --
synthetic phospholipids and peptides, which are used in the development of gene
therapy and a number of new drug delivery formulations. Genzyme said the Swiss
concern has 45 employees and had 1993 revenues of 7.2 milllion Swiss francs, or
about $ 5.5 million.


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 1995


                             719 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                             July 19, 1994 Tuesday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFCASE

BODY:

   NEW TEAM: Wellfleet Communications Inc. of Billerica and California-based
SynOptics Communications Inc. yesterday publicly named four individuals to the
new management team of the merged company. The team includes Gary Bowen,
executive vice president of field operations and marketing; R.S. Cheheyl,
executive vice president of business operations; William Ruehle, executive vice
president and chief financial officer; and Ronald Schmidt, executive vice
president and chief technology officer. These four executives, along with
Chairman of the Board Paul Severino and President and CEO Andrew Ludwick, will
be responsible for defining the strategy and direction for the new firm.

   SHAWMUT: Shawmut National Corp. said its newly formed Shawmut Bank FSB unit
acquired Guardian Bank FSB, of Boca Raton, Fla., from the Resolution Trust Corp.
for $3.8 million. In a press release, the company said it purchased all $25
million in deposits. Loans were not part of this transaction.

   NORPLANT: A suit seeking class-action status was filed against Wyeth-Ayerst
Laboratories, manufacturer of the female contraceptive Norplant, on behalf of a
Florida woman and an undetermined number of plaintiffs for personal injuries
caused by the manufacture and distribution of the device. The suit seeks
compensatory damages for each plaintiff. Norplant, introduced in 1991, consists
of six capsules surgically inserted in the upper arm which continuously release
a synthetic hormone to prevent pregnancy.

   CREAGEN: Neurex Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif. completed its acquisition of all
the outstanding stock of Creagen Inc. for about 1.95 million shares of Neurex.
Creagen is a privately held company based in Boston. In a press release, Neurex
said Dr. Roberto Crea, currently chairman and chief executive of Creagen, will
assume the role of senior vice president, research and technology development.

   GENZYME: Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge said it bought Sygena Ltd., a privately
held Swiss pharmaceutical manufacturing company, for about 19 million Swiss
francs, or $14.5 million. Genzyme said Sygena will provide it with increased
capacity to make pharmaceuticals and pharmaceutical intermediates, particularly
synthetic phospholipids and peptides, which are used in the development of gene
therapy and a number of new drug delivery formulations. Genzyme said the Swiss
concern has 45 employees and had 1993 revenues of 7.2 milllion Swiss francs, or
about $5.5 million.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             720 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                      July 18, 1994, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: CITY TIMES; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: CITY TIMES

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: Pinellas babies' transplants helping doctors to learn

BYLINE: DEANNA BELLANDI

BODY:


   It was show and tell for doctors in training.

   On display at this spring at Washington University in St. Louis were Lauri
Waldron, a Pinellas Park mom, and her medical miracle, infant daughter Autumn
Karyn Bailey.

   It was a chance for the medical students to put a face on the cold, hard
facts of a rare lung disease.

   And it was a simple example of the impact Autumn and another Pinellas  County
baby, Meagan Craig of Palm Harbor, are having on medical science.

   Since the two underwent history-making lung transplants at St. Louis
Children's Hospital earlier this year:

   Doctors have begun writing a medical journal article detailing the  inherited
disease, surfactant protein B deficiency.

   Researchers have accelerated a plan to find out how prevalent the disease
is.

   Doctors have seen that the disease has at least one short-term cure: lung
transplants.

   Researchers have better lung tissue samples than ever to study the  disease.

   Autumn, now 6 months old, and 7-month-old Meagan are only two infants to
survive the disease, thanks to their transplants.

   "They were very ground-breaking," said Dr. Aaron Hamvas, medical director  of
the neonatal intensive care unit at St. Louis Children's Hospital.

   Doctors at the St. Louis hospital, which has a national reputation for
pediatric lung transplants, are writing an article about the disease,  detailing
the medical histories of Meagan and Autumn.

   The two ended up in St. Louis to wait for lung donors shortly after their
births last winter in Pinellas County hospitals. Doctors have stressed that
finding two cases of the disease in such proximity is coincidence.

   The doctors hope to have their article published in a national medical
journal so other physicians will consider this rare disorder when newborns  have
unexplained respiratory failure, Hamvas said.

   Early diagnosis means prompt listing for a baby on the national list of
people waiting for organ donors.

   A lung transplant is so far the only known treatment for the disorder,  which
was identified by scientists last year. Slightly more than a dozen  families
around the world have been identified as having had children  afflicted with the
disease.

   A core group of six doctors, including Hamvas and Dr. Lawrence Nogee of
Johns Hopkins University, have applied for a $ 3-million grant from the
National Institutes of Health to study how prevalent this disease really is.

   The group of doctors plans to survey birth and death records in Missouri,
and possibly Florida, for babies who died of respiratory disease before the  age
of six months, Hamvas said.

   Doctors plan to look at the autopsy slides of these children to see if they
died of surfactant protein B deficiency before doctors knew what the disease
was.

   "This disorder is much more common than we previously believed," Hamvas
said.

   The diagnosis of Meagan and Autumn, whose families live just miles apart,
has been an impetus for doctors to move forward with the research.

   Mike Craig, Meagan's father, is thrilled.

   "I just hope it helps other kids and other families," he said.

   Meagan is still recuperating at the St. Louis hospital because she had to
undergo a second lung transplant in June when a severe bacterial infection
ravaged the first set of lungs she had received in February. Autumn, who had
her transplant in March, has been home with her family in Pinellas Park since
last month.

   Because of Meagan's and Autumn's lung transplants, researchers can, for the
first time, study the disease in lung tissue removed from living children,  said
Nogee of Johns Hopkins University, the lead investigator of a team that
identified the gene defect.

   "It's very exciting that there is potentially a cure in transplant,"  Nogee
said.

   Doctors didn't know what would happen when they did the first transplant on
Meagan in February. All they knew was that the disease was causing her lungs  to
fail and, with no other known treatment, a transplant was her only hope.

   "It's an experiment in and of itself," Nogee said. "You don't know for  sure
it's going to work before you do it because something like this hasn't  been
done."

   It was a risk both Meagan's and Autumn's parents were willing to take.

   "We had a chance to save my baby's life," said Waldron, Autumn's mother.  "It
didn't feel like an experiment."

   Doctors hope that by studying the damaged lungs removed from Autumn and
Meagan, they can better understand how the lungs and the surfactant protein B
work and maybe develop another treatment for the disorder, Nogee said.

   Potential treatments include gene therapy, whereby a healthy gene is
introduced into the lungs to replace the defective one that causes the lungs
not to make the surfactant protein B, Nogee said.

   "It'd be a a lot simpler to give a gene rather than a set of lungs," he
said.

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Times files, (2);
Dr. Aaron Hamvas; Dr. Lawrence Nogee; Meagan Craig, shown with her physical
therapist, Cathy Yungbluth, had a rare lung disorder.; Autumn Bailey with
parents Richard Bailey and Lauri Waldron.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1994


                             721 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                July 17, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 1245 words

HEADLINE: The Cure That Killed;
HIV Haunts Hemophiliacs

SOURCE: FRED ZWICKY; FOR THE SUN-TIMES; RICHARD A. CHAPMAN

BYLINE: By Howard Wolinsky

BODY:


   When concentrated clotting factor was introduced in the late 1960s, it was
seen as a lifesaver and life enhancer for 20,000 Americans with hemophilia.

   But between the late 1970s and mid-1980s, the Human Immunodeficiency Virus
(HIV) spread through the drug, made by pooling blood from thousands of donors.

   It has devastated a generation of people with the blood-clotting disorder.
"The 'cure' killed you," said Glenn Rakosnik, 41, an electronic technician and
hemophiliac from Naperville who became infected in 1982 or 1983 from an infusion
of contaminated factor VIII.

   Though he has remained relatively healthy, he said dozens of patients with
whom he attended hemophilia clinics as a child have died from HIV-related
disease.

   The supply of the clotting factor essentially has been considered safe since
1985. However, effects from the HIV-contaminated blood used before then still
are felt.

   Experts estimate that 60 percent of the 20,000 people with hemophilia in the
United States are infected with HIV, and more than 80 percent of those with
severe hemophilia have HIV, researchers have reported.

   More than 3,000 people with hemophilia have contracted full-blown AIDS; more
than 2,000 of them have died, according to the federal Centers for Disease
Control.

   Hemophilia is an inherited disorder that almost exclusively affects males,
though women are carriers of the condition.

   Dr. Margaret Telfer, director of the hemophilia program at Michael Reese
Hospital, said a deficiency of the blood protein factor VIII or ineffective
factor VIII causes people with hemophilia to bleed longer than other people
because they do not quickly develop a firm clot. She said it is a myth that a
minor cut can cause a person with hemophilia to bleed to death.

   Telfer, chairman of the medical advisory committee to the Hemophilia
Foundation of Illinois, said the real problem for these patients is internal
bleeding, which may not have an obvious cause. The bleeding causes painful
swelling of the joints. White cells in the blood attack the lining of joints and
ultimately the bone, resulting in crippling arthritis.

   Until the mid-1960s, hemophilia was treated with transfusions of whole blood
or plasma, the portion of blood containing clotting factors. But this approach
was only partially effective and many patients still had damage that required
them to use wheelchairs and crutches.

   The breakthrough came with the development of concentrated factor VIII, which
allowed patients to care for themselves at home.

   "It was very exciting. It was like penicillin for pneumonia," Telfer said.
"The concentrated factor VIII helped save lives, stopped very painful episodes
and prevented or postponed joint damage."

   The lives of these patients began to become more normal, the death and
unemployment rates for hemophiliacs dropped dramatically.

   Then came AIDS.

   Dr. David Green, director of the Northwestern Hemophilia Program, said the
unusual infections associated with AIDS first began to be noticed in a few
people with hemophilia in 1982.

   At that point, he said, it was not known that the pooling of blood from
thousands of patients -- a process necessary to yield adequate amounts of the
concentrated factor VIII -- inadvertently created an efficient means of
spreading the AIDS virus.

   Traditionally, the hemophilia community has largely kept to itself because
they feared that misunderstanding of the condition caused job discrimination and
other problems.  Before anyone heard of AIDS, Rakosnik said he once was told
"point blank I was not going to be hired because I had hemophilia. The employer
was afraid I would bleed."

   "AIDS just drove us deeper into seclusion," he said.

   Some hemophilia patients were persecuted, such as the Florida family whose
home was burned to the ground because they had several children with the
disorder. And Ryan White, probably the best known person with the disease, had
to move away from a small Indiana town because he was unable to attend school
there. White, 18, died in 1990 after a 5 1/2-year struggle with AIDS.

   "The devastation has been unprecedented. Some families have lost five men to
AIDS," said Judy Buchner, executive director of the Hemophilia Foundation of
Illinois. "They are in perpetual mourning."

   The average age of death of people with hemophilia had increased from below
40 in 1968 to 64 in 1983. In the age of HIV, the average age at death had again
dropped to 40 in 1988. Based on the fact that he underwent repeated blood tests
for AIDS, Rakosnik had assumed he was not infected.

   However, the testing was anonymous, a part of a study. He had not been
informed that he had been infected until his wife Karen became pregnant with
their daughter Shannon, now 6.

   He said he received a panicky reaction from doctors and nurses when he
announced that his wife was pregnant. AIDS counselors tried to persuade Karen to
abort, but she decided to take her chances.

   In the end, thanks to "blind luck," he said neither his wife nor daughter was
infected.

   "We were lucky. But others weren't. There have been a lot of patients and
their wives who have died. There are a lot of children who caught this disease,"
he said.

   Douglas Gayton, of Canton, has faced an uphill struggle through his nine
years because of the combination of HIV and hemophilia. He has nearly died from
AIDS-related cancer and pneumonia.

   His adoptive mother, Cathy, said she tries to encourage her son to lead
anormal life as possible as much as possible. "But I hold my breath every time
he roller skates," she said.

   John Rogers, 29, of Palatine, said the epidemic has robbed him of his dreams.
He said he only by chance discovered in 1989 he had HIV when a lab technician he
was dating arranged a blood test.

   "It totally blew my socks off when I came back positive for HIV," he said.

   He said the disease has stopped him from getting married for fear of losing
his disability and health insurance. He is saddened because he will not father a
child.

   "You don't know from one day to the next if you're going to be sick," he
said. "It is hard living like this, but you do learn to appreciate every day you
have."

   Still, the future is looking brighter for the generation of people with
hemophilia born since 1985.

   Green noted that blood-borne infections increasingly have become eliminated
as more purified factor VIII and a genetically engineered version have become
available.

   He said research in Sweden has shown that preventive treatment every other
day with factor VIII has shown that joint damage can be avoided. Typical
treatment with factor VIII in this country is about once a week for patients
with severe hemophilia.

   Green also noted that researchers are investigating potential cures of
hemophilia with gene therapies that would make it possible for patients with
hemophilia to increase their body's production of factor VIII.

   Rakosnik said he tries to stay optimistic that better treatment for AIDS and
HIV will become available to his generation of hemophilia patients. He has set
personal goals for himself, such as seeing his 13-year-old daughter Lauren go
off to college.

   "I am skeptical that a cure for AIDS will be found. My concern is that
another blood-borne virus will come along. Hemophiliacs are a barometer of the
health of the blood supply," he said. "The public has a vested interest in
keeping the blood supply safe not only for hemophiliacs, but for the rest of the
population."

GRAPHIC: Doug Gayton (above), a hemophiliac, injects chemotherapy drugs. Glenn
Rakosnik (right) poses with his wife, Karen, and daughters Lauren, 13, and
Shannon, 6. Dr. Margaret Work with hemophilia patients John Rogers, 29, a
hemophiliac infected with HIV, says the virus has robbed him of his dreams. See
also related stories.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1994


                             722 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                      July 17, 1994, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: LARGO-SEMINOLE TIMES; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: LARGO-SEMINOLE TIMES; NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; CLEARWATER TIMES;
TAMPA TODAY

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: Infants' transplants help doctors learn

BYLINE: DEANNA BELLANDI

BODY:


   It was show and tell for doctors in training.

   On display at this spring at Washington University in St. Louis were Lauri
Waldron, a Pinellas Park mom, and her medical miracle, infant daughter Autumn
Karyn Bailey.

   It was a chance for the medical students to put a face on the cold, hard
facts of a rare lung disease.

   And it was a simple example of the impact Autumn and another Pinellas  County
baby, Meagan Craig of Palm Harbor, are having on medical science.

   Since the two underwent history-making lung transplants at St. Louis
Children's Hospital earlier this year:

   Doctors have begun writing a medical journal article detailing the  inherited
disease, surfactant protein B deficiency.

   Researchers have accelerated a plan to find out how prevalent the disease
is.

   Doctors have seen that the disease has at least one short-term cure: lung
transplants.

   Researchers have better lung tissue samples than ever to study the  disease.

   Autumn, now 6 months old, and 7-month-old Meagan are only two infants to
survive the disease, thanks to their transplants.

   "They were very ground-breaking," said Dr. Aaron Hamvas, medical director  of
the neonatal intensive care unit at St. Louis Children's Hospital.

   Doctors at the St. Louis hospital, which has a national reputation for
pediatric lung transplants, are writing an article about the disease,  detailing
the medical histories of Meagan and Autumn.

   The two ended up in St. Louis to wait for lung donors shortly after their
births last winter in Pinellas County hospitals. Doctors have stressed that
finding two cases of the disease in such proximity is coincidence.

   The doctors hope to have their article published in a national medical
journal so other physicians will consider this rare disorder when newborns  have
unexplained respiratory failure, Hamvas said.

   Early diagnosis means prompt listing for a baby on the national list of
people waiting for organ donors.

   A lung transplant is so far the only known treatment for the disorder,  which
was identified by scientists last year. Slightly more than a dozen  families
around the world have been identified as having had children  afflicted with the
disease.

   A core group of six doctors, including Hamvas and Dr. Lawrence Nogee of
Johns Hopkins University, have applied for a $ 3-million grant from the
National Institutes of Health to study how prevalent this disease really is.

   The group of doctors plans to survey birth and death records in Missouri,
and possibly Florida, for babies who died of respiratory disease before the  age
of six months, Hamvas said.

   Doctors plan to look at the autopsy slides of these children to see if they
died of surfactant protein B deficiency before doctors knew what the disease
was.

   "This disorder is much more common than we previously believed," Hamvas
said.

   The diagnosis of Meagan and Autumn, whose families live just miles apart,
has been an impetus for doctors to move forward with the research.

   Mike Craig, Meagan's father, is thrilled.

   "I just hope it helps other kids and other families," he said.

   Meagan is still recuperating at the St. Louis hospital because she had to
undergo a second lung transplant in June when a severe bacterial infection
ravaged the first set of lungs she had received in February. Autumn, who had
her transplant in March, has been home with her family in Pinellas Park since
last month.

   Because of Meagan's and Autumn's lung transplants, researchers can, for the
first time, study the disease in lung tissue removed from living children,  said
Nogee of Johns Hopkins University, the lead investigator of a team that
identified the gene defect.

   "It's very exciting that there is potentially a cure in transplant,"  Nogee
said.

   Doctors didn't know what would happen when they did the first transplant on
Meagan in February. All they knew was that the disease was causing her lungs  to
fail and, with no other known treatment, a transplant was her only hope.

   "It's an experiment in and of itself," Nogee said. "You don't know for  sure
it's going to work before you do it because something like this hasn't  been
done."

   It was a risk both Meagan's and Autumn's parents were willing to take.

   "We had a chance to save my baby's life," said Waldron, Autumn's mother.  "It
didn't feel like an experiment."

   Doctors hope that by studying the damaged lungs removed from Autumn and
Meagan, they can better understand how the lungs and the surfactant protein B
work and maybe develop another treatment for the disorder, Nogee said.

   Potential treatments include gene therapy, whereby a healthy gene is
introduced into the lungs to replace the defective one that causes the lungs
not to make the surfactant protein B, Nogee said.

   "It'd be a a lot simpler to give a gene rather than a set of lungs," he
said.

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Times files, (2);
Dr. Aaron Hamvas, (ran LT NT CT); Dr. Lawrence Nogee, (ran LT NT CT); Autumn
Bailey, with parents Richard Bailey and Lauri Waldron., (ran LT NT); Meagan
Craig, with her physical therapist, Cathy Yungbluth., (ran LT NT)

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1994


                             723 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      July 15, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: A place to beat a genetic urge to eat

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    When a baby is born with Prader-Willi syndrome, that child lives with a
hunger that's never satisfied.

   So strong are the effects of the disorder that even teens and adults may
ransack refrigerators and eat food right off supermarket shelves.

   And because children with PWS often suffer some mental retardation, too, the
challenge can overwhelm parents.

   So far, there is no cure. Ongoing research in various labs across the USA has
recently narrowed the search for the cause of PWS to a "candidate gene," says
Dr. Suzanne Cassidy, a medical geneticist at Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, Cleveland. The culprit: absence of part of the copy of
chromosome 15 from the father.

   Better knowledge of PWS may lead to "treatments and maybe even gene therapy"
to replace or compensate for the proteins affected by the garbled or missing
genetic messages, Cassidy says. "But to prevent (the syndrome), that's not
likely to happen in the near future," says Cassidy, who will be on the program
when researchers and many parents gather in Atlanta next week for a national
conference on the disorder. (For more information, call 800-926-4797.)

   Named after Swiss doctors Andre Prader and Heinrich Willi, who helped
identify the syndrome in 1956, Prader-Willi syndrome occurs in 1 in 10,000 to
15,000 births. Some PWS symptoms:

   -- Lifelong poor muscle tone causes even newborns to cry weakly and not suck
properly.

   -- An insatiable appetite results in most children becoming obese. PWS also
causes them to gain weight easily.

   -- Neither sex is fertile; the genitalia underdevelop and puberty is
incomplete. Women rarely have periods; men may not have a low voice, grow beards
or other body hair.

   -- Most have an IQ of 40 to 90. About age 3, many begin to develop
personality problems (compulsive behavior, tantrums, stubbornness).

   The affected children have "a very characteristic personality type," Cassidy
says. "They're very stubborn, manipulative and have temper tantrums long past
the age when persons usually have them. It affects their quality of life (as
they age). They can't keep jobs, they get kicked out of group homes, they make
life impossible for families."

   But there are some glimmers of hope. In a suburb southwest of Kansas City,
Mo., a living arrangement called Southern Road has worked wonders - for the
person with PWS and the family. "It's respite for the family . . . (and as)
normalized living of life as possible, given the daily impact the syndrome has,"
says Kathleen McCarther of Open Options, a non-profit organization that runs
Southern Road.

   Its roomy, ranch-style accommodations house 11 residents and feature two
self-serve laundry rooms, an exercise area with a treadmill and stationary bike,
an airy dining room with vaulted ceiling and generous backyard.

   But the staff makes the house a home. During the week it plans dances, hiking
and trips to movies, ballgames, amusement parks, the zoo. Most residents earn
money by working at a production plant nearby.

   Staffer Ken Skillman, a Grizzly Adams of a man, has a gruff delivery he can
use to tease the residents. Chatting after dinner one night, he proclaims the
usual evening snacks won't be on the agenda.

   Two residents, Lynn Billedo, 40, and Shelly Radinsky, 29, look at each other,
concerned. A second later, Billedo loosens up. "He always tries to pull that,"
she says. They all laugh.

   Three years ago, Billedo weighed 375 pounds; today it's 145. By traditional
PWS terms, she's a jet-setter. Several times, Billedo has flown cross-state to
visit her parents. "All by myself. I love to fly."

   A former resident, Roland Reed learned enough in four years at Southern Road
to live on his own for the first time. He moved into a nearby duplex last fall
with another man who also has PWS. A support worker regularly spends time there.

   "It's a big step," admits Reed, 33, who was born in Carthage, Mo. He has a
job at a nearby hotel and enjoys his long-sought freedom.

   Reed wasn't diagnosed until after high school and weighed 320 once; today he
weighs 132. With obvious pride, he opens a high school yearbook showing his
former, larger self. To lose weight, "I stuck to my diet. I found out what was
junk stuff and what not to eat."

   The accomplishments of Reed and his former housemates are remarkable, Cassidy
says. Such experiments have been tried, "but not always successfully. (PWS) is a
disorder. They cannot control if they feel hungry or not. They can possibly
control how they respond."

   Still, McCarther says, "We hope they (can eventually) move out, but for some
people, this is their home."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Lauren Chapin

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1994


                             724 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 2353 words

HEADLINE: Vexing Pursuit of Breast Cancer Gene

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   MY TATE of Richmond is thinking about something no 23-year-old should have to
consider: getting rid of her healthy young breasts.

   Already her family has suffered enough misery to satisfy Sophocles. Her
grandmother was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 39 and died of it eight
years later, her body a brutal tapestry of surgical scars and radiation burns.
In 1989, Ms. Tate's aunt, Mary Jo Ellis Kahn, also learned she had breast
cancer, at age 39. As Ms. Kahn was in the hospital having her mastectomy, Ms.
Tate's mother, Judi Ellis, discovered that she, too, had breast cancer, at age
41. Both women went through months of harsh chemotherapy, which was enough to
persuade Ms. Tate's other two maternal aunts, Charlynn Ross and Lauran Ellis, to
have prophylactic mastectomies in their mid-30's.

    Now Ms. Tate is wondering how long she can wait until she follows suit.
About the only thing that would dissuade her from having her breasts removed
would be to learn unequivocally that she had not inherited from her mother the
terrible trait that would predispose her to contracting breast cancer at a young
age.

   She is one of hundreds of thousands of women in the United States who may
carry the trait, an altered form of a gene linked to breast cancer. And she is
one of the reasons why the massive hunt now under way to discover the gene has
attracted more attention -- and fanned greater hopes -- than any genetic
enterprise attempted since Gregor Mendel began crossing his peas.

   Scientists have played into the buildup, with many of them predicting that
the discovery would happen any day, any week, any month now. They have been
saying that for the past two years.

   The delay has proved both a bane and a blessing. It has added to the overall
angst among women and researchers alike, but it has stimulated vigorous,
clearheaded discussions of how knowledge of the gene should and should not be
used once it is uncovered. While experts warn against any fantasies that the
finding will revolutionize the diagnosis or treatment of breast cancer
overnight, some are stretching their minds to conceive of novel ways that the
discovery might eventually prove its worth.

   There is ample reason to long to discover the gene. A mutated form is almost
surely responsible for the great majority of cases of hereditary breast cancer,
which accounts for about 5 percent of all breast cancers. More than 600,000
women in the United States may carry the breast cancer trait, a mutated form of
the gene called BRCA-1, and for these women the odds of contracting breast
cancer by the age of 65 are better than 85 percent.

   Beyond its role in familial breast cancer, the gene is very likely involved
in many of the 95 percent of cases that are not familial, tumors that
spontaneously arise at some point in a woman's life. Researchers suspect that a
change in the normal biochemical spelling of the BRCA-1 gene is a central step
in the genesis of breast cancer. Those alterations can either be inherited, as
they are in familial breast cancer, or picked up as a result of radiation, diet
or environmental toxins, or they may be just a random mishap that occurs when
one breast cell divides into two. So researchers hope that by capturing and
analyzing the BRCA-1 gene, they will have a molecular grasp on breast cancer
generally. They also will gain insights into ovarian cancer, another malignancy
linked to the gene.

   Given the potential importance of the discovery, about a dozen major
laboratories in the United States, Canada, Europe and Japan are feverishly
competing for the honor of isolating the gene.

   But researchers now concede that the task is much harder than they had
originally anticipated. They know roughly what sort of gene they are looking
for. They have studied hundreds of families with long and sad histories of
breast and ovarian cancer. They have pored over the genetic material of women
known to carry the breast cancer mutation and compared it with the DNA of
hundreds of others without the trait. They have narrowed their search to one
neighborhood of one chromosome, a segment about halfway down the lower arm of
chromosome 17, out of the 23 pairs of chromosomes found in all human cells.

   But the neighborhood they are scratching through is still huge, and it turns
out to be a sort of midtown Manhattan of DNA, a region densely packed with
genes. Scientists had thought they would find maybe 10 genes on the block, but
they have instead identified at least 26. Worse still, some of these genes are
squashed one into another, making it very difficult to sort out who is doing
what and which begins where.

Getting So Close, Only to Miss Again

    Again and again, biologists searching in that territory have examined genes
that bore tantalizing earmarks of being the right quarry. One gene they looked
at, for example, is involved in estrogen metabolism, and what could be a more
likely candidate for a breast cancer gene than one related to estrogen?

   Again and again, they have been disappointed.

   "There have been many biologically plausible candidate genes," said Dr.
Mary-Claire King, a geneticist at the University of California at Berkeley.
"There have been many really good clues. That's why there was reason to be
optimistic." Dr. King was the first to locate the approximate neighborhood of
the breast cancer gene in 1990, and she is now a leader in the quest to find its
precise street address.

   At the moment, her lab is devoting most of its energy to a candidate gene
they have nicknamed Odo, after a character in the television series "Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine." They think it looks very promising, but Dr. King says it will
take weeks, if not longer, to sort out what is going on with it. "I give it a
1-in-10 chance" of being the right gene, said Lori S. Friedman, a graduate
student in the lab who is working on Odo. "At this point, I'm just trying to be
pragmatic." A year or so ago, when her brother and his family began building a
house in Iowa, Ms. Friedman made a gentlewoman's bet with him that she would
have her BRCA-1 before the house was finished. "Well, they're all moved in now,"
she said.

   Dr. Francis Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research in Bethesda, Md., who is also seeking the gene, said, "I'm still pretty
optimistic it will happen in the next few months, but it wouldn't be wise to say
that with great assurance, given the fact that I said that a few months ago."

   As a backup plan for locating the gene, Dr. Harold Varmus, director of the
National Institutes of Health, has proposed using $1 million of the institutes'
discretionary fund to start a sort of mini-Human Genome Project, focusing on the
region of chromosome 17 where BRCA-1 is hiding.

   Dr. Varmus has suggested that a scientific team undertake to sequence, or
spell out, all one million DNA subunits in that part of the chromosome, a
technically feasible but daunting task. If the entire biochemical sequence of
the terrain were known, not only would scientists be able to march in easily and
pluck out the right gene, they would also have the complete letter-by-letter
guide for the gene from the start, easing their efforts to identify the various
mutational differences they suspect distinguish one breast cancer patient from
another.

   Dr. Varmus expects to decide by September which team will get the $1 million
grant, and the sequencing will probably take another year, although efforts
currently under way could turn up the gene long before then.

Delays Providing Time to Think

    The delay in locating the gene may not be entirely bad. It has given
researchers, ethicists, breast cancer activists and others ample time to
consider what should be done after the gene is found. All agree on one point:
The discovery will represent but the barest beginning in thwarting breast
cancer. The finding alone will not cure a single patient, and whatever new
therapies it may yield will be years in coming. Scientists have a notoriously
difficult time proceeding from the isolation of a gene to an understanding of
how the gene normally works in the body, or what happens when the gene goes
askew.

   An even bigger leap will be needed to translate an understanding of the gene
into new cancer drugs, improved cancer detection methods, gene therapy
techniques, preventive regimens or any other bedside breakthrough.

   "People should understand what this means," said Frances M. Visco, president
of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, a lobbying organization based in
Washington. "This is not the answer to the breast cancer epidemic."

   Of more immediate concern is how the gene will be used to screen for breast
cancer susceptibility, and what women will be told about their options if they
prove to be carriers. Even in the most straightforward cases, the issue is a
minefield. The first women to benefit from screening will be those in high-risk
families, in which several close relatives had breast cancer at a young age,
before menopause.

   But it is not clear what the benefits will be to a woman who finds out she is
a carrier of the gene mutation linked to familial breast cancer. At this point,
it appears that her options will be limited. Prophylactic mastectomies are not
proven to work. Surgeons can never be sure they have removed all the breast
tissue, and any cells left behind retain their malignant potential. What is
more, in some families the altered form of BRCA-1 seems to markedly increase the
risk of ovarian cancer as well as breast cancer. Should these women be counseled
to have their ovaries removed as well as their breasts?

   "At some point you wonder how many organ parts you have to cut out," said
Mary Jo Ellis Kahn, who is helping to draft guidelines on screening procedures
with BRCA-1. "This is a very harsh thing to even consider."

Limited Choices For Women at Risk

    Some women may choose to live with the risk and simply try to improve their
surveillance of their breasts. But even with regular mammograms, many tumors are
missed. And the breast tissue of young women, particularly under the age of 40,
is so dense that it can be especially hard to distinguish between breast and
tumor tissue. But for a carrier of the mutation, breast cancer can strike at a
very young age, which means that early mammograms are needed.

   Another option for carriers is to get into the newly reactivated tamoxifen
trial, a clinical study under way at several centers throughout the country. The
drug has been shown to prevent the recurrence of breast cancer in those who have
already suffered from the disease, and now researchers hope to determine if
tamoxifen can prevent the onset of tumors in healthy women known to be at high
risk. However, the drug has side effects, its effectiveness is unknown, it
increases the risk of uterine cancer, and it can put premenopausal women into
early menopause.

   "If I were in the position of knowing I was at risk, I would join the trial,"
Dr. King said. "I have no hesitation about saying it. But I also must say that
of the 13 women in my lab, I'm the only one who would do it. "I'm also, at 48,
the oldest woman in my lab, and that may influence my thinking here," she added.

   Women who learn that they have the mutation might wish to avoid extra sources
of estrogen, like birth control pills or hormone replacement therapy, some
researchers said.

   Other scientists are trying to stretch their imaginations to see how
knowledge of the gene could immediately be put to use. Dr. David Botstein, a
geneticist at Stanford University, has proposed that healthy women found to
harbor the mutation might wish to bank samples of their bone marrow. If they
needed a bone marrow transplant later to help them weather the onslaught of
chemotherapy, they could use their healthy stored marrow to replenish the marrow
that the cancer drugs would kill. That could significantly improve the chances
of the transplant succeeding, compared with today's approach of using donor
marrow or a cancer patient's current marrow, which is often already contaminated
with metastatic tumor cells.

   Dr. Mark H. Skolnick, a geneticist at the University of Utah Medical Center
in Salt Lake City, who is also seeking the breast cancer gene, has proposed
that, since early childbearing is known to help reduce a woman's overall risk of
breast cancer, a young woman found to carry the mutation might consider having a
child at a relatively young age. Alternatively, scientists might come up with a
way of simulating pregnancy with hormones, lending the benefits without the
obligations, he said. However, the degree to which pregnancy influences the odds
of breast cancer in a woman with an extremely elevated risk remains unknown.

   When or if women not in a high-risk group are ever likely to be screened for
altered forms of BRCA-1 is not clear. Dr. Anne M. Bowcock, head of the
department of pediatrics of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
in Dallas, another seeker of the gene, said that there might be dozens, if not
hundreds, of different mutations that could affect the performance of the BRCA-1
gene. Some mutations might confer a much higher cancer risk on women than
others, and it will take time for scientists to sort out the many tangled skeins
before a doctor can tell a woman walking in off the street what her odds of
cancer may be.

   In Dr. Collins's view, any new genetic tests that emerge from the work should
probably be thought of as new drugs and be subjected to the same rigorous
standards of safety and efficacy. "DNA testing has potential efficacy if a
breast cancer could be picked up early in a woman at risk and then more easily
cured," he said. "But the test can also have toxicity, where people are given
misleading information, or information that is not explained in a beneficial way
and ends up hurting the patient.

   "What we're looking at here is efficacy versus toxicity. You wouldn't want to
take a new drug right out of the lab and put it into every doctor's office the
next day, and you wouldn't want to do that with a new DNA test either."

GRAPHIC: Photos: Members of a family dealing with a hereditary form of breast
cancer: Mary Jo Ellis Kahn, left rear; Judi Ellis, left front; Lauran Ellis,
center, and Amy Tate, right. (Timothy Wright for The New York Times) (pg. C1);
Dr. Francis Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome Research,
above, and right, Dr. Mary-Claire King, a geneticist at the University of
California at Berkeley. (Photographs by Marty Katz for The New York Times) (pg.
C12)

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1994


                             725 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      July 11, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F8; APPOINTMENTS

LENGTH: 774 words

HEADLINE: APPOINTMENTS

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Associations/Nonprofit


   The Arlington County Bar Association named Richard E. Trodden president.

   The Association of Women in International Trade named Barbara D. Linney
president, Kristal Alley vice president, Liese Wright secretary, Cindy Fraser
treasurer, and Jeannette Tramhel assistant treasurer.

   Jeremy P. Moyes was named director of the International Executive MBA program
at the Georgetown University School of Business.

   The Alexandria-based National Association of Children's Hospitals and Related
Institutions named Molly A. Anthony vice president for research and policy
analysis.

   Philip Perrine was named president of the Montgomery County Chamber of
Commerce.

   William J. Cople III was elected general counsel of the National Capital Area
Council of the Boy Scouts of America.

   The Maryland Bankers Association in Annapolis elected Charles W. Hoff III
president and appointed R. Eugene Taylor and William C. Harris to the board.

   Gloria Bergquist joined the American Forest & Paper Association in Washington
as director of environmental public affairs.

   The Anne Arundel Trade Council elected Andrew R. Lombardo president, Arthur
Ebersberger vice president, Ed Ladd secretary and Scarlett Breeding treasurer.

   James L. Moore Jr. was elected chairman of the Junior Fellow College Advisory
Council of the Washington-based American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists.

   The Board for International Broadcasting named Kevin Klose president of Radio
Free Europe/Radio Liberty Inc. and Robert Gillette director of broadcasting.

   Michael S. Lofton was elected president of the Maryland Industrial
Development Association in Annapolis.

   The National Geographic Society appointed John Daly vice president and chief
financial officer and Joyce Golden vice president for financial planning.

   The National Association of Investment Companies named Bruce Gamble
president.

    Alexandria Hospital named Carlton A. Stockton, Stefani J. Filak, Ethel S.
Underwood and James I. Chatman to the board.

   Robert G. Snyder joined the Maryland Department of Economic and Employment
Development as environmental technology representative.

   The National Trust for Historic Preservation in Washington named Kathy Dwyer
Southern executive director of Montpelier in Orange, Va., home of President
James Madison.

   Round House Theatre in Silver Spring named Joseph W. Lamkin and Eliot
Pfanstiehl to the board, and Sara A. Purcell marketing associate.

   Companies


   Russ Reid Co. named Mark McIntyre vice president and director of its new
Washington office.

   David A. Hirsch joined the Fairfax law firm Mendelsohn & Ishee, P.C. as of
counsel.

   Lafarge Corp. in Reston named E.T. Balfe executive vice president of the
company and president of the Lafarge Construction Materials group.

   UUNet Technologies Inc. in Falls Church appointed John W. Sidgmore president
and chief executive.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg named Marvin E. Jaffe to the board.

   Raytheon Engineers & Constructors named James U. DeFrancis vice president of
its Washington operations.

   John C. Hunt Jr. was named front office manager for Loews L'Enfant Plaza
Hotel in Washington.

   The McLean-based Heritage Bank named William E. Ore vice president.

   Precision Tune Inc. in Leesburg named Frederick Simmons associate general
counsel.

   KPMG Peat Marwick in Washington named John J. O'Neill partner.

   Loiederman Associates Inc. in Rockville named Mary C. Giles associate.

   Donald J. Minarich joined Caterair International in Bethesda as senior vice
president of the strategic market unit, for northern North America.

   Systech Group in Reston named Joseph A. Barry senior security engineer.

   Klein & Stump Inc. in Arlington named Jerry D. Stump president.

   MTL Systems Inc. named Ralph Keim director of Washington operations.

   Potomac Valley Bank appointed Kenneth C.  Cook president and chief executive,
and R. Dennis Homberg vice chairman of the board.

   Hechinger Co. in Landover appointed Scott Litten senior vice president and
chief financial officer.

   MCI Communications Corp. in Washington named Michael Rowny executive vice
president for alliances and ventures for NetworkMCI.

   Eisner, Petrou & Associates in Washington named Jeffrey A. Wilklow senior
vice president.

   Hyatt Regency Washington named Joseph M. DeMille director of sales and
marketing.

   Columbia Communications Corp. in Bethesda named Arthur Hill vice president of
sales.


   Send information about promotions, appointments and personnel moves to
Appointments, Business News Department, The Washington Post, 1150 15th St. NW,
Washington, D.C. 20071-5302. All material must be submitted in writing.



GRAPHIC: PHOTO, JOYCE GOLDEN

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1994


                             726 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      July 8, 1994, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F3; MICHAEL SCHRAGE

LENGTH: 1056 words

HEADLINE: An Infusion of Computer Modeling Could Enliven the Life Sciences

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Michael Schrage

BODY:

   Fifty years ago this month, a Nobel laureate physicist published a tiny book
whose title asked a simple question: "What Is Life?"

   Erwin Schroedinger, a creator of the quantum physics that was then leading
the world inexorably toward the atomic bomb, wondered what role his science
could play in explaining the nature of living things. "How can the events in
space and time which take place within the spatial boundary of a living
organism," he asked, "be accounted for by physics and chemistry?"

   Denying any hints of once-trendy vitalism or mystic rationales, Schroedinger
boldly asserted that "the obvious inability of present-day physics and chemistry
to account for such events is no reason at all for doubting that they can be
accounted for by those sciences." As the war ended, Schroedinger's book -- based
on his 1943 Dublin lectures -- appealed to physicists who wanted to turn their
talents away from weapons of destruction toward the understanding of life. The
book strongly influenced the imaginations and research agendas of a generation
of young scientists -- including such future Nobel laureates as Francis Crick,
James Watson and Jacques Monod. "What Is Life?" framed the questions scientists
would be answering for the rest of the century.

   But the book also was a symbol of a research effort that ultimately may prove
every bit as important as the Manhattan Project.

   Throughout the 1930s, the Rockefeller Foundation -- then the most innovative
provider of funds for basic scientific research -- believed that physicists held
the intellectual keys to creating breakthroughs in the life sciences. Under the
direction of Warren Weaver, the foundation encouraged such physicists as Max
Delbrueck and Leo Szilard to apply their talents to the problems of biology.

   In effect, the Rockefeller Foundation invested millions to bring the culture
and tools of physics to the domain of life. These physicists redefined the
vocabulary of the life sciences and created a new scientific subculture.

   For example, Delbrueck, funded by Rockefeller, launched the Phage Group of
physics-influenced researchers, which explored the genetics of bacterial
viruses. The youngest member of that group? James Watson, who became a
co-discoverer of the double helix.

   These were the institutional beginnings of molecular biology, and they
seamlessly led to the cracking of the genetic code and the emergence of
biotechnology as an industry. The roots of innovations from mapping the human
genome to our tentative forays in gene therapy thus reach back directly to the
programs initiated in the 1930s and the questions articulated by Schroedinger.

   Today there are no books comparable to "What Is Life?" nor any research
foundations seeking to create new subcultures of science. But it's clear that,
just as physics stood ready to transform biology half a century ago, there are
similar opportunities to transform the life sciences today.

   The physicists have had their turn. Who's next? Who should be next? What does
biology now need?

   "We need computer science and metaphors from mathematics to get to the next
level of understanding," asserts Lee Hood, Gates Professor and chairman of the
molecular biology department at the University of Washington. Yes, that's Gates
as in Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft Corp., who both endowed the chair
and played an essential role in recruiting Hood from the California Institute of
Technology.

   Hood is enamored of the potential of digital technologies to detect and
create intelligible patterns from the reams of data generated by such
initiatives as the Human Genome Project.

   "There are enormous amounts of data to analyze, and we need both the tools
and the theories to do it," Hood says. "That's why I see theoretical biology
becoming so important. We have all this two-dimensional data from chromosomes
and three-dimensional data from the structure of proteins and multidimensional
data from complex systems of interaction -- like how the neurons of the brain
interact to give us consciousness... . What we don't have are the theories or
the mathematics that help pattern this data. We need to marry biology with
mathematics and computer modeling."

   "Computer modeling is vital," agrees Caltech science history professor Daniel
Kevles, who wrote "The Physicists," a definitive history of physicists in the
United States, and who now explores the culture of the life sciences. "Computer
modeling [emulation] of cellular processes strikes me as a potentially important
opportunity. The cell is a very complicated place; there are a lot of things
going on at the same time. How we move out into the cell from the genome is very
important... . The field of molecular biology needs more biologically informed
software people."

   It's not enough to have biologists try to build computer models and
simulations of molecular biology, a common enough practice today. Rather,
there's a need to get the world's best mathematicians and modelers to learn
molecular biology.

   Hood, who wants to launch a Center for Computational Biology, thinks it would
be "great" if the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation
or private foundations would aggressively fund mathematicians and computer
scientists to come into biology in the 1990s the way the Rockefeller Foundation
paid for physicists to come into biology more than 50 years ago. "The NIH is
just beginning to understand this," he says.

   Might an influx of mathematicians and computer modelers into biology have an
impact comparable to that of the physicists? Will our understanding of life be
marginally improved or fundamentally transformed if our abilities to digitally
model and calculate life processes radically change?

   Perhaps a new realm of "bio-informatics" -- a science and technology of
managing, modeling and manipulating molecular biological data -- could lead to
the biggest industry yet: one that merges computer software with medical
diagnoses and therapy.

   If we hope to see the same sort of advances in biology the next 50 years as
we did the last 50, society will have to make a serious investment in the new
technologies of bio-informatics.

   Michael Schrage is a writer, consultant and research associate at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and a columnist for the Los Angeles
Times.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1994


                             727 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 7, 1994, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words

HEADLINE: INNOVATION / MICHAEL SCHRAGE:  SECRETS OF LIFE MIGHT BE REVEALED IN A
DIGITAL FORMAT

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHRAGE

BODY:

   Exactly 50 years ago, a Nobel laureate physicist published a tiny book whose
title asked a simple question: "What Is Life?"

   Erwin Schrodinger, a creator of the quantum physics that was then leading the
world inexorably toward the atomic bomb, wondered what role his science could
play in explaining the nature of living things. "How can the events in space and
time which take place within the spatial boundary of a living organism," he
asked, "be accounted for by physics and chemistry?"

   Denying any hints of once-trendy "vitalism" or mystic rationales, Schrodinger
boldly asserted that "the obvious inability of present-day physics and chemistry
to account for such events is no reason at all for doubting that they can be
accounted for by those sciences." As the war ended, Schrodinger's book -- based
on his 1943 Dublin lectures -- appealed to physicists who wanted to turn their
talents away from weapons of destruction and toward the understanding of life.
The book strongly influenced the imaginations and research agendas of a
generation of young scientists -- including such future Nobel laureates as
Francis Crick, James Watson and Jacques Monod. "What Is Life?" framed the
questions scientists would be answering for the rest of the century.

   But the book was also a symbol of a research effort that may ultimately prove
every bit as important as the Manhattan Project.

   Throughout the 1930s, the Rockefeller Foundation -- then the most innovative
funder of basic scientific research -- believed that physicists held the
intellectual keys to creating breakthroughs in the life sciences. Under the
direction of Warren Weaver, the Foundation encouraged such physicists as Max
Delbruck and Leo Szilard to bring their mind-sets to the problems of biology.

   In effect, the Rockefeller Foundation invested millions to bring the culture
and tools of physics to the domain of life. These physicists redefined the
vocabularies of the life sciences and created a new scientific subculture.

   The Rockefeller-funded Delbruck, for example, launched the Phage Group of
physics-influenced researchers that explored the genetics of bacterial viruses.
The youngest member of that group? James Watson, who became a co-discoverer of
the double helix.

   These were the institutional beginnings of molecular biology and they
seamlessly led to the cracking of the genetic code and the emergence of
biotechnology as an industry. The roots of innovations from mapping the human
genome to our tentative forays in gene therapy thus reach back directly to the
programs initiated in the 1930s, and the questions articulated by Schrodinger.

   Now there's no book today comparable to "What Is Life?" nor any research
foundations seeking to create new subcultures of science. But it's clear that,
just as physics stood ready to transform biology half a century ago, there are
similar opportunities to transform the life sciences today.

   The physicists have had their turn. Who's next? Who should be next? What does
biology now need?

   "We need computer science and metaphors from mathematics to get to the next
level of understanding," asserts Dr. Lee Hood, the Gates Professor and Chairman
of the Molecular Biology Department at the University of Washington. Yes, that's
Gates as in Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, who both endowed the chair
and played an essential role in recruiting Hood from Caltech to the University
of Washington.

   Hood is enamored of the potential of digital technologies to detect and
create intelligible patterns from the reams of data generated by such
initiatives as the Human Genome Project.

   "There are enormous amounts of data to analyze and we need both the tools and
the theories to do it," Hood says. "That's why I see theoretical biology
becoming so important. We have all this two-dimensional data from chromosomes
and three-dimensional data from the structure of proteins and multidimensional
data from complex systems of interaction -- like how the neurons of the brain
interact to give us consciousness. . . . What we don't have are the theories or
the mathematics that help pattern this data. We need to marry biology with
mathematics and computer modeling."

   "Computer modeling is vital," agrees Caltech History of Science Professor
Daniel Kevles, who wrote "The Physicists," a definitive history of physicists in
the United States, and who now explores the culture of the life sciences.
"Computer modeling (emulation) of cellular processes strikes me as a potentially
important opportunity. The cell is a very complicated place; there are a lot of
things going on at the same time. How we move out into the cell from the genome
is very important. . . . The field of molecular biology needs more biologically
informed software people."

   It's not enough to have biologists try to build computer models and
simulations of molecular biology, a common-enough practice today. Rather,
there's a need to get the world's best mathematicians and modelers to learn
molecular biology.

   Hood, who wants to launch a Center for Computational Biology, thinks it would
be "great" if the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation
or private foundations would aggressively fund mathematicians and computer
scientists to come into biology in the 1990s the way the Rockefeller Foundation
paid for physicists to come into biology over 50 years ago. "The NIH is just
beginning to understand this," he says.

   Might an influx of mathematicians and computer modelers into biology have an
impact comparable to that of the physicists? Will our understanding of life be
marginally improved or fundamentally transformed if our abilities to digitally
model and calculate life processes radically change?

   Perhaps a new realm of "bio-informatics" -- a science and technology of
managing, modeling and manipulating molecular biological data -- could lead to
the biggest industry yet: an industry that merges computer software with medical
diagnoses and therapy.

   If the next 50 years hope to see the same sort of advances in biology as the
last 50, society will have to make a serious investment in the new technologies
of bio-informatics.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1994


                             728 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    July 3, 1994 Sunday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: COM; Pg. 5F

LENGTH: 794 words

HEADLINE: INVADER SNEAKS UP ON VICTIM RESEARCHERS SEEK GENETIC WEAPON FOR
FIGHTING BACK

BYLINE: ROBERT S. BOYD Free Press Washington Staff

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- It starts so innocently -- on a sunny day at the beach, around
a backyard grill, in the friendly warmth of a smoky bar.

   But swiftly, stealthily, the temple of your body is violated as if by a thief
in the night.

   A silent intruder -- perhaps an ultraviolet ray, or a byproduct of carbon
from broiling steak, or a whiff of tar in tobacco -- sneaks into one of the
trillion cells that make up a human being.

   Once inside, the invader targets a single gene out of the 100,000 coiled in
the nucleus of each cell. It zaps one of the microscopic chemical units that
form the gene and determine its function in DNA, the biological codebook for
every living creature.

   The tiny wound seems trivial -- nothing like the havoc caused by a knife or a
bullet. But the first step has been taken down a long, winding road that may
lead to cancer and death.

   Fortunately the first step, by itself, is not enough to cause cancer. Many
other genetic alterations must follow to produce a malignant tumor. During that
process, nature has ways to repair damaged genes and halt the growth of
cancerous cells. Increasingly nowadays doctors do, too.

   In recent years, scientists have learned in immense detail how cancer begins,
grows and spreads. As a result, they are far better armed for battle than when
President Richard Nixon launched the War on Cancer in 1971.

   "There have been breathtaking advances in the fundamental understanding of
how a normal cell becomes a cancer," the National Cancer Advisory Board says in
a report being prepared for delivery to Congress this summer.

   Cancer warriors hope to add genetic weapons to their arsenal; the traditional
tools against cancer -- surgery, drugs and radiation (sometimes mocked as
"slash, poison and burn") -- have failed to conquer the disease.

   Government scientists, academic researchers and drug companies are racing to
find ways to detect, prevent and correct gene damage. Nearly 70 gene therapy
trials have been authorized, 50 of them for cancer.

   Since 1992, 16 brain cancer patients have been injected with a gene that
makes their tumors respond to chemotherapy.

   "Five patients who failed all previous therapy showed significant
improvement," said Dr. Michael Blaese, a leading gene therapist at the National
Cancer Institute. "We're very encouraged."

   Scientists have known for years that cancer is not one disease, but many
diseases, each marked by the uncontrolled growth of cells. But now it is clear
that all cancers have something in common -- one or more defective genes.

   In most cases, genes are injured by an external force, such as sunlight or a
chemical in food, air or water. In other cases, a genetic flaw is inherited from
a parent.

   The genes involved in cancer are those that govern cell division. About 100
such genes have been identified, and about 20 have been linked to specific
cancers.

   A colon cancer gene was discovered last December, a kidney cancer gene in
May. Currently half a dozen scientific teams are competing to be the first to
pinpoint a breast cancer gene.

   "When we find the gene, we can test women to see if they are at risk," said
Mary-Claire King of the University of California, leader of one of the research
teams. Cancer fighters are eager for such tests because early detection is one
of the best ways to reduce the death rate.

   Scientists have determined that there are two types of cancer genes.

   Genes in one set, first identified in the mid-1970s, are known as oncogenes
(onco is a prefix meaning cancer). Oncogenes are normal growth genes that have
turned bad. Like the Sorcerer's Apprentice in the movie "Fantasia," oncogenes
make cells multiply wildly, forming malignant tumors.

   The other cancer genes, labeled tumor suppressor genes, were discovered in
the late 1980s. When healthy, their role is to stop cells from dividing.

   Oncogenes are often likened to the accelerator on a car, and suppressor genes
to the brakes. When either malfunctions, trouble follows.

   "A cancer cell's growth may derive from a stuck accelerator or a defective
braking system," said Robert Weinberg, a leading researcher at the Whitehead
Institute in Cambridge, Mass.

   Scientists say most cancers are not caused by a single genetic flaw. Instead,
they are the result of a complex cascade of events that may take decades.

   For example, at least three suppressor genes must fail and one oncogene must
run amok to turn a benign polyp into colon cancer.

   The fact that most cancers require repeated genetic injuries may make them
easier to block.

   "By erecting multiple hurdles in the road, the circuitry inside our cells
ensures that only the rare cell will sustain the requisite number of changes for
making a cancer cell," Weinberg said.

   ***

GRAPHIC: Diagram JAMES SMALLWOOD and JUDY TREIBLE, KRT

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             729 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              July 1, 1994 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1374 words

HEADLINE: GRANTING HOPE

BYLINE: BRIAN T. MEEHAN, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Friday, July 1, 1994 GRANTING HOPE

   Summary: Gene therapy offers hope for Kirsten Frohnmayer, who has  Fanconi
anemia, a rare genetic disorder that killed her sister Katie

   Since she was 10, Kirsten Frohnmayer has asked for nothing but the truth.
She demanded it from her parents, Dave and Lynn Frohnmayer, and from all the
doctors and nurses. She wanted to know what was wrong, even when the answers
got scary and the words unfamiliar.

   Two words, Fanconi anemia, forever changed her family's life. They were
first spoken 11 years ago when Kirsten's anemia led to tests that diagnosed  the
rare genetic disorder. In the years since, Fanconi anemia has stolen her
childhood, threatened her future, and, in 1991, taken her sister Katie's life.
But Kirsten Frohnmayer and her family have refused to become victims.

   On Thursday, 11 years after the nightmare began, the Frohnmayers visited  the
molecular genetics lab at Oregon Health Sciences University. The young  optimist
has become a star student at Stanford University while her parents  have tilted
at medical windmills. No patient ever had a better advocate than  Lynn
Frohnmayer, who has pushed and prodded the scientific community into  action.

   Hospital officials on Thursday announced the receipt of a $6 million  federal
National Institutes of Health grant to study Fanconi anemia. It  arrived largely
because of the untiring efforts of a family that refused to  buckle.

   ``This was Buck Rogers science 11 years ago,'' Dave Frohnmayer, interim
president of the University of Oregon, said of the gene therapy procedure that
holds hope for Kirsten Frohnmayer. Research has made lightning gains since  1992
when Manuel Buchwald, a Canadian researcher, identified one of the genes
involved in Fanconi anemia. The National Institutes of Health in the United
States has approved a gene therapy trial that could benefit Frohnmayer.

   ``I was told by a Nobel Prize winner that gene therapy was impossible in  our
lifetime,'' Dave Frohnmayer said. ``And yet Kirsten's cells have been  corrected
in a test tube. . . . It does fill you with hope, though sometimes  it seems to
come glacially slow, as in Katie's case.''

   Katie Frohnmayer died Sept. 26, 1991, of complications related to the
disease. She was 12 years old; her father was Oregon attorney general at the
time. The family was devastated.

   ``Part of being an optimist is that I always did look on the bright side of
things, and I never believed that she would die,'' her sister said. ``I really
didn't. . . . It's still hard for me to believe that she is actually gone.''

   The last 11 years have been a painful family odyssey. The Frohnmayers have
coped by leaning on each other, keeping a sense of humor and staying  relentless
in the cause of advancing Fanconi research. They've published a  handbook in
several languages, started an international support group and  established the
Fanconi Anemia Research Fund.

   The fund provided seed money that helped OHSU land the big NIH grant and
also funded Buchwald's research. Despite the hard work and optimism, there  have
been days when the pain is overwhelming.

   - Pain of loss remains

   ``I don't know if one ever recovers from that kind of a loss,'' Lynn
Frohnmayer says of her daughter's death. ``The pain is for me constant, day to
day. I miss Katie all the time. I literally think about her every single day.

   ``You ask how has this changed our life?'' she says. ``How has this not
changed our life? Nothing seems altogether the same. When Kirsten got sick, I
was branch manager of Children's Services Division here in Eugene. I thought I
had three healthy, normal children. David was attorney general of the state of
Oregon. Our lives seemed stable. The kids were happy. . . . And this has just
totally changed our lives. I live daily with a lot of fear. I know too much
about this disease.

   ``I think I was a different person before. I felt in control. If I worked
hard in school, I'd get good grades; if I did a good job at work, my  supervisor
would notice. When something like this happens, you realize there  are many
times when you are not in control.''

   And yet, the family has worked hard to make an impact on the disease that
took Katie. Dave Frohnmayer says: ``This has been not so much a labor of love
but a labor of desperation.''

   The disorder is named for the Swiss scientist who identified the disease in
the 1920s. It packs a puzzling arsenal of symptoms and strikes patients
differently.

   - Disease often misdiagnosed

   Doctors often misdiagnose the disease because of the baffling array of
symptoms. It can cause cancer and birth defects, damage the heart and brain  and
retard growth, affect skin pigment and cause abnormalities with a  patient's
thumb. In most patients, the disease eventually attacks bone marrow  and wrecks
the marrow's vital function of producing blood cells. Most patients die of
infection or unchecked bleeding before their 20th birthday.

   Researchers don't know what causes the disease, but they do know it is
carried in a recessive gene that can lie dormant for generations. It is passed
much like cystic fibrosis is handed from parent to child -- two latent  carriers
both pass the tainted gene to their child. A bone marrow transplant  is the only
proven cure, and suitable donors are hard to find. The Frohnmayers tested
hundreds of family members and founded a national donor registry but  could not
locate suitable donors for Katie or Kirsten.

   In February 1987, the couple had their fifth child, a little girl they  named
Amy. Initial tests indicated Amy did not have the disease. The family  later
learned the tests were wrong and that Amy, too, has Fanconi anemia.

   ``That was a terrible shock,'' says Lynn, who said the family has waited to
disclose Amy's illness until she was old enough to understand. Amy today is a
lively 7-year-old. Her health is good, but her mother worries about her blood
count; her white and red blood cell numbers are slowly dropping.

   - Blood counts plummet

   Kirsten Frohnmayer's health, which had been stable for seven years, hit a
rocky period this year. Her blood counts dropped to dangerous levels, making
the prospect of gene therapy all the more urgent. The family is waiting for  the
U.S. Food and Drug Adminstration to approve the gene therapy trial. In the
procedure, a retrovirus is used to insert corrected genes into the cells that
form the building blocks of the patient's blood system.

   In a test at NIH headquarters in Maryland, scientists have been able to
correct Frohnmayer's broken genes in a test tube. The family hopes that the
procedure will be approved in time to help her. Lynn Frohnmayer believes
there's a chance the procedure could begin by year's end.

   In the meantime, the Frohnmayers do what they have done for 11 years. They
get on with life. Kirsten Frohnmayer earned a 3.77 grade-point average at
Stanford last year as a human biology major.

   This summer, she is working for a Eugene law firm and watching old movies  at
home with her mother.

   Her life has been shaped by the disease but not harnessed by it.

   ``I don't remember ever being a carefree child after age 10,'' she says.
``I'm definitely a happy person, and I don't obsess about this problem at all.
But I never have that feeling of complete total safety. You always know there
is that threat. When I make plans for my future, which I do, I can never be  100
percent sure that I'll have one that's very long.'

   The disease has given Kirsten Frohnmayer insights usually reserved for  those
who have lived far longer.

   ``It's given me an appreciation for life that I think people don't have
unless it's threatened,'' said the 21-year-old. ``Just like you never realize
how much you need your foot until you break your leg, it's that kind of thing. .
. . I don't tend to get that upset about small things. . . . I noticed it at
school, for example, when one of my friends came back from a test and had not
done well and was just sobbing and saying this was the end of her life and it
was just awful. I just stepped back and I said, ``Look, look at what you do
have. You have great health.' I kind of look at things differently.''

   ILLUSTRATION: Color Photo by ROSS W. HAMILTON of The Oregonian staff

   Graphic - Chart.  THE FUND.  Address.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             730 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 29, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme in pact to develop drug with California firm;
EMERGING BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Signs of small biotech companies coming to grips with their inability to
finance more than a single clinical trial and casting a net for corporate
alliances became evident this week when Genzyme Corp. agreed to develop a
promising drug being handled by Celtrix Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Santa Clara,
Calif.

   The corporate alliance calls for Celtrix to give Genzyme all commercial
rights to its proposed drug, called BetaKine, or Transforming Growth Factor Beta
family of proteins, for tissue repair and the treatment of multiple sclerosis
while retaining the rights to treat certain eye diseases - the small company's
initial focus.

   Under the agreement, Genzyme will get 10 percent equity in Celtrix for $ 10
million and agree to spend more than $ 60 million to develop BetaKine. Also
Celtrix has an option to require an additional equity investment by Genzyme of
up to $ 10 million in December 1995, based on certain pricing and other
parameters - a move both companies said is aimed at insuring the success of the
drug's development.

   For Genzyme, the Celtrix deal gives the Cambridge company an entre into a new
market - wound healing. Genzyme is in the late stages of testing Vianain, a drug
treatment which removes dead tissue from burn and venous ulcer wounds. BetaKine,
a naturally occurring, cell-regulating protein could complement Vianain in
helping rebuild new tissue in ulcer wounds.

   Genzyme plans to manufacture BetaKine at is new Allston manufacturing
facility.

   "We felt wound healing was a fairly complicated market, one where it is not
clear who the customer is," said Sandra McNamara, Celtrix vice president and
chief financial officer. "There is not much in the way of technology that's been
brought to wound healing patients for chronic ulcers . . . and it's an area that
needs a lot of education in innovative products that we didn't see the value in
investing in."

   BetaKine also expands Genzyme's focus to another rare disorder - multiple
sclerosis. Genzyme is well known for developing Ceredase, a successful, albeit
expensive, treatment for Gaucher's disease, a rare genetic disease that affects
less than 5,000 people and has committed to spend $ 400 million on a gene
therapy approach to treat cystic fibrosis.

   "Much of what we have learned in dealing with Gaucher's disease is likely to
be applicable to the commercialization of BetaKine for multiple schlerosis,
including working with patient advocacy groups and with reimbursement
authorities," said Gregory Phelps, Genzyme senior vice president.

   For Celtrix, the deal means new cash for the 150-employee company - as much
as $ 20 million in two years - to add to its current cash of $ 35 million. It
also gives the company financial clout to go to Wall Street for additional
financing.

   "This was a pretty good deal for both companies," noted Carol Werther,
biotechnology analyst for Cowen & Co.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994


                             731 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                        June 27, 1994 Monday PM EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 418 words

HEADLINE: CASH IS CONCENTRATED HERE

BYLINE: Rick Selvin, Daily News Staff Writer

BODY:

   There's a little blue spot in the center of your brain, and researcher Gary
Aston-Jones has his eye on it.

   It controls your ability to concentrate.

   Aston-Jones, director of the Division of Behavioral Neurobiology at Hahnemann
University, is interested in that blue spot - locus coeruleus in Latin - because
a malfunction there makes it difficult or impossible to focus on one thing at a
time.

   Phone ringing . . . kids shouting . . . TV blasting . . . teacher talking -
all of life's little simultaneous stimulations - can become overwhelming if you
can't choose one at a time and concentrate on it.

   The spot is easy to see - a pool of blue cells in a sea of mostly gray matter
- but difficult to understand. Aston-Jones and his colleagues have been
concentrating on concentration under separate grants from the United States Air
Force - which clearly has a stake in pilots' ability to focus on the job at hand
- and the Human Frontiers Science Program. The grants are for three years and
total $500,000 annually.

   Research at Philadelphia hospitals and universities consistently makes
medical headlines. One of the most recent was a report last week in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that a team at Thomas Jefferson
University is zeroing in on a genetic cause for manic-depressive illness.

   A month earlier, scientists at Jefferson announced a technique for stopping
the HIV virus from multiplying inside human cells.

   And in March, at the University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene
Therapy, the world's first successful gene therapy treatment for familial
hypercholesterolemia was announced. FH is an inherited liver condition that
prevents the organ's cells from removing cholesterol from the blood. Sufferers
have "off-the-scale" cholesterol levels that cannot be treated by diet.

   The Hahnemann blue-spot research is just one of hundreds of grant-supported
projects underway in the city's hospitals and universities. Millions of
dollars in government and private funds are funneled annually to local research
facilities. Some of the work is sponsored by pharmaceutical and medical
technology companies with future profits in mind.

   Many of the projects are in the area of genetics and genetic engineering -
the study of those tiny building blocks of life and how they can be identified
and, if necessary, changed in the name of better health.

   Others, like Aston-Jones' work, are aimed at learning how parts of the body
work - or fail to work.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             732 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      June 26, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

NAME: JOSEPH D. SCHULMAN

SECTION: WASHINGTON POST MAGAZINE; PAGE W12

LENGTH: 5836 words

HEADLINE: Repro Man

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Mark Cohen

BODY:

   Gee, I'm sorry, honey, thinks Anna as she lies in a small, dimly lit room
staring at an ultrasound monitor showing a video picture of her 18-week-old
fetus. I never realized our genes were such a mess.

   A first-time expectant mother with long mocha hair and a freckled,
girl-next-door face, Anna is here at the Genetics & IVF Institute for
amniocentesis -- a relatively routine procedure in which a sample of fluid
containing fetal cells will be withdrawn from her uterus and tested for
potential birth defects. When she arrived at the Fairfax reproductive center
with her husband, Keith, their only real concern was a problem flagged by Anna's
regular obstetrician: the fetus's slightly higher risk for Down's syndrome
because of Anna's age, 34, and her score on a standard blood test performed on
pregnant women.

   But within minutes of sitting down with a genetic counselor, Anna confronted
all sorts of hereditary bugaboos emerging from her family tree.

   For example, when Anna mentioned her half a dozen mildly hemophilic cousins,
the counselor gasped. Anna's family had never attached much importance to its
little "bleeder" problem, so she was surprised when the counselor asked if a
positive genetic test for hemophilia would cause her to consider terminating her
pregnancy. Next, it was on to retarded Uncle Andy. A misfortune Anna had always
believed was "just one of those things," the counselor explained, might actually
be a genetic condition called Fragile X syndrome. The counselor urged Anna to
take a test to determine whether she'd passed the gene for it to her fetus. The
counselor also handed the couple a pamphlet about cystic fibrosis, another
genetic ailment that Genetics & IVF routinely screens for. When Keith jokingly
brought up the abundance of eczema in his family, Anna half expected the
counselor to offer them a prenatal test for skin rashes.

   Now, as she waits with Keith for the institute's director, Joseph Schulman,
to perform the amniocentesis, Anna is a jumble of nerves. She reaches over her
head for Keith's hand and peers at the ultrasound monitor . . . Is that the
baby's ear? The counselor specifically asked about the shape of Uncle Andy's
ears. No, wait, it just moved. So it's not an ear. Oh, God, where ARE the ears?

   Schulman snaps on his rubber gloves. He rips open a narrow white packet and
withdraws the 3 1/2-inch needle that he is about to insert to within three
centimeters of Anna's fetus. "Okay," he says, "I'm going to have to ask you not
to hold your husband's hand."

   Why not? thinks Anna anxiously, not understanding that he's trying to ensure
she stays perfectly still. I want to hold his hand. She looks up at Schulman's
face bathed in the cold, eery light of the video screen. What kind of doctor is
this, anyway?


   THERE ARE at least two possible answers to that question. Looked at one way,
Joe Schulman is a maverick on a wide-open health care frontier. He's Ray Kroc in
a lab coat: a graying, 52-year-old government scientist turned medical
entrepreneur who, in just 10 years, has built Genetics & IVF from a tiny
prenatal testing and fertility practice into a humming, 200-employee economic
combine occupying much of a suburban office park off Route 50. Schulman doesn't
actually invent new genetic technologies; he leaves that to the big university
hospitals. What he does is offer the latest tests and procedures, for a price,
earlier than most hospitals do. He is a man who has made his reputation, in
large part, by guessing correctly which of the genetic revolution's byproducts
will play in Fairfax, and delivering them fast and accurately. Nor does he
intend to stop in Northern Virginia: With the McDonald's founder as his model,
the Route 50 gene man has spun off franchises in Florida and Ohio, and has
visions of more McDNAs to come.

   His success derives not only from his own acumen and from rapid advances in
the developing field of genetic testing, but also from a demographic trend: Like
Anna and Keith (who asked that their last name not be used, to protect their
privacy), most of Schulman's customers are professional couples who have waited
longer in life to reproduce, and who either need help conceiving or are anxious
about the quality of the life they're about to produce. And like Anna and Keith
-- who will wind up paying $ 2,442 for a battery of tests -- they're often
willing to spend whatever it takes to look into the future.

   Some of what he does is run-of-the-mill, the kind of service offered by many
health care providers: ultrasound, amniocentesis, fertility treatments. But
Schulman also ventures into braver, newer territory: He was one of the first in
the country to offer prenatal screening for cystic fibrosis and Fragile X.
Recently, he has begun to screen adults for their genetic cancer risk; decades
before the first tumor might appear, they will be able to gauge the odds of that
occurring. And he is starting to move into something closer to genetic
engineering, combining his staff's genetic screening capabilities with its
expertise in fertility treatments. When Schulman's people are assessing the DNA
of a four-cell test-tube embryo, the scenarios described in sci-fi flicks and
dystopian novels no longer seem quite so far-fetched.

   Looked at another way, Schulman is a runaway scientific train.

   No one has quite figured out yet how to regulate genetic testing,
particularly when it's carried, as Schulman is carrying it, into the for-profit
sector. A National Institutes of Health task force will soon be looking into the
matter, though at this point it's not even clear whether responsibility for
setting ethical limits should lie with the Food and Drug Administration or with
some special government commission.

   Meanwhile, under an informal arrangement between Genetics & IVF and its
largest outside investor, Inova Health System, Schulman has agreed to take his
most controversial ideas before the ethics committee of the Inova-owned Fairfax
Hospital. To date, this group of physicians, nurses and clergy has challenged an
idea only once -- when he wanted to use some of his most powerful technology to
enable parents to pick the gender of their kids. That time, Schulman backed off
and withdrew the proposal.

   "It's scary," says committee member Melissa Larsen. A year after leading the
nay contingent against Schulman's choose-your-gender project, the ob-gyn sits at
her dining room table in a Burke subdivision, her pajama-clad 4-year-old leaning
into her lap. "We're getting to the point where we have more tools than we know
what to do with. As a society we better make some decisions fast because the
implications could be enormous."


   WHETHER YOU AGREE with Larsen depends, to an extent, on your understanding of
genetics and genetic testing -- and beyond that, on your confidence that your
fellow Americans can understand these things too.

   Schulman takes the optimistic view. He strongly believes that most patients,
with the help of professionals, are fully capable of deciding whether to get a
genetic test and of interpreting the results.  He's aware that for most
recipients of bad genetic news, the options are limited: When a patient has
herself tested to determine if she's carrying one of the genes for mental
retardation, for example, she's under no illusion that some cure will
miraculously appear in time to reconfigure the millions of affected cells in her
fetus's brain. She's getting the test either because she's prepared to have an
abortion or because she simply wants to know. In either case, Schulman argues,
that's her business.

   But sometimes things can get really complicated. Sometimes even world-class
scientists don't at first fully comprehend potential implications of their
discoveries -- let alone people who, before their half-hour counseling session,
hadn't thought about DNA since 10th grade.

   "That's why we have small, controlled studies," says Michael Kaback, a
prominent geneticist at the University of California at San Diego and an
outspoken critic of Schulman. "I don't think we should be jumping until we know
how to run, running until we know how to walk, and walking until we know how to
crawl. We're at the crawling stage now, and a few like Schulman are jumping into
this without waiting for that interim step. They're not telling people that this
whole process is under evaluation; they're just going ahead and testing them,
without worrying about the possible negative effects."

   Schulman confronted the uncertainty factor four years ago when he started
offering cystic fibrosis screening to prenatal customers. Some years earlier,
scientists had identified the genetic defect responsible for this often-fatal
childhood lung ailment, a disease with a 1 in 2,500 chance of cropping up in any
pregnancy. But they hadn't yet found all of the common mutations within the
gene. To be more specific: DNA is made up of four basic kinds of particles:
guanine, adenosine, thymine and cytosine -- generally referred to by the
abbreviations G, A, T and C. The gene in question, whose normal form is
essential to lung function, contains more than 250,000 such particles, and a
mistake (or mutation) in any one can cause CF. Back in 1990, researchers were
still trying to pinpoint where to look in the sequence of particles for certain
mutations; they had identified the location for the CF mutations that ran in
some families, but not in others.

   This partial knowledge created an extremely complicated situation for anyone
on the front lines of patient care. At Genetics & IVF, the staff inevitably
identified a number of fetuses who had definitely inherited a bad "copy" of the
so-called CF gene from one parent; the question was whether they had inherited a
second bad copy from the other parent, which would trigger the disease. So the
institute then tested the parents (at an additional $ 195 apiece). But in some
instances it was impossible to determine whether both parents carried a bad
copy.  In cases where -- for example -- the father was identified as a carrier
and the mother's test result came back negative, the parents still couldn't rest
easy: Because of the possibility of other rare, still elusive mutations, the
mother couldn't be absolutely sure that she wasn't a carrier as well. The
mother's DNA might be perfectly clean, or she could be at risk of passing a
second, deadly mutation to her fetus.

   Thus, some couples went through the entire testing process only to see their
risk of a CF baby raised from 1 in 2,500 to approximately 1 in 400, with no way
to get firmer information until the child was born. In such cases their anxiety
was heightened rather than allayed.

   "They'd call us," says Jill Fonda, a genetic counselor at Children's
Hospital, where some of Schulman's customers turned for a second opinion. "We
had to tell them there was nothing we could do for them before birth either.
They were climbing the walls. It was terrible.

   "We haven't gotten any calls over the past 10 months since the technology has
improved. But I'm still not sure population screening for CF is worth the added
burden on the family and expense."

   At least one leading geneticist, however, thinks the controversy has been
exaggerated. "People tend to be overly critical of Joe," says Arthur Beaudet of
Houston's Baylor College of Medicine, whose prenatal testing center was also
among the first to offer CF screening. "At Baylor, we frequently encountered
pregnancies with that level of risk during that period, and I don't know of any
case where anyone terminated a pregnancy or expressed an extraordinary amount of
anxiety. When you're talking about chances of one in a few hundred, I don't
think patients get very nervous with that kind of risk. In fact, I think they're
often more comfortable with those kinds of numbers than we are."

   Like Beaudet, Schulman says that to his knowledge none of his customers
terminated a pregnancy out of fear of CF. And he defends the CF screening,
pointing out that the vast majority of people received reassuring results and
peace of mind -- and that the few who didn't still appreciated knowing that a
risk ran in their families.


   AT GENETICS & IVF, it's the day after Anna's amniocentesis. The forsythia are
in riotous bloom and an American flag flutters by the entrance, while inside the
main genetics lab, technician Barbara Lustig finishes prepping a handful of
samples for the coming week's genetic tests. Lustig adds sugar water to the test
tube of blood labeled "Anna 10825" and spins the tube in a high-speed centrifuge
to separate the red from the white blood cells. She drains off the red part,
adds other buffers and spins, drains and adds some more. Finally, she holds the
tube up to the fluorescent light, revealing what look to be tangled, fine white
threads suspended in clear liquid. "There it is," she announces. Anna's DNA.

   To think, the blueprint for all human life, the ghost in Anna's machine:
there for all the world to see like some floating dust ball. Yet it's really
only the beginning of Anna's odyssey. On Monday, her DNA will be cut up by
enzymes so it can be run through an electrified gel. Then synthetic strands of
radioactive G's, A's, T's and C's will be released into the gel, which, because
of a couple of other peculiar properties of DNA, will cause certain telltale
signs to occur. Whenever one of these radioactive "probes" for the normal
Fragile X gene finds a match in Anna's DNA, it will leave a mark that can be
detected by X-ray film; when mutant probes find matches, they will leave marks
at a slightly different spot on the gel. The location and thickness of the
marks, as well as any smudges that occur nearby, will reveal the chances that
Anna is carrying the gene for another Uncle Andy.

   As amazing as all that sounds, it's actually low tech compared with where
genetic testing is heading. For now, the lab is dotted with the kind of
makeshift solutions characteristic of an industry just finding its legs: the
heavy mail-order catalogues used as presses to make sure the X-rays develop
properly; the numerous "FOR RESEARCH USE ONLY" labels on the buffer and probe
jars -- a routine legal qualifier from the manufacturers. Lustig and the other
staffers call the contents of these jars "home brews," because the recipes must
be tweaked to achieve the desired results. Strikingly little of the process is
standardized or comes ready-made.

   But that won't be the case for long. For example, Schulman has considered
buying robots to do the tasks that occupied Lustig's attentions all morning.
Prepackaged testing kits are starting to arrive from drug companies. Also, more
of the kits are moving away from the "analog" approach of gels, marks and
smudges to a digital yes/no indicated by the presence of a single blue dot on a
white strip of paper. In a few years, the strips and dots could be replaced by
microchips and tiny fluorescent specks that light up when a match is made
between a person's DNA and a common mutation. In time the process will become
faster still, as researchers at places like Cal Tech work to graft genetic
testing techniques onto advanced number theory. The genetic chip of the future
could contain millions of G's, A's, T's and C's arranged in such a way that a
person's DNA would instantaneously match with every possible combination of GATC
in the human genome, thereby spitting out a person's entire genetic profile in a
matter of seconds.

   Of course, the only way for a medical entrepreneur to survive in such a
tumultuous environment is to be extremely nimble. In that respect, Schulman may
have engineered the perfect corporate organism. In a half-hour meeting, his crew
can make decisions that would involve months of red tape at a university. Having
surrounded himself with a bright, collegial assortment of academic expatriates,
techno-junkies and veteran clinicians, he works to keep the ideas rolling,
eschewing memos and even personal secretaries because he thinks they're
potential impediments to the free flow of information. Staffers routinely cull
medical journals and meet to hash out which discoveries make sense for the
institute to get involved with, given their day-to-day experience dealing with
scores of patients. Then, when Schulman senses an idea has reached fruition,
there's usually just one layer of approval it has to go through: him.

   "Joe's a very good businessman," says Lustig, as she stores Anna's DNA in the
refrigerator next to a vial of Anna's fetus's genes. "He knows what we should
and shouldn't do. He'd never get us overextended and into something he
shouldn't." It's a sentiment commonly heard around the institute, where people
tend to share Schulman's philosophy on the value of information and on their
clients' ability to assimilate it.


   TO UNDERSTAND what motivates Joseph D. Schulman, it helps to know that his
childhood sweetheart died of leukemia when Schulman was 12 years old. At the
time, many who knew him already assumed he would be a doctor; he was good at
sciences and had two physician uncles practicing within a couple of miles of his
family's Flatbush apartment. But Schulman says it was really that death that
settled the matter for him.

   "I went over to Nancy's house one day," he recalls 40 years later, sitting
behind his desk at the institute. "The housekeeper told me that she was sick and
that she had gone to the hospital. A week later she was dead. It was quite
devastating. But I think it strengthened my desire to try do something to
improve the world, to cure some disease or another."

   He pursued his goal with dispatch. He finished high school in three years,
graduated first in his class from Brooklyn College and distinguished himself at
Harvard Medical School and in his pediatrics training at Massachusetts General
Hospital and NIH. Along the way, he dabbled semi-seriously at the timpani and at
chess. One noteworthy chess game in the early '70s provides additional insight
into his character.

   At the time, Schulman was doing a second residency in ob-gyn at New York's
Cornell Hospital. Participating in one of those 20-board simultaneous
exhibitions against a touring grandmaster, Schulman played his usual
recreational game -- until he found himself losing. It was a breakthrough
moment. "I don't fully understand it myself," he recalls, "except that at a
certain point in the match I suddenly got angry and started to see these
possibilities on the chess board that I'd never seen before. I could see nine,
10 moves ahead." When he stood up an hour later, victorious, he was practically
dizzy.

   It was the last competitive chess game Schulman ever played. But he retained
the ability to react to a setback with energy and clarity of vision -- and, of
course, the ability to look ahead. By that point, his youthful anger at
childhood diseases was being transformed, sharpened by the era's exciting
prenatal testing innovations into what amounted to an even bolder vision:
stopping the killers before they see the light of day.

   Then Schulman read about something that sent his ambition soaring. In a small
private hospital in northern England, a geneticist named Robert Edwards was
mixing sperm and eggs in a test tube to create human embryos. Much of the
British scientific establishment was aghast; headlines in the tabloids screamed
that Edwards would create monsters, but Schulman was so mesmerized that he
arranged to spend a year training at Edwards's side. When he looked through a
microscope and saw his first human embryo in early 1974, only half a dozen or so
people in the world had seen such a thing.

   His year with Edwards instantly credentialed Schulman as an expert in the
next-to-nonexistent field of in vitro fertilization. It also started a pattern
that would be repeated throughout his career: Whenever any now-famous
reproductive scientist unveiled a major discovery, Schulman was always among the
first off a plane to see it. It was almost funny -- reminiscent of the Woody
Allen film "Zelig," in which an otherwise obscure figure somehow winds up in all
the photographs and film footage of the epochal events of the 20th century.
Years from now, you can almost imagine the scientific historians remarking, "Oh,
there's Schulman next to Pierre Dellenbach in Strasbourg performing one of the
first ultrasound-guided egg retrievals . . . There he is again next to Jackson
and Wapner doing an early chorionic villus sampling . . . And, look, there's
Schulman with Van Steirteghem injecting an egg with a single sperm."

   When he returned to Bethesda in the summer of 1974, it was with a tenured
appointment to study hereditary diseases and an opportunity to set up NIH's IVF
program. But three months into his new job he fell victim to circumstances
beyond his control. Nixon's secretary of health, education and welfare, Caspar
Weinberger, issued an order suspending all federal funding for embryo research
until an ethics advisory board could meet to decide how to proceed. Schulman
didn't think the policy would last, yet as the issue became a lightning rod for
conservatives and months passed without the board even convening, he began to
realize he'd need to shift his attention back to hereditary diseases.

   He proceeded to carve out a productive niche in the big leagues of academic
research. "He was well thought of in basic areas of metabolism," says UCSD's
Kaback, who knew him in the NIH days. "In cystinosis [a rare childhood kidney
disease] his group was one of the leading groups in the world -- of course,
there were maybe six groups working on it, but his was one of them." Schulman
also developed one of the first fetal therapies, for another rare, bizarrely
disfiguring genetic ailment known as congenital adrenal hyperplasia. While fetal
gene therapy was still largely in the realm of science fiction, Schulman deduced
that this disease -- in which female babies are born with male genitals -- could
be prevented by injecting the mother with steroids during the first trimester.
To the small number of families affected, the discovery made him a hero.

   But by the early '80s, Schulman had reached a kind of glass ceiling at NIH.
When, in 1982, he was passed over for an appointment to head the newly created
Human Genetics Branch, he decided he'd had it with the government, and accepted
an offer to set up an IVF program at George Washington University Medical
Center. Married at the time to a physician with a practice in the area, and the
father of two daughters approaching college age, Schulman thought the GW
situation sounded like a good fit. Besides, he figured it would be sweet revenge
to set up an IVF program within the shadow of the board lording over the embryo
research moratorium.

   He was wrong.


   SCHULMAN RECALLS his 15 months in the department of obstetrics and gynecology
at GW as "the most painful period of my professional life," a period that
culminated in his failure to secure tenure. He says things got off on the wrong
foot when -- contrary to his expectations -- he learned he would be sharing
authority for the new IVF program. Former colleagues say he could have handled
the situation better. They describe him as arrogant and headstrong, and say that
he refused to work through regular bureaucratic channels and wound up fighting
with everyone from the secretaries on up. Schulman, in turn, felt hamstrung and
ganged-up on. "You ever read Gulliver's Travels?" he asks now. "You know how
Gulliver is there on the ground, and there's a whole bunch of little guys who've
got him tied down? That's what the hell it was like."

   Throughout the conflict, one of Schulman's chief adversaries was John Larsen,
who at the time was GW's acting ob-gyn chairman (and, as it happens, the older
brother of Melissa Larsen, who would later clash with Schulman on the Fairfax
Hospital ethics committee). John Larsen explains that when Schulman was denied
tenure a year after his arrival, it was for a "haystack" of reasons that
basically amounted to a colossal personality conflict. Yet Larsen isn't entirely
critical of his former associate. "Take Attila the Hun," he offers. "Was he good
at sharing? No, of course not. But he was a brilliant leader . . .

   "Schulman is a hard-driving, ambitious genius. I think this is a great
country where somebody like him who's iconoclastic and can't get along in a
group setting can compensate enough to build an enterprise on his own. Our
society has been grown great by entrepreneurial work. The challenge is to make
sure the controls are in place to protect citizens from abuses."


   BUT WHAT CONSTITUTES abuse? In this new and dazzling field, few people can
agree.

   The uncertainty of the ethical terrain became apparent at the Fairfax
Hospital ethics committee meeting of February 1993. The monthly meeting started
out as just another day at the office: As the members sat around their
white-painted cinderblock room eating cafeteria-baked chicken, they listened as
Schulman explained how he wanted to combine genetic testing and IVF techniques
to permit couples who felt they had too many children of one gender to choose
the sex of the four-cell embryos that doctors would implant in the mother's
womb. He pointed out that the institute had received calls from people inquiring
whether such a technique was offered.

   Based on past experience, Schulman had every reason to expect that they could
wrap this up in one meeting. But as soon as the discussion got underway, it
became clear that wasn't going to happen. For half an hour, the committee
couldn't get past the question of what "too many" meant. Were five children of
the same sex too many? Were two? Would couples who had one girl, say, and now
simply wanted a boy be allowed to participate in the program? As some committee
members were gathering their things to leave, a rough consensus was forming
around three as being the right definition of "too many," but that was as far as
they got for the first day.

   The big guns came out during the second day of deliberations. One urologist
argued that the committee should stop wasting time and just vote to approve
Schulman's idea, since he couldn't see how it was any different from the other
things Genetics & IVF was doing. A nurse retorted that, in fact, this was the
most disgraceful form of sexism she'd ever encountered; she believed that the
only people who would pay to use the new procedure would be rich immigrants
whose culture valued boys more highly than girls. A gynecologist who opposed
abortion went on record as opposing everything Genetics & IVF stood for, though
he said he would abstain from voting, since his views seemed to be somewhat off
the point of the present discussion.

   But Schulman's strongest challenge came from Melissa Larsen. "What will we
start selecting for next?" Larsen says she asked. "It won't be too long, you
know, before we know the genes for eye and hair color, height, weight. How are
we going to react in a few years when Dr. Schulman comes back in here asking for
our blessing to begin testing for those things?"

   When those possibilities were combined with the $ 10,000 price tag Schulman
had quoted, Larsen argued, they amounted to a recipe for Darwinian disaster. "We
could wind up with one wealthy segment of the population with only male children
-- much less blond-haired, blue-eyed males."

   What finally swung the vote, though, may have been something Schulman himself
said. During a break in Larsen's oratory, he pointed out that "if we don't do
this, some other place eventually will."

   "That's really reverse reasoning," Larsen recalls saying. "That's like when
my son comes to me and says, 'Joey has a BB gun. Can I have one too?' Just
because somebody else will do it doesn't mean we ought to. I don't want to get
in the position of saying okay and having some Washington Post reporter coming
out here interviewing us about why we did this."


   IT'S SATURDAY AFTERNOON, a week after the extraction of Anna's DNA. At the
other end of the building, a technician is busy putting the finishing touches on
Anna's test results, but here in Genetics & IVF's brand new cancer genetics lab,
all is quiet.

   The facility isn't much to look at: a 25-by-20 room with some new wooden
cabinets and black Formica countertops, a couple of 1,000-magnification
microscopes, a small darkroom behind a door. But as Schulman leads the way into
an adjoining room with a battered table, unmatched metal folding chairs and a
soda machine, he offers a vision of an expansive future. "See, when the time is
right, we can knock this wall down and expand the lab into here," he says as he
walks across the gray-carpeted hallway into a conference room. "And into here,"
he continues, heading around a bend into the employee coffee room, "and also
into here. In a month we could easily turn this whole half of the floor into a
cancer lab. We always set things up so that in between our labs is nonlab space,
which is much easier to dismantle. What you want is to start with what you need,
and if it gets to be 10 times bigger," he says, with a laugh, "hey, so much the
better."

   Cancer might be just the ticket too. While diseases like cystic fibrosis and
Fragile X are rare, over a million Americans each year get cancer. And science
is rapidly approaching the point where it will be possible to identify the GATC
sequences predisposing people to dozens of common malignancies. Genetics & IVF
already is applying some of these discoveries: Over the past couple of months,
staffer David Bick, a pediatrician, has been working with 100 Fairfax Hospital
oncology patients and their families trying out the groundbreaking hereditary
colon cancer findings from three American and Dutch labs. Sensing developments
to come, Schulman is thinking about buying a $ 100,000 gene sequencing machine.
He knows this clunky technology will soon go the way of eight-track tapes and
Beta VCRs. But in the meantime it would enable the institute to screen for any
newly discovered cancer gene without having to wait for researchers to identify
all of the common mutations. Identification of the breast cancer gene is
expected later this year, and if Schulman is well prepared, Genetics & IVF might
be able to start meeting its portion of the huge anticipated demand days after
the finding hits the scientific press.

   This scares the living daylights out of Schulman's critics. "We don't even
know what these mutations mean yet," cautions Johns Hopkins geneticist Neil
Holtzman upon hearing of Schulman's plans. Holtzman, who will chair the NIH task
force on regulating genetic testing, explains that the cancer gene discoveries
are so new that the only data on them is from families with an unusually high
incidence of the disease. It's hard to tell yet whether genetic testing based on
these discoveries will be as reliable a edicter for people from more typical
families. Holtzman also has a number of other concerns: How will relatives who
don't want to know whether a cancer gene lurks in the family be protected? Do
you test minors? And -- despite recent laws in some states prohibiting
discrimination -- how will insurance companies and employers react if they get
hold of a person's genetic risk profile for the big C?

   Perhaps most troubling to the policy experts is that genetic cancer screening
could unleash on the population an entire new category of murky worries --
worries that could haunt people for the rest of their lives. True, a person who
tests positive for a breast or colon cancer gene might respond by embarking on a
rigorous checkup schedule to catch a lump or polyp before it becomes fatal. But
what scientists are finding is that cancer risks tend to come in bundles. So,
while a positive test result for the so-called colon cancer gene might indicate
a 95 percent chance of colon cancer, it also indicates a roughly 20 to 40
percent chance for cancer of the pancreas, endometrium, liver, stomach, ovaries,
larynx, bladder and kidneys -- none of which a person can do much about, except
sit around and wait.

   Schulman isn't insensitive to such concerns. But, as he leans against a work
table in the empty lab, his hands buried in the pockets of his lab coat, he
emphasizes all the good that can come out of genetic cancer screening. He
reminds critics that these are fast-moving killers that can strike in the prime
of life. The vigilant colonoscopies and mammograms he envisions being spurred by
positive genetic test results, he says, could preserve the lives of millions of
Americans.

   "If people don't see much value in getting a test, they'll stay away," he
adds with a shrug. "People have a way of figuring out what's a waste of their
time and money. Granted, it's an imperfect system, but what's the alternative?
Some central committee that decides for the whole country what tests should and
shouldn't be allowed?"

   His expression hardens. "If you have a tiny little group of people trying to
decide for everybody, and they get it wrong, then it's wrong for everybody," he
says finally. "Advising? Advising is okay. But deciding for everybody? That's
tyranny."


   IN ANNA'S DREAM, the telephone is ringing. Her heart leaps at the sound of
the voice on the other end of the line.

   "Anna," begins the genetic counselor, "I have great news for you --
everything checked out fine. The Fragile X test came back negative. So did the
CF. And we counted the chromosomes and there's no risk for Down's."

   "Thank you!" exclaims Anna. "I can't tell you what a relief this is."

   Waking in her bed, Anna feels better than she's felt since she walked into
Schulman's institute. For 10 days she has obsessively shuffled and reshuffled
the worries in her head: Cystic fibrosis concerns her somewhat, Fragile X
somewhat more, Down's syndrome maybe most of all. She has decided that Down's is
the only condition that might prompt her to abort, if it turns out from
additional imaging tests that the fetus's heart valves are mangled, as they tend
to be in severe cases. After 10 days of such anguished reflection, the dream is
her first sign that everything will be okay. All right, she tells herself as she
lies beside her still sleeping husband. But let's not count your chickens. You
don't want to jinx it.

   When the real phone call comes that evening, it's every bit as reassuring as
the dream version. After hanging up, Anna and Keith hold each other and jump up
and down in the living room. Over and over they exclaim how wonderful this is,
how all the anxiety was worth the peace of mind in the end. Then Anna tells
Keith about her dream. To a T, she says, every detail was exactly the way things
turned out in real life, except for one. In the dream, the baby was a girl; in
real life, it's going to be a boy.

   For a couple of seconds, Keith stands there motionless. "Wow," he says
finally, summing up the feeling for both of them. "How bizarre."

   Mark Cohen is a Baltimore writer whose work has appeared in GQ, Baltimore
magazine and the New York Times Magazine.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, JOSEPH SCHULMAN, DIRECTOR OF THE GENETICS & IVF INSTITUTE, WITH
A PORTRAIT TAKEN SEVEN YEARS AGO. MAX AGUILERA-HELLWEG

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1994


                             733 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     JUNE 21, 1994, TUESDAY, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A5

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: EXPERIMENTAL AIDS TREATMENT STRENGTHENED

BYLINE: JEFF NESMITH, COX NEWS SERVICE

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Strengthened with new genetic ''instructions,'' synthetic antibodies capable
of attacking the AIDS virus could be administered to HIV-positive volunteers in
a few months, scientists said yesterday.

   The novel approach to AIDS treatment would use gene therapy to instruct the
cells of AIDS-infected persons to produce the special antibodies, which would
then disrupt the virus' spread.

   So far, all research on the technique has been confined to laboratory cell
cultures. In these experiments, the synthetic antibody appears to reduce a
thousandfold the ability of the AIDS virus to spread.

   Researchers at Harvard University's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute said
yesterday that they are applying to federal regulatory agencies for permission
to try the treatment on a small group of healthy, HIV-positive volunteers late
this year or early in 1995.

   The researchers announced last year that they had designed synthetic
antibodies that attack the AIDS virus inside infected cells.

   An innovation greatly increases the power of the synthetic antibody to
destroy the virus, said Dr. Wayne Marasco, leader of the Harvard research team.

   Originally, the researchers reported they had found a way to design a gene
that causes an AIDS-infected cell to create large quantities of antibodies that
disrupt the production of new virus inside the cell.

   Now, Marasco and his associates report in today's issue of the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, they have added more instructions, which cause
some of the special antibodies to leave the infected cell and attack the AIDS
virus wherever they encounter it.

   Among other things, this means the antibodies are able to cripple ''free
floating'' AIDS virus that has not yet found a cell to infect, the scientists
say.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             734 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      June 20, 1994, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 6; Column 1; Editorial Writers Desk

LENGTH: 735 words

HEADLINE: IN HIGH-TECH AGE, U.S. SCIENCE AND MATH EDUCATION FALTERS;
CALIFORNIA IS NEAR THE BOTTOM IN A NATION THAT HOLDS A HUMILIATING RANKING

SERIES: Next Monday: Some remedies.

BODY:

   Nearly 37 years after Americans were shocked by Sputnik I, science and
mathematics education in public schools is again in crisis. The menace now is
not a technologically mighty Soviet Union. Rather the United States is eroding
from within, peopled by citizens who leave high school ignorant of rational
means of evaluating reality and without the skills to hold modern jobs.

   They are easy marks for purveyors of astrology, New Age quackery such as
crystal healing, dubious nostrums, even magic. They are unable to evaluate
technical and medical developments in an age in which relative risk and gene
therapy are the stuff of daily news. And they are poorly prepared for the new
enemy, international economic competition.

   A 1990-1991 study by the Educational Testing Service found that American
13-year-olds ranked behind those of South Korea, Taiwan, Hungary, what was then
the Soviet Union and eight other industrialized countries in science ability.
The problem is nationwide, but absolutely appalling in California, arguably the
most technologically dependent state.

   In a 1993 comparison by the Council of Chief State School Officers,
California ranked at or near the bottom on almost every indicator of science and
math education. For example, the state ranked dead last in the percentage of
high school graduates who had taken chemistry. Two-thirds of the California
graduates managed to spend four years in high school without taking a day of
chemistry; 85% took no physics. No wonder so many people are hoodwinked by
sellers of healing crystals with "special vibrations."

   The stark irony is that the United States boasts the most distinguished
institutions of scientific research in the world, and the most Nobel Prize
winners. Although the top 10% of American high school graduates emerge with
top-notch science educations, most pupils are woefully prepared. The problem is
acute in many minority communities. Because science and math are gatekeepers to
the professional schools of medicine, dentistry and engineering, it is little
wonder that minority groups are so poorly represented in these professions.

   Partly the blame lies with religious zealots who have managed to water down
curricula and textbooks in some places. The larger blame goes to a public that
has not realized we have entered an age when even many blue-collar jobs require
enormous technical sophistication, problem-solving skills and computer literacy.

   But not all the news is bad. The new president of the National Academy of
Sciences, Bruce M. Alberts, has made improvement of pre-college science
education a top priority. The academy's National Research Council is preparing
science education standards to guide local school districts on what pupils at
various grade levels should know about biology, chemistry, physics and other
subjects. The academy and the Smithsonian Institution have set up the National
Science Resources Center to disseminate curricular innovations. Also, scientists
at Caltech and other universities are beginning to offer their expertise to
local schools, even though the scientists usually get little credit for such
work when it comes to gaining tenure.

   And last month, the National Science Foundation awarded the first round of
$15-million grants to nine cities under its Urban Systemic Initiative, meant to
help big-city schools improve science teaching. At the same time, Ramon
Cortines, the New York City chancellor (who made science a top concern when he
headed the Pasadena and San Francisco school districts), announced that New York
high school students must take real math and science; no more fluffy "general
science." Sad to say, the Los Angeles Unified School District initially failed
to qualify for the NSF grants because its proposal was so badly written.

   Industry is demanding highly skilled labor particularly in California, home
of Silicon Valley and a burgeoning biotech industry. The pedagogical tools are
available to schools. The question now is whether parents, teachers and
political leaders can muster the will, determination and money to beat back the
forces of ignorance and prepare youngsters for a world in which survival will
depend not so much on the strength of arms as keenness of intellect.

California on Chemistry

   Percentage of high school students taking chemistry by graduation (1991-92)
Source: Council of Chief State School Officers

GRAPHIC: Chart, California on Chemistry

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1994


                             735 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 13, 1994, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: Sickle-cell patients living longer lives, study finds

BYLINE: SHANKAR VEDANTAM; Knight-Ridder Tribune News

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   PHILADELPHIA -- After tracking 4,000 patients with
sickle-cell disease for a decade, researchers have finally brought
a message of hope for tens of thousands of people with the painful
disease: Just hang in there.

   Their study shows that people with sickle-cell disease are
living well into their 40s -- twice as long as doctors had assumed.

   The extra window of life is more than a morale booster for
patients.  Studying them also has helped explain why some people
live longer.

   ""Most (sickle-cell patients) do not believe that they will
live beyond 20,'' said Kwaku Ohene-Frempong, director of the
Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia.  ""This study shows the disease is compatible with
adult life. ''
 The genetically transmitted blood disease -- which often
causes acute pain, organ failures and infections, such as pneumonia
-- affects mostly African-Americans.

   Although gene therapy offers the greatest hope of eventually
finding a cure, such a breakthrough is probably not imminent.

   The study, published Thursday in the New England Journal of
Medicine, found that the average life expectancy for those with
sickle-cell anemia was 42 years for men and 48 years for women.

   Sickle-cell anemia is the most severe form of the disease, found in
two of every three cases.

   For those with a milder form -- sickle-cell-hemoglobin C,
which afflicts one in five people -- life expectancy was found to
be 60 years for men and 68 for women.

   ""It's going to give people a lot of hope,'' said Juanita
Smith of West Philadelphia, whose 5-year-old son, Kyle, has battled
sickle-cell disease since birth.  He has been hospitalized 40 times.

   She is upbeat about her son's chances: ""The disease is
manageable,'' she said.  ""It's not a death sentence. ''

   The study only predicts average life expectancy for those
with the disease.  ""It doesn't apply to individual patients,''
Ohene-Frempong said.

   ""If you're a man with the disease and you're 40 years old,
you're not going to die in two years' time. ''

   Sickle-cell disorders stem from abnormal hemoglobin, the
protein that carries oxygen inside red blood cells.  Abnormal
hemoglobin tends to clump together, distorting the normally smooth
contours of blood cells and forming the dreaded sickle or crescent
shapes.  In turn, these sickle cells clog blood vessels.

   In studying patients who survived the longest, the
researchers also proved something that they had guessed for some
time.

   Those sickle-cell patients who had higher levels of fetal
hemoglobin as children tended to survive longer.

   Fetal hemoglobin is a form of hemoglobin produced by the
fetus.  It holds oxygen more tightly than the hemoglobin produced
after birth and is less susceptible to clumping.

   Normally, the gene that produces fetal hemoglobin switches
off after birth because oxygen is plentiful outside the womb.

   Scientists battling the sickle-cell disorder have been trying to
find ways to coax the gene to keep producing fetal hemoglobin in
children and adults.

   ""It really enforces therapy to increase fetal-hemoglobin
levels,'' said Orah Platt, associate professor of pediatrics at the
Children's Hospital in Boston and the lead researcher of the study.

   ""The study gives us tremendous impetus. ''

   Ohene-Frempong agrees.  If researchers can find a way to
switch the gene back on, the fetal hemoglobin could prevent
clumping or ""polymerizing. ''

   ""If you don't form the polymer, you don't form the sickle
cells.  If you don't form the sickle cells, you don't get the
disease,'' he said.

   Ohene-Frempong guessed that researchers would probably
achieve a breakthrough in gene therapy within 10 years and find a
way to cure the disease.


LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1994


                             736 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 12, 1994, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 84

LENGTH: 121 words

HEADLINE: Cambridge firms gets $ 9m;
EMERGING BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By RONALD ROSENBERG, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The Virus Research Institute Inc. of Cambridge, a developer of three
vaccines, along with gene therapy and antiinfective drugs, said it has received
$ 9 million in additional funding.

   Together with $ 12 million in two earlier rounds of financing, the 2-year-old
company has raised $ 21 million. New investors include Aetna Casualty and Surety
and Axiom Venture Partners. They joined existing venture backers, HealthCare
Ventures, Concord Partners, Everest Trust and Gateway Venture Partners.

   The new financing will enable the company to fund advanced clinical trials
for its vaccine against diarrheal disease, both injectable and oral versions,
and gene therapy against the HIV virus responsible for AIDS.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1994


                             737 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4A;  Page 3;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 580 words

HEADLINE: Compassion Is the Best Medicine

BYLINE: By David Spiegel;   David Spiegel, professor of psychiatry at Stanford
University School of Medicine, is author of "Living Beyond Limits," about coping
with serious illness.

DATELINE: STANFORD, Calif.

BODY:

   We don't have a health care system but rather a disease cure system. The
public believes and many doctors behave as if most illnesses are curable. We
think of the body as if it were a machine with replaceable parts: defects can be
identified, removed and replaced through treatments like organ transplants,
drugs and gene therapy. With a few exceptions, this is not the case.

   The expectation of cure has led to an explosion of invasive, expensive and
often risky interventions that have at best marginal effects on survival. We
have focused too much on diseases and too little on the people who have the
diseases.

    Most Americans die of chronic and progressive illnesses: heart disease,
stroke and cancer. Cure is the exception, not the rule. What these patients need
is health caring. Compassionate care should help people live with illness by
relieving suffering, managing symptoms and coping with the uncertainty and fear
of further illness.

   Several recent studies -- of metastatic breast cancer patients, lymphoma and
malignant melanoma patients, and patients recovering from heart attacks -- have
shown that participating in support groups not only improves people's mood and
coping skills but may help them live longer.

   Unfortunately, many inexpensive group interventions are not part of standard
treatment. They are offered as adjuncts to medical care. They are not reimbursed
by insurance plans, although they cost a small fraction of fully covered
invasive procedures.

   And many of these procedures produce only marginally greater benefits than
the risks they incur. Insurance companies regularly pay huge bills for surgical
procedures whether or not they work, but little or nothing on helping patients
cope with illness. Mental health benefits, including psychotherapy, have been
singled out for benefit caps in President Clinton's health plan. This ignores
the complex interaction of mind and body that we are beginning to understand
through recent research on the effects of social support and stress on health.

   Humane care costs less than high-tech care and is what patients want and
need: Americans spend $12 billion a year out of pocket on alternative medical
care.

   Depression is three times as common among medical in-patients and twice as
common among medical out-patients as in the general population. Depression and
anxiety, in turn, make medically ill people heavier users of medical services.

   A study in Canada demonstrated that the least well-adjusted patients cost the
health care system 75 percent more than the best adjusted ones, largely through
unnecessary primary care visits, hospital days and lab services. Stress-related
symptoms account for 60 percent of all primary care visits.

   Surgical and other medical procedures have made an enormous difference in
people's lives. But our health care system overvalues procedures at the expense
of the old-fashioned medical compassion and concern that doctors and their
patients used to take for granted.

   Medicine's oldest adage is "to cure rarely, to relieve suffering often and to
comfort always." In this century, we have twisted that job description: many
doctors think their task is to cure rather than care. We need more compassion
and counseling and less cutting and testing. The myth of cure is costly in human
and financial terms; the price of dashed hopes is high. With a focus on care,
many individuals with serious diseases can lead longer, happier and more
productive lives.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1994


                             738 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    JUNE 11, 1994, SATURDAY, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A2

LENGTH: 281 words

HEADLINE: PITT STUDY TO TEST GENE THERAPY ON ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: STEVE TWEDT, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Researchers at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center have been given
approval by a National Institutes of Health advisory committee to find out if
gene therapy might lead to an effective treatment for arthritis.

   Co-principal investigator Christopher Evans said it's the first time the
NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee had approved gene therapy testing in
patients for a chronic, non-fatal disease.

   Before they begin testing on patients, however, Evans and partner Paul
Robbins must get approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which
could come by year's end.

   Six patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis, marked by painful joint
swelling, would be involved in the first phase of the study.

   One week before the subjects undergo scheduled surgery for finger joint
replacement, they would be injected with cells from another joint. Those cells
would be infected with a modified virus carrying the gene for a potentially
anti-arthritic protein.

   Evans said they hoped to learn if their method of transferring the gene would
work, if the gene makes the protein, and if that protein is biologically active
after being transferred. All that will be determined by examining the joint
after it is removed a week later.

   ''If we get good results, we will ask permission to go in at an earlier
stage'' of the disease, Evans said.

   Although the procedure may help researchers determine how promising gene
therapy is for developing an effective treatment, it will not benefit the six
patients, Evans said.

   But it will not require any additional surgery for them, he added. ''And the
beauty of it is that we're giving patients their own cells back.''

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             739 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 11, 1994 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:4,5,7; B-3:6; B-2:1; B-9:2,3

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy to be tested against lethal brain tumors

BYLINE: AMY BAYER, Copley News Service

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- A federal panel yesterday approved a San Diego medical research
team's request to use gene therapy to treat inoperable brain cancer, the first
hurdle to making San Diego the nation's leading test site for the cutting-edge
medical treatment. A National Institutes of Health (NIH) advisory committee
voted unanimously to allow testing of the experimental gene treatment, according
to Dr. Robert Sobol of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center. "It is a crucial
first step," said Sobol, a gene therapy researcher who testified before the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee at the NIH campus in suburban Bethesda, Md.
The research program must win approval from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, which could take several months. The procedure under study uses
gene therapy to alter cells from cancerous tumors, adding a gene that produces
interleuken-2, a substance researchers believe will stimulate the patient's
immune system to attack the tumor. Under the proposal, researchers hope to test
the gene therapy on approximately 30 brain cancer patients.

   Test subjects would include only those patients who have not responded to
conventional treatment and who consent to take part in the experiment. The study
would be conducted through Sharp HealthCare System and its hospitals throughout
Southern California, and is primarily intended to determine the safety of such
treatments.

   If patients respond well, or otherwise are not harmed, the doctors hope to
pursue further research to determine whether gene therapy has therapeutic
benefits. The San Diego Regional Cancer Center launched the first human test of
such gene therapy in 1992 on a La Mesa woman, Clemma Hewitt, who died last year
after a battle with a highly lethal brain tumor known as glioblastoma. Hewitt
received the experimental treatment after the head of the NIH, persuaded by
desperate family members, granted a special exemption, bypassing the slow-moving
approval process. The researchers believe the gene therapy helped shrink
Hewitt's tumor and prolong her life.

   But the technique remains controversial and its medical benefits unknown.
Last year, the same federal panel rejected a Sobol proposal to conduct further
experiments, saying a single human case offered too little data to support more
tests. Committee members also complained last year about the publicity generated
by the Hewitt case, suggesting that the San Diego researchers were too quick to
credit gene therapy for results that may have been the result of any number of
treatments she received. At yesterday's hearing, Sobol provided the committee
additional data from animal studies and made other changes in the proposal,
including adding a provision that the names of patients would not be released to
the news media. According to Dr. Nelson Wivel, director of the NIH Office of
Recombinant DNA Activities, federal health officials have approved other gene
therapy experiments directed at brain cancer.

   However, the San Diego experiment is the only process that involves a direct
attempt to enhance the body's immune response. The San Diego Regional Cancer
Center recently received federal approval to conduct similar gene therapy
experiments on colon cancer. Such federal approval is required for all medical
research that receives federal funding.

   The San Diego researchers are seeking federal grants for the brain and colon
cancer research, heretofore supported by private donations.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             740 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      June 9, 1994 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 714 words

HEADLINE: STUDY: SICKLE CELL PATIENTS LIVE INTO 40S THAT IS TWICE AS LONG AS
DOCTORS HAD ASSUMED. THE STUDY FOLLOWED 4,000 PATIENTS.

BYLINE: Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   After tracking 4,000 patients with sickle cell disease for a decade,
researchers have finally brought a message of hope for tens of thousands of
people with the painful disease: Just hang in there.

   Their study shows that people with sickle cell disease are living well into
their 40s - twice as long as doctors had assumed.

   The extra window of life is more than a morale booster for patients. Studying
them also has helped explain why some people live longer.

   "Most (sickle cell patients) do not believe that they will live beyond 20,"
said Kwaku Ohene-Frempong, director of the Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center at
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. "This study shows the disease is compatible
with adult life."

   The genetically transmitted blood disease - which often causes acute pain,
organ failures and infections like pneumonia - affects mostly African Americans.
There are about 1,500 patients in the Philadelphia area, two-thirds of whom are
under 20, and about 60,000 nationwide.

   Although gene therapy offers the greatest hope of eventually finding a cure,
such a breakthrough is probably not imminent.

   The study, published today in the New England Journal of Medicine, found that
the average life expectancy for those with sickle cell anemia was 42 years for
men and 48 years for women. Sickle cell anemia is the most severe form of the
disease, found in two of every three cases.

   For those with a milder form - sickle cell-hemoglobin C, which afflicts one
in five people - life expectancy was found to be 60 years for men and 68 for
women.

   "It's going to give people a lot of hope," agreed Juanita Smith of West
Philadelphia, whose 5-year old, Kyle, has battled sickle cell disease since
birth. He has been hospitalized 40 times and just returned from the hospital on
Tuesday.

   She is upbeat about her son's chances: "The disease is manageable," she said
yesterday. "It's not a death sentence."

   The study only predicts average life expectancy for those with the disease.
"It doesn't apply to individual patients," Ohene-Frempong said. "If you're a man
with the disease and you're 40 years old, you're not going to die in two years'
time."

   Sickle cell disorders stem from abnormal hemoglobin, the protein that carries
oxygen inside red blood cells. Abnormal hemoglobin tends to clump together,
distorting the normally smooth contours of blood cells and forming the dreaded
sickle or crescent shapes. In turn, these sickle cells clog blood vessels.

   In studying patients who survived the longest, the researchers also proved
something they had guessed for some time.

   Those sickle cell patients who had higher levels of fetal hemoglobin as
children tended to survive longer.

   Fetal hemoglobin is a form of hemoglobin produced by the fetus. It holds
oxygen more tightly than the hemoglobin produced after birth and is less
susceptible to clumping.

   Normally, the gene that produces fetal hemoglobin switches off after birth
because oxygen is plentiful outside the womb. Scientists battling the sickle
cell disorder have been trying to find ways to coax the gene to keep producing
fetal hemoglobin in children and adults.

   "It really enforces therapy to increase fetal hemoglobin levels," said Orah
Platt, associate professor of pediatrics at the Children's Hospital in Boston
and the lead researcher of the study. "The study gives us tremendous impetus."

   Ohene-Frempong agrees. If researchers can find a way to switch the gene back
on, the fetal hemoglobin could prevent clumping or "polymerizing."

   "If you don't form the polymer, you don't form the sickle cells. If you don't
form the sickle cells, you don't get the disease," he said.

   Ohene-Frempong guessed that researchers would probably achieve a breakthrough
in gene therapy within 10 years and find a way to cure the disease.

   Yesterday, Ebony Ravenell, 4, who has sickle cell disease, listened as her
mother, Adrienne Pitts, of Southwest Philadelphia, spoke about the hope the new
study has brought. Ebony isn't quite sure what's wrong, except that her feet and
hands erupt in pain from time to time or she comes down with fevers.

   Mostly, she's a normal pre-schooler, a thoughtful child who'll sing Barney's
song, "I love you," on request, her voice quavering on the high notes.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             741 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                June 5, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 55

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Offers Hope for Cancer Cure

SOURCE: ROBERT A. DAVIS

BYLINE: By Howard Wolinsky

BODY:


   One of the puzzles of brain cancer is why some people get it and others
don't.

   It's a growing theory that genetics play some role, said Dr. Philip Cogen, a
neurosurgeon and molecular biologist at the University of Chicago's Wyler
Children's Hospital.

   Cogen said the genetic material -- DNA -- in brain tumors is being examined
with sophisticated new lab tests that can disclose differences between it and
normal tissue.

   For example, brain cancer cells may be missing DNA that normally suppresses
cancerous growth or have extra pieces of DNA, known as oncogenes, that can
induce normal cells to become cancerous.

   Using this information, Cogen and others already are able to determine the
severity of the disease and how responsive it will be to specific therapy.

   Cogen said the genetic findings can show which patients with
medulloblastomas, a common childhood cancer, are at greater risk for a regrowth
of cancer.

   "Those with a good risk, for example, may only need radiation, while those
with a poorer risk will need radiation and chemotherapy," he said.

   The next step will be to use genes in therapy.

   Dr. Joseph Moskal, a molecular neurobiologist and director of research at the
Chicago Institute of Neurosurgery and Neuroresearch at Columbus Hospital, said a
variety of approaches are being studied to develop gene therapies.

   He said researchers at the National Cancer Institute have successfully
injected into brain tumors a herpes virus that carried in new genetic material.

   Moskal said the new genes could make the cancer cells more vulnerable to
drugs or radiation. He said it may also be possible to introduce "suppressor"
genes that will get the cells to produce proteins to stop the growth of cancer
cells.

   This therapy still is highly experimental, but researchers are optimistic
that gene therapy will be available for brain-cancer patients.

   "It's unlikely we will have a complete cure in five years, but I do think we
will have gene therapy, probably tailor-made for patients, that will complement
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy," Moskal said.

GRAPHIC: Dr. Philip Cogen, a neurosurgeon and molecular biologist at the
University of Chicago's Wyler Children's Hospital, is studying the role genetics
play in tumors and how the DNA of cancerous tissue differs from normal tissue.
See also related stories.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1994


                             742 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                June 5, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: PEOPLE PLUS; SNAPSHOT; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Researcher Was a Patient, Too

SOURCE: KEN BLACKBIRD

BYLINE: By Tom Seibel

BODY:


   As a cancer patient himself, University of Chicago oncologist Nicholas J.
Vogelzang has no trouble empathizing with his patients.

   Diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease in 1983, Vogelzang received radiation
therapy on his neck and chest at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, so
he knows what it's like to be on top of the gurney.

   "On the other hand, it gives me a toughness. I don't get real mushy. . . . I
know how patients can benefit by being strong," says Vogelzang, who has a wife
and three teenage sons and lives in Western Springs.

   For the man who leads the team of U. of C. medical pioneers who this week
embarked on a groundbreaking experiment using gene therapy for a kidney-cancer
patient, it's a long way from the streets of Holland, Mich., where he grew up in
a family of seven kids -- five of whom now have careers in medicine.

   As a college student, he spent two summers working at Argonne National
Laboratory near Lemont, where he caught "the science bug," he says. As a James
Scholar at the University of Illinois Medical School in the early 1970s, his
share of his tuition "was so cheap, it helped me stay in research," with no
loans to pay off.

   After his residency and chief residency at the medical center, an American
Cancer Society fellowship sent him to the University of Minnesota, where "the
cancer thing became part of my life."

   Along the way, Vogelzang, a researcher and professor of medicine at the U. of
C. Medical Center, has published nearly 130 clinical papers and authored or
co-authored 30 book chapters and about 150 medical abstracts since 1978.

   It has been a crowded schedule for someone who is just 44 years old.

   So on the scale of professional excitement, how does his current project
rank?

   "This is right up there."

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1994


                             743 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                June 5, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; THE WEEK THAT WAS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 652 words

HEADLINE: THE HIGHLIGHTS

SOURCE: BOB BLACK;

BODY:


   Ex-Minister Accused

   In Attack on Muslim

   The man accused of trying to assassinate former Nation of Islam spokesman
Khallid Abdul Muhammad was a defrocked minister in the sect who had armed
himself heavily before the attack, police said.

   James Edward Bess allegedly used a 9-mm. pistol in the attack, hitting
Muhammad in the legs and wounding four bodyguards and a bystander outside the
University of California at Riverside auditorium where the Muslim leader was
speaking May 29.

   Police also found two loaded 9-mm. handguns in a backpack and a loaded rifle
with a scope in a car nearby, Police Chief Ken Fortier said. Both were believed
to belong to Best.

   Gay Officer Reinstated

   As Ban Suffers Setback

   The ban on homosexuals serving openly in the military suffered at least a
symbolic setback when a federal judge in Seattle ordered reinstatement of a
National Guard colonel dismissed after she acknowledged she is a lesbian.

   The case involved a high-ranking and well-regarded officer, Margarethe
Cammermeyer, chief nurse for the Washington State National Guard until her
involuntary discharge in 1992.

   Cammermeyer's Fifth Amendment rights were violated by her 1992 discharge,
U.S. District Judge Thomas Zilly said.

   Zilly was not the first judge to make such a ruling, and the issue is certain
to be considered by higher courts.

   No Other Fixed Cases,

   Maloney Lawyer Says

   Allegations that former Cook County Circuit Judge Thomas J. Maloney fixed two
other murder cases in addition to the three he was convicted of are "pure
nonsense," his attorney said.

   "If there were any validity to these charges they would have been included in
the indictment" that led to Maloney's conviction last year, said his attorney,
Terence P. Gillespie.

   Federal prosecutors made the allegations in a document filed with U.S.
District Judge Harry D. Leinenweber. They want the information considered when
Maloney is sentenced July 13.

   Maloney, 68, was the first local judge ever to have been charged or found
guilty of fixing a murder trial.

   Abortion, Birth Control

   Divide Clinton, Pope

   President Clinton sought to find common ground with Pope John Paul II in
defending family values, but conceded that "genuine disagreements" over birth
control and abortion may be unbridgeable.

   The pope, who appeared frail in his first major public appearance since
breaking his hip in April, was resolute in his opposition to abortion during a
40-minute meeting Thursday with Clinton.

   Clinton, for his part, said he was "pretty straightforward" in laying out
U.S. policy in support of abortion. But where the Vatican focused on the core of
their differences, Clinton emphasized what they could agree on.

   U. of C. Tests DNA

   Treatment for Cancer

   The University of Chicago is pioneering, with the help of cancer patient
Edward Murphy, a new treatment that uses DNA to alter diseased cells.

   U. of C. researchers have performed groundbreaking "in vivo" gene therapy on
a tumor just below Murphy's rib cage. The therapy calls for DNA to be introduced
directly into an organ or tumor.

   Doctors hope the DNA will change the character of the cancer cells, so the
body can recognize them as foreign cells to fight the disease.

   It is the first time the experimental treatment has been done in the Chicago
area and the first time it has been used to fight cancer of the kidney, doctors
said.

   U.S. to Screen Haitian

   Refugees in Jamaica

   Haitian boat people seeking political asylum in the United States are to be
screened at a facility planned for the neighboring island of Jamaica,
administration officials say.

   President Clinton's special adviser on Haiti, William Gray, was in Jamaica
during the last week to work out details, officials said.

   Paul Robertson, Jamaica's foreign affairs and foreign trade minister, said
late last month that his country would be willing to accept up to 100 refugees
at any one time.

GRAPHIC: Sgt. Maj. Enrique Guzman, drum major of the Schurz High School ROTC
Drum Corps, leads the first-place all-city drum and bugle corps Thursday in the
ROTC Junior Cadets Parade. The 44th annual parade honored World War II veterans.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1994


                             744 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                June 3, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: U.C. Fights Cancer With DNA;
Patient Receives 4 Injections in Test Of Gene Therapy

SOURCE: KEN BLACKBIRD

BYLINE: By Tom Seibel

BODY:


   Cancer patient Edward Murphy is helping the University of Chicago pioneer a
new treatment that uses DNA to alter diseased cells.

   U. of C. researchers have performed groundbreaking gene therapy -- called "in
vivo" -- on a tumor just below Murphy's rib cage. The therapy calls for DNA to
be introduced directly into an organ or tumor.

   Doctors hope the DNA will change the character of the cancer cells from cells
that the immune system cannot recognize as foreign to those that are recognized
as foreign, so the body can fight the disease.

   "We are making this tumor become an orange instead of an apple, and (hope)
that the immune system only recognizes oranges," Dr. Nicholas J. Vogelzang, an
oncologist and professor of medicine at the U. of C.'s Bernard Mitchell
Hospital, said Thursday as he tried to describe the complex treatment.

   It is the first time the experimental treatment has been done in the Chicago
area and the first time it has been used to fight cancer of the kidney, doctors
said.

   Although Murphy's affected kidney was removed after the diagnosis, the cancer
already had begun to spread throughout his body. In February, he had radiation
therapy for a tumor near his ear.

   Murphy, a retired law professor, this week received four injections of
laboratory-produced DNA into a fist-size tumor just below his rib cage, doctors
said.

   "It's not a hard choice," Murphy, 66, of Osceola, Ind., said of his decision
to undergo the procedure. "There aren't many alternatives. Of those that were
available, this just seemed to be the most promising."

   Murphy, who has nine children and 22 grandchildren, was diagnosed with kidney
cancer in July, 1992, during a routine physical examination. Further testing led
to the cancer diagnosis, said Murphy's wife, Mary Ann, who was at a press
conference with her husband at the hospital.

   Murphy has been through several unsuccessful standard and investigational
therapies, including a procedure with interleukin-4, an immune system stimulant,
but he had to stop that treatment because of side effects.

   While Murphy is enthusiastic about the latest treatment, the futile attempts
of

   previous therapy have worn on him.

   "I was telling Dr. Vogelzang . . . it reminded me of a book I read by this
World War II veteran who described his experiences in the South Pacific," Murphy
said. "He said 'one damned island after another.' . . . well, it's one treatment
after another, it seems."

   After a University of Michigan trial of the gene therapy, researchers found
that the injected DNA was "taken up" or remained in the cells and altered the
genetic structure in four of five patients with metastatic melanoma, a fatal
skin cancer.

   Although there was no cure reported in the treatment, a glimmer of success
was found when one patient did go into partial remission and several tumors
disappeared.

   Vogelzang said Murphy will be one of 15 patients to be tested in a study
being conducted by the U. of C., one of 70 centers licensed by the Recombinant
Advisory

   Committee of the U.S. National Institutes of Health to perform such
procedures.

   Similar in vivo tests are being conducted in a colon cancer experiment at the
Mayo Clinic and a continuing melanoma study at the Arizona Cancer Center.

   "We'll have a better feel of the response of this treatment in two weeks'
time when we look at Professor Murphy under ultrasound to see if the tumor we
treated shrunk and the vascular supply to the tumor also has diminished," said
Dr. Gary Sudakoff, a radiologist, who injected the DNA into Murphy.

   There are nearly no side effects or pain involved in the in vivo gene
therapy, Vogelzang said, the main worry being an uncontrolled allergic reaction
to the DNA.

   Mary Ann Murphy said the gene therapy, compared with other treatments her
husband has been through, "was a walk on the beach."

GRAPHIC: Edward Murphy is undergoing experimental gene therapy in an effort to
combat his kidney cancer. ILLUSTRATION; See roll microfilm.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1994


                             745 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                June 3, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: Researcher Puts Caution First

BYLINE: Tom Seibel

BODY:


   Gene therapy -- or, as Dr. Nicholas J. Vogelzang put it, "changing the
machinery of tumor cells" -- is in its infancy, and tests on humans are just
beginning.

   The overall implications of successfully altering cancerous cells and making
them easy prey for immune systems can be staggering. But so far, Vogelzang said,
the "process has been successfully accomplished in animals and in a small number
of human patients, perhaps less than 10 in the world."

   If gene therapy is successful on Edward Murphy and others in the experiment,
will it be a breakthrough?

   "The breakthrough concept is one I have learned to be very cautious in using
at all," Vogelzang said. "There is a very famous sequence of cover stories in
one of the former Chicago newspapers . . . in the morning, it said
'Breakthrough' with an exclamation mark. In the afternoon (edition), it said
'Breakthrough' with a question mark.

   "It was a warning, I think, to those of us in cancer research to be very
cautious. We are, above all, clinical scientists, and we are conducting very
careful experiments.

   "Professor Murphy understands it is an experiment. We obviously want and hope
for the best, but we're also realistic enough to know that breakthroughs are
perhaps once-in-a-lifetime events.

   "I am an oncologist. I am also a realist. . . . Each step of progress we
measure in inches.

   "I would be delighted if just the lesion we injected went away. That would be
my biggest gain; then we could do other lesions."

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1994


                             746 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              June 3, 1994 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: DOERNBECHER PLANS NEW HOSPITAL FOR CHILDREN

BYLINE: STEVE WOODWARD, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Friday, June 3, 1994 DOERNBECHER PLANS NEW HOSPITAL FOR CHILDREN

   Summary: The modern $60 million facility would be built on the campus of
Oregon Health Sciences University

   Doernbecher Children's Hospital on Thursday unveiled an ambitious plan to
build a $60 million hospital on the Oregon Health Sciences University campus.

   The hospital, expected to open by the end of 1997, would replace the
crowded, four-decades-old facility that now takes up 2 1/2  floors of
University Hospital. It would be the first new hospital built in the Portland
area since the Veterans Affairs Medical Center opened in 1988.

   The new facility would be ``an all-purpose children's hospital,'' said Dr.
Ron G. Rosenfeld, chairman of pediatrics at Doernbecher. ``It will cover every
kind of medical, surgical, psychosocial problem that children have.''

   The trustees of the Doernbecher Children's Hospital Foundation and the
Oregon Health Sciences University Foundation already have raised $10 million  in
pledges among themselves and physicians. The Doernbecher foundation has set a
total fund-raising goal of $30 million. The 1994 Children's Miracle Network
Telethon, which begins Saturday, is expected to raise $2.3 million toward the
goal.

   Dr. Peter O. Kohler, OHSU's president, said the remaining money could come
from several gift funds already in existence at OHSU and from about $10  million
in revenue bonds that the university is authorized to issue. He said  the
university wants to avoid adding too much to the $47 million in debt that  it
already carries.

   Kohler said no state money will be used for the project. J.S. May, director
of the Doernbecher foundation, said the project organizers will likely pursue
federal funding, but they are assuming they will not get it.

   ``This is not going to be the Taj Mahal,'' said Ernie F. Sturm, president  of
the Doernbecher foundation board. Instead, the new hospital will be ``very
functional,'' he said.

   In recent months, the possibility of a new children's hospital has been at
the center of a spat between OHSU and Legacy Health System, which operates
Legacy Emanuel Children's Hospital in Portland. Legacy cried foul when OHSU
began talks  with Legacy's main competitors, Kaiser Permanente and Sisters of
Providence Health System, about a possible combination of their children's
services.

   But the rhetoric has begun to abate.

   Kohler and John G. King, president and chief executive officer of Legacy
Health System, tested the waters in a recent, discreet meeting, but nothing
concrete has yet materialized.

   Kohler said Thursday that OHSU's talks with Legacy are separate from its
talks with Kaiser and Sisters of Providence. Both sets of talks, however,  focus
on ways ``to do things together more efficiently.''

   ``We remain extraordinarily positive about our relationship with OHSU,''
said James E. May, president and chief executive officer of Legacy Portland
Hospitals, the Legacy arm that oversees its children's hospital.

   In fact, the big health systems cooperate on several pediatric services
already, such as an areawide child abuse center.

   Moreover, both OHSU and Legacy boast services that the other system doesn't
have, providing opportunities to share the wealth. OHSU, for example, has the
area's only bone marrow transplant program for leukemia patients. Legacy has
the area's only extracorporeal membrane oxygenation machine, an expensive,
high-tech device that maintains oxygen levels in an infant's bloodstream.

   OHSU and Legacy explored a joint children's hospital in 1991, but OHSU
pulled out when cost estimates soared to $100 million and Measure 5 began to
take its toll on the university's budget.

   OHSU's current talks with Kaiser and Sisters of Providence are continuing,
as the parties work on financial details of their arrangement. A final report
is expected in July, Kohler said.

   Doernbecher serves an estimated 90 percent of all children in Oregon who
have cancer. About a third of Doernbecher's patients have cancer, half of them
leukemia -- cancer of the blood.

   The rest suffer from heart disease, kidney failure, muscular dystrophy,
birth defects, cystic fibrosis and other serious childhood injuries and
illnesses.

   The new hospital could house new services, Doernbecher's Rosenfeld said,
including gene therapy, treatments using recombinant DNA, and improved organ
transplant technologies.

   The hospital also would house a pediatric cancer center, consolidating
Doernbecher's cancer-related services, and a ``compromised host'' unit, which
would provide isolation for patients whose immune systems cannot protect them
from infectious diseases.

   The hospital probably would be located on Campus Drive, south of the  current
location and next to a large parking garage. The hospital itself would have an
estimated 165 parking places -- an important incentive for  Portland-area
pediatricians who have long complained about parking and the  difficulties of
navigating the complex maze of streets and buildings atop  Marquam Hill.

   Rosenfeld said he has been speaking to pediatricians over the last six
months to determine their concerns about admitting their patients to
Doernbecher. Local pediatricians tend to use Legacy Emanuel Children's
Hospital, while pediatricians throughout the state tend to send their  difficult
cases to Doernbecher.

   ILLUSTRATION: Graphics -- Graph/WHAT'S NEW.

   Graphics -- Graph/TELETHON.

   The 1994 Children's Miracle Network Telethon, which is expected to raise $2.3
million of the Doernbecher foundation, runs from 6 p.m. Saturday to 3 p.m.
Sunday on KATU (2).

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             747 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 1, 1994 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:1,4,5,6,7,8,9; B-2:2,3

LENGTH: 632 words

HEADLINE: If they could see her now . . .

BYLINE: Tom Blair

BODY:

   Sahar Husseini, who came to San Diego State from Jerusalem in 1989, accepted
her Outstanding Student Award from the university at commencement Saturday
night.

   And now she has the overwhelming urge to visit the University of Jerusalem to
share the good news.

   In 1988, that university rejected her application for admission, citing her
handicap.

   But, in her five years at SDSU, she overcame discrimination and a language
barrier to earn the highest grade point average in the university's School of
Social Work. Sahar is blind. [ ] Entre news Tipsters who helped lead police to
arrests in the May 1 Balboa Park murder of student-actor John Lentz will collect
their rewards after June 6. That's when Crime Stoppers makes the announcements
at its annual Enough Is Enough luncheon at the U.S. Grant.

   Crime Stoppers posted a $1,000 reward, supplemented by $9,000 from an
anonymous Old Globe patron . . . Herb Klein, the Copley Newspapers
editor-in-chief and former communications director in the Nixon White House, is
making a rapid recovery at Scripps Clinic.

   He's expected to be home by week's end and back at work by mid-month after
stomach surgery on Thursday.

   Cracks an upbeat Klein: "It got me out of a Friday dental appointment." . . .
Former Rep. Jack Kemp, the oddsmakers' early favorite for the Republican
presidential nomination in 1996, is in to address the SD Chamber of Commerce
annual dinner tonight at the Hyatt Regency La Jolla.

   But he'll stay at the Sheraton Harbor Island.

   In its Presidential Suite. [ ] The grounded ear Dr. Tony Baron of Scripps
Ranch, expert in prevention of workplace violence, has enlisted in the battle to
make our nation's fighting forces a little less violent.

   True. The Army and Navy have hired Baron to provide workplace
violence-prevention training. (Among other Baron clients: SDSU, Sea World and
the UCSD campus cops.) . . . If she's not in the yellow pages, maybe she doesn't
exist?

   Shirley Weber, who's running for 4th Dist. supervisor, knows the value of an
identifiable voice.

   Her radio ads star John Crawford, the silver-tongued pitchman for PacBell's
Yellow Pages . . . Our city's reputation as a biotechnology center is further
enhanced. Publisher Appleton & Lange, a Connecticut-based subsidiary of Simon &
Schuster, has chosen Dr. Robert Sobol of the SD Regional Cancer Center as editor
of its new international journal, Cancer Gene Therapy. . . . Mark Larson, who
landed at North County's KPRZ Christian-pop radio station last month as GM after
19 years at KFMB, is back in the airwaves this afternoon from 4-6 on KPRZ (1240
AM) . . . That's a wide broom at KFMB. Latest to be swept out: TV sales manager
Weldon Donaldson (23 years at the station) and veteran radio newsman Ian Rose
(20 years in SD radio, 12 1/2 at KFMB). [ ] Givers The special guest star
yesterday at Chaparral High School in El Cajon: boxer Terry Norris, the WBA
super welterweight champ.

   Students who take part in the school's drug-free program, and agree to
voluntary testing, receive regular incentives from the program's director, coach
Bud Meeker. Yesterday's incentive was a pep talk from Norris . . .

   "Good Morning, America" entertainment reporter Chantal will emcee tonight's
Design Industry Foundation for AIDS dinner at the Sheraton Harbor Island.

   And she'll have a backstage reunion with an old "GMA" sidekick: KNSD's Denise
Yamada, one of the honorees at the dinner benefiting the Center for Women &
Children with HIV/AIDS. [ ] Tres chic The children of hoteliers may have a
somewhat skewed view of life.

   C.J. Rizzo, GM at Grosvenor Inn, says her 4-year-old son, Chase, was avoiding
bedtime the other night.

   He was hungry, he told his mother, who couldn't resist his charms.

   "Well, honey, what would you like to have?"

   C.J. asked him.

   Suggested Chase: "How about a cappuccino?"

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             748 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     May 31, 1994, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy attack tried on AIDS virus

BYLINE: GINA KOLATA; New York Times

BODY:

   The AIDS virus continues to elude all conventional attacks.

   Find an effective drug and the virus quickly mutates to sidestep
the obstacle.  Make a vaccine and the virus changes its coat to
become invisible to the immune system's antibodies.

   In search of fresh approaches, some molecular biologists say
it is a mistake to treat AIDS as if it were caused by an ordinary
virus like those of influenza or polio.

   Instead, they say, AIDS should be seen as a disease of DNA.

   Since HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, integrates itself into the
DNA of the chromosomes, they argue, the methods of gene therapy and
molecular biology should be used to attack the virus as it subverts
the cell's genetic machinery, almost as if it were a mutant human
gene.

   The perspective of AIDS as a disease of DNA has helped
inspire several new and ingenious approaches.  Although these may
prove no more successful than the conventional efforts, they
represent the most sophisticated tools that molecular biologists
now command.

   Two such schemes are now ready to be tried in people with
AIDS and others will be tested in patients later this year.  As
always in clinical studies, these initial trials are intended to
establish safe modes of treatment, not to accomplish a cure at this
stage.

   The challenge of a gene therapy approach to AIDS is to choose
the right viral genes to sabotage.  ""You can target different
proteins that are controlling different parts of the viral life
cycle,'' said Dr. Gary J. Nabel, a Howard Hughes researcher at the
University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor.  ""You can
target proteins that are needed for the virus to get into the cell,
to get into the nucleus, to get out of the nucleus.  Other
strategies might be to hit the incoming virus or block the exit of
outgoing virus. ''

   Nabel and his colleagues are aiming at a small but critical
cog in the machinery by which HIV assembles new viruses.  It is a
protein made by an HIV gene called rev and it has a humble but
essential duty, that of transporting copies of most of the virus's
genetic messages from the nucleus of a cell into the surrounding
cytoplasm.

   Without the rev protein, the genetic messages needed to make
new viruses stay bottled up in the cell nucleus and are unable to
direct the synthesis of more viruses.

   Nabel's idea is to add a gene to cells that makes a subtly
altered version of the rev protein, one that readily latches onto
the genetic messages created by the virus, but that is unable to
transport the message out of the nucleus.

   Nabel said that this gene therapy worked well in human cells
growing in the laboratory.  He is about to start a study testing it
with 12 people with HIV infections.  About a billion white blood
cells, a thousandth of the body's total, will be taken from each
patient and treated with a vector that inserts the variant rev gene
into the chromosomes of each cell.

   Nabel is testing two different vectors.  One is a virus that
inserts the rev gene into the cell's DNA.  The other is a gold
bullet.  The spaghetti-like DNA is wrapped around a tiny gold pellet
and the pellet is shot into the cells.  The cells take up the rev
gene and spit out the gold, Nabel said.  The treated cells will then
be re-injected and the patients monitored to follow their progress.

   If the variant rev gene does protect his patients' cells,
Nabel and his colleagues will then treat a larger proportion of the
body's white cells, in an attempt to treat the disease.

   Dr.Roger A. Pomerantz, a molecular virologist at Thomas
Jefferson University in Philadelphia, is also targeting the rev
gene but has found a different way to block it.  His method is to
inactivate it with a specially designed antibody.


LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1994


                             749 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  May 31, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1908 words

HEADLINE: New York Hospitals Are Facing A Sharp Increase in Empty Beds

BYLINE: By MELINDA HENNEBERGER

BODY:

   The number of empty hospital beds in the New York City area is growing
steadily, only a few years after patients faced a critical shortage of space.
The reduced demand has already shut down entire wings and caused layoffs of
almost 2,000 workers over the last two years, hospital officials say.

   The decrease in demand comes after a similar trend emerged nationwide, driven
in part by a turn to health maintenance organizations that emphasize preventive
and outpatient care. And the decline is expected to continue.

    "They were having trouble finding space for their patients, and now they're
having trouble finding patients for their space," said Peter Slocum, a spokesman
for the state Health Department. "In the late 80's they were concerned about
having the capacity to keep their business going, but in the brave new world of
reform there's a much more long-term concern about the hospitals' survival."

   The average daily census of patients in New York City hospitals last year was
19,667 people, or 81.6 percent of available beds, according to the state Health
Department. That was a decline of more than 4 percent from the average of 20,536
two years earlier.

   Public health experts also attribute the decline to medical advances that
have shortened patient stays, and to some extent, a reduction in the length of
stay of AIDS patients, as more care has become available at home, in hospices or
on an outpatient basis.

   As a result, state health department officials say they expect the size of
hospitals in New York City, its suburbs and the state as a whole to shrink by 20
percent in the next five years. And inevitably, said Dr. Mark R. Chassin, the
state health commissioner, a number of institutions will be forced to close.

   "I think there are going to be a lot of hospital closures," Dr. Chassin said,
"and I hope we can manage that in a way that won't cause access problems in
rural as well as inner-city areas."

   Marc H. Lory, executive vice president and chief operating officer of
Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, said, "I'd be lying if I said we weren't
nervous, but I guess all of us are sort of hoping it's the other guy."

   Columbia-Presbyterian recently laid off 350 of its 6,735 workers and closed a
unit with 166 of its 1,460 beds -- temporarily, he said, until administrators
see whether the trend holds. He said the hospital started thinking about closing
beds and taking other economy measures about 18 months ago.

   Large institutions are not as vulnerable as smaller, community hospitals,
which are most at risk. But excess capacity is encouraging larger hospitals to
merge with smaller ones that will feed them patients who need high-tech care in
return for protection from extinction.

   And ultimately, proponents of community health care say the declining demand
for inpatient services will force all hospitals to redefine themselves, by
shifting much of their work to outpatient clinics that provide primary care,
with fewer, smaller hospitals left to tend only the sickest patients.

   Gerry Hudson, executive vice president of Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital
and Health Care workers, said the future of the health care system depends upon
the hospitals' ability to convert to a primary care system that will transfer
its resources to community clinics, where health care is in short supply.

   "We're looking for funds for a conversion plan pretty much like the military
has," he said, to retrain health care workers for employment in new settings.
"If you do it any other way you'd have huge layoffs." He said a vast reduction
would devastate the local economy, in which the health care industry in a
leading employer.

   In some ways, the situation is analogous to the downsizing of the military,
with some in the industry arguing that major reductions could leave communities
vulnerable to surprise assaults like the AIDS epidemic and the resurgence of
tuberculosis.

   "AIDS teaches us we ought to expect the unexpected, and there are reasons to
be cautious about how much smaller the system gets," said David A. Gould, vice
president of the United Hospital Fund of New York, a philanthropic, policy and
research organization.

   He said a new generation of surgical procedures still being developed, like
gene therapy, for example, could soon create new demand for hospital beds.
"Volatility makes it difficult to plan," he said, adding that the real danger
for patients in a shrinking industry is not the hospitals that have closed but
those that are struggling to remain open. "The two or three years before they
close, do you really want to be a patient in one of those places?" he asked.

   But in both public and private New York City hospitals, the number of empty
beds has increased sharply since mid-1992, with an occupancy rate dipping from
over 90 percent at the height of the hospital bed shortage in the late 80's to
85.7 percent in 1991 and 81.6 percent in 1993, according to the state Health
Department.

   As the trend continues, some hospitals are trimming excess capacity as
aggressively as possible, convinced that hospitals of the future will be
significantly smaller. Others have taken a wait-and-see approach, hoping to
protect their investment in the beds they have now.

Shorter Stays, More Patients

    The average length of stay also decreased by half a day over the last year,
said Kenneth E. Raske, president of the Greater New York Hospital Association.

   "We dropped a full day in length of stay in a little over a year," said Mr.
Lory, of Columbia-Presbyterian. "That may not seem like a lot, but if you take
the size of our institution, one day equals 1,400 empty beds."

   Columbia-Presbyterian is at relatively low risk, he said, because it
maintains a high turnover of patients.

   To remain solvent, hospitals are in the difficult and rather paradoxical
position of trying to attract more patients but for shorter stays. That is
because New York is one of only two states in the country -- Maryland is the
other -- that reimburse the hospital based on the diagnosis rather than the
number of days a patient stays, even if the patient is privately insured. The
state's reimbursement policy means the hospital makes more money by discharging
patients quickly, since it is paid the same whether the patient stays a day or a
month.

   Other hospitals that have cut their inpatient capacity include St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, which this spring eliminated a total of 53
beds in two medical and surgery units and two psychiatric inpatient units,
resulting in some layoffs. New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center cut 80 beds
in two medical and surgery units between 1989 and 1992 after a concerted effort
to reduce their patients' length of stay. The hospital reports that since the
cutbacks its occupancy rates have risen to about 90 percent.

   "We've been proactive and tried to move on this ourselves," said George
Vecchione, director of New York Hospital.

   The emptiest wings in most hospitals these days are in the medical and
surgery areas; in pediatric wards, absent the young patients eating ice cream
after their tonsillectomies, which is now day surgery, and in maternity wards,
which keep women for increasingly shorter stays after delivery. At the same
time, there is a shift in emphasis to intensive-care beds as hospitals
increasingly concentrate on sicker patients.

More Space in Other Areas

    There is even more excess capacity in some areas of the region, with New
Jersey reporting a 70 percent occupancy rate in 1993, down from 73 percent in
1992.

   And across the country, hospital occupancy rates began declining more than a
decade ago, with an national average occupancy rate that now hovers around 65
percent, according to the American Hospital Association.

   New York is actually the last state in the country to see its hospitals
emptying, primarily because it is the nation's most highly regulated health care
system; while other regions overbuilt, New York forced its hospitals to prove
the need for every new bed, which must be certified by the state health
department.

   "I can't think of a new hospital built in New York in the last 20 years,
while across the country you had enormous growth," said Jeffrey Merrill, a
professor at Columbia University's School of Public Health.

   Health maintenance organizations and other forms of managed care were also
slow to take hold in New York, because of the opposition of an unusually strong
medical community. Unlike the business people who run most hospitals in other
parts of the country, health officials said, the top executives of many major
New York hospitals are doctors.

The AIDS Factor

    And in the late mid-1980's, just as medical advances were starting to create
some excess capacity, the AIDS crisis hit New York with particular virulence,
devastating communities but reviving several hospitals.

   "AIDS and TB had a dramatic impact on why we haven't lost" more inpatient
demand, said John Billings, an associate professor of health policy management
at New York University. "But we're starting to manage AIDS in a different way
and patients have decided they'd rather be treated in other settings."

   Preliminary state health department figures for the last quarter of 1993
indicate that the hospital census of AIDS patients has leveled off, Mr. Slocum
said.

   Sidney Pitter, a 33-year-old opera singer who has AIDS, is among those who,
with the help of a visiting nurse and a nurse and lay volunteer with the
supportive care program at St. Vincent's Hospital and Medcical Center of New
York, has been able to stay out of the hospital for most of the three years
since his illness was diagnosed.

   "In Sidney's case, we really have clearly been able to keep him out of the
hospital because he's forgetful about taking and refilling his medication" for
toxoplasmosis, a parasitic infection of the brain that responds to the medicine
he takes daily, said Patricia Moule, a nurse with the St. Vincent's supportive
care program.

   During a recent visit from Ms. Moule, Mr. Pitter offhandedly mentioned that
his vision had been slightly blurred; he was immediately hospitalized with
retinitis, and doctors said the nurse's timely intervention probably saved Mr.
Pitter's sight. When he was released on Friday, after his second hospital stay
in three years, Ms. Moule also helped him home.

   Some of the older patients who once filled New York's hospital beds because
there was no room in the state's tightly regulated nursing homes have also been
moved out of hospitals now, with the building of 5,000 new beds statewide over
the last several years.

More Outpatient Service

    And the number of procedures that can be done on an outpatient basis, or as
day surgery is growing rapidly, now including such serious operations as a
partial mastectomy, hernia repair, and the setting of broken bones that have
penetrated the skin. Exploratory surgeries are increasingly rare, and admissions
for a battery of tests are all but unheard of.

   In the newly competitive environment in New York, hospitals have started
aggressive public relations campaigns, including mailings and advertisements.

   In the future, Dr. Chassin said, the institutions that survive will
specialize. "You'll have cardiac surgery in one, obstetrics in another, instead
of hospitals that have seen themselves as full service providers," he said. Many
others, he said, "should be looking for a new mission in life."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sidney Pitter, a 33-year-old opera singer who has AIDS, is among
those who, with the help of a visiting nurse and a nurse and lay volunteer with
the supportive care program at St. Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New
York, has been able to stay out of the hospital for most of the three years
since his illness was diagnosed. Mr. Pitter prepared for his discharge from the
hospital last week. (Stephanie Berger for The New York Times) (pg. B2)

Graph: "HEALTH CARE: Fewer Patients" shows the occupancy rate and length of stay
of patients in New York City hospitals from '89-'93. (Source: New York State
Health Department) (pg. B2)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1994


                             750 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  May 31, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Attacks On AIDS Readied

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   THE AIDS virus continues to elude all conventional attacks. Find an effective
drug and the virus quickly mutates to sidestep the obstacle. Make a vaccine and
the virus changes its coat to become invisible to the immune system's
antibodies.

   In search of fresh approaches, some molecular biologists say it is a mistake
to treat AIDS as if it were caused by an ordinary virus like those of influenza
or polio. Instead, they say, AIDS should be seen as a disease of DNA. Since
H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, integrates itself into the DNA of the
chromosomes, they argue, the methods of gene therapy and molecular biology
should be used to attack the virus as it subverts the cell's genetic machinery,
almost as if it were a mutant human gene.

    The perspective of AIDS as a disease of DNA has helped inspire several new
and ingenious approaches. Although these may prove no more successful than the
conventional efforts, they represent the most sophisticated tools that molecular
biologists now command. Two such schemes are now ready to be tried in people
with AIDS and others will be tested in patients later this year. As always in
clinical studies, these initial trials are intended to establish safe modes of
treatment, not to accomplish a cure at this stage.

   The challenge of a gene therapy approach to AIDS is to choose the right viral
genes to sabotage. "You can target different proteins that are controlling
different parts of the viral life cycle," said Dr. Gary J. Nabel, a Howard
Hughes researcher at the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor.
"You can target proteins that are needed for the virus to get into the cell, to
get into the nucleus, to get out of the nucleus."

   Dr. Nabel and his colleagues are aiming at a small but critical cog in the
machinery by which H.I.V. assembles new viruses. It is a protein made by an
H.I.V. gene called rev and it has a humble but essential duty, that of
transporting copies of most of the virus's genetic messages from the nucleus of
a cell into the surrounding cytoplasm.

   Without the rev protein, the genetic messages needed to make new viruses stay
bottled up in the cell nucleus and are unable to direct the synthesis of more
viruses.

   Dr. Nabel's idea is to add a gene to cells that makes a subtly altered
version of the rev protein, one that readily latches onto the genetic messages
created by the virus, but that is unable to transport the message out of the
nucleus.

   Dr. Nabel said that this gene therapy worked well in human cells growing in
the laboratory. He is about to start a study testing it with 12 people with
H.I.V. infections. About a billion white blood cells, a thousandth of the body's
total, will be taken from each patient and treated with a vector that inserts
the variant rev gene into the chromosomes of each cell.

   Dr. Nabel is testing two different vectors. One is a virus that inserts the
rev gene into the cell's DNA. The other is a gold bullet. The spaghetti-like DNA
is wrapped around a tiny gold pellet and the pellet is shot into the cells. The
cells take up the rev gene and spit out the gold, Dr. Nabel said. The treated
cells will then be re-injected and the patients monitored to follow their
progress. If the variant rev gene does protect his patients' cells, Dr. Nabel
and his colleagues will then treat a larger proportion of the body's white
cells, in an attempt to treat the disease.

A Second Strategy

    Dr. Roger A. Pomerantz, a molecular virologist at Thomas Jefferson
University in Philadelphia, is also targeting the rev gene but has found a
different way to block it. His method is to inactivate the protein with a
specially designed antibody. Ordinarily, antibodies are large molecules that are
excreted by cells that produce them. They float free in the bloodstream as part
of the body's surveillance system, attaching themselves to foreign molecules.

   Dr. Pomerantz has designed an antibody that recognizes the virus's rev
protein. He inserts the gene for the antibody into white blood cells by putting
it in a virus. Since the antibody stays inside the white blood cell where it is
made, it lacks the tags that signal the cell to export it. In the current issue
of The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Dr. Pomerantz reports
that his anti-rev antibody stops infected cells from producing H.I.V. He expects
to start preliminary studies in people with AIDS within the next year.

   In an added twist to these strategies of blocking viral genes with gene
therapy, several groups of researchers have found ways to be sure that the added
genes are quiescent unless and until they are needed. To do this, they attached
an H.I.V. signal to the genes. This is the signal the H.I.V. uses to force a
cell to start expressing its genes. So every time the cell starts to make
H.I.V., it will make proteins that block H.I.V. from being made. Dr. Nabel, for
example, said he added H.I.V. control regions to the genes that he would add
with the gold bullets.

   A third gene therapy approach is to concoct a gene that produces a powerful
weapon known as a ribozyme.  Ribozymes are strands of RNA that can function as
enzymes, and they can be designed to attack other strands of RNA at specific
chemical sites. This makes it possible to develop a ribozyme that will chew up
RNA from H.I.V. without attacking any of the cell's own RNA molecules.

   Several groups of researchers are pursuing the ribozyme strategy, including
Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal of the University of California at San Diego. She has
designed a ribozyme that recognizes a particular sequence of H.I.V., along with
a method to insert a gene for the ribozyme into white blood cells. She and her
colleagues are awaiting approval from the Food and Drug Administration to test
the technique in patients.

   If any of these gene therapies seems to discourage the virus, researchers
say, the next step would be to combine the various gene therapies to narrow the
virus's chance of escape.

   Gene therapy, they say, presents a tougher challenge to the AIDS virus than
the drugs and vaccines that it can avoid by mutating. The virus would have to
change the shape of its rev protein completely to escape the anti-rev protein,
while small mutations allow it to escape from the drugs and vaccines now
available. Dr. Nabel said he had not seen any evidence that the virus could do
that. This kind of consideration, molecular biologists said, gives them hope.

'An Intellectual Watershed'

    "If you compare it to traditional drug development, in many ways it's an
intellectual watershed," Dr. Nabel said. "Rather than pursuing drugs by trial
and error, this allows us to use our knowledge base to design strategies."

   Dr. John Rossi, a molecular biologist at the City of Hope Medical Center in
Duarte, Calif., who is developing one such approach, said of gene therapy, "I
think it is absolutely certain that it's going to make a difference."

   But Dr. Rossi and others said that many hurdles remained for researchers and
that a successful treatment, if it emerged, was probably years away.

   Although Dr. Pomerantz said he, too, was optimistic, he added, "We have a
long way to go.

   "Clearly, this will be a row with more failures than successes," he said.
"Don't expect next week that someone will yell, 'Eureka!' "

GRAPHIC: Diagrams: Heading Off AIDS at Gene Level

In experimental approaches to fighting the human immunodeficiency virus, some
researchers are exploiting the fact that it acts almost as if it were a mutant
human gene. The virus insinuates itself into the genetic material of human cells
and uses it to replicate more H.I.V. particles, so the idea is to insert a gene
to block a step in replication. These approaches may work where conventional
weapons against the human H.I.V. fail: the virus mutates to evade drugs and
eludes vaccines by developing new coatings to become invisible to antibodies.

Decoy Rev Protein Blocks Migration

In the decoy rev approach, the decoy protein attaches itself to the messenger
RNA. Thus, the genetic messages needed to make new viruses instead stay bottled
up in the cell nucleus and are unable to direct the synthesis of more viruses.

3 Experimental Strategies

A vulnerable point in H.I.V. replication is the production of a special protein
called rev that ferries messenger RNA out of the cell nucleus so it can assemble
new H.I.V. particles. In one approach, a gene that produces a decoy,
nonfunctional rev protein is inserted. Another approach inactivates the rev gene
with an antibody fragment that blocks its activity. A third approach is to
concoct a gene that produces a ribozyme, a strand of RNA that can function as an
enzyme; it can be designed to attack other RNA at specific sites.

Ribozyme Homes In on the Enemy

It is possible to develop a ribozyme that will chew up RNA from H.I.V. without
attacking any of the human cell's own RNA molecules.
Antibody Fragment Attacks Protein

The gene to make an antibody fragment that recognizes H.I.V.'s rev protein is
carried into white blood cells by another virus. In the test tube, the anti-rev
antibody stops infected immune cells from producing H.I.V.

Sources: Dr. Gary J. Nabel/University of Michigan Medical Center; Dr. Roger A.
Pomerantz/Thomas Jefferson University; Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal/University of
California at San Diego

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1994


                             751 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 31, 1994, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 1012 words

HEADLINE: Attempts at liquid breathing / Technologies may save preemies, treat
illnesses

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    The intensive care nursery of the future may hold rows of dark, bubbling
aquariums.

   Inside, babies born too soon will breathe special fluids that allow their
premature lungs to develop without harm, just as if they were still in the womb.

   While that's definitely a science fiction scenario, scientists are in fact
well on their way toward developing liquid breathing technologies.

   "We breathe liquids in the womb for the first nine months of our lives," says
Leland Clark Jr., a pioneer of liquid breathing research. "As our knowledge of
lung function increases and as the fluid compounds get better every year, we get
closer to a really simple method of breathing liquid out of the womb."

   Clark is credited with first recognizing that a class of chemicals called
perfluorocarbons, developed in the Manhattan Project, make a perfect medium for
liquid breathing. Perfluorocarbons are like liquid Teflon and are excellent
carriers and dissolvers of oxygen and carbon dioxide. They also seem harmless.

   Breathing fluids that can deliver controlled levels of oxygen to the lungs
and carry away carbon dioxide could mean the difference between life and death
for premature infants with underdeveloped lungs. Liquid breathing also may
rescue adults who fall victim to acute respiratory distress syndrome, experts
say.

   Approximately 80,000 infants are born prematurely each year. The main cause
of their deaths is premature lung development. Also, approximately 600,000
people in the USA must be put on mechanical ventilators each year because of
trauma or disease that causes their lungs to fail. Of these, about 150,000 to
200,000 develop acute respiratory distress. Liquid breathing in these cases
could give doctors time to treat whatever condition is causing the lung failure.

   Liquid breathing may benefit premature babies because their lungs don't yet
make surfactant, a substance which keeps the air sacs in their lungs from
collapsing and causing respiratory distress.

   Today, a surfactant drug can be given to reduce the chances of dying, but
doctors still must use mechanical ventilators to help the infants breathe. These
ventilators must be turned to high, and ultimately damaging, pressures to get
air into the underdeveloped alveoli even after surfactant is given.

   A small group of scientists reason that since the lungs at this early stage
in development are better suited to breathing liquid, then perhaps a premature
baby could do much better if not forced to breathe air.

   Researchers are already showing "very promising" results in a five-center
clinical trial of premature babies treated with an experimental perfluorocarbon
called LiquiVent, says Thomas Shaffer, Temple University School of Medicine and
St. Christopher's Hospital for Children, Philadelphia.

   Shaffer conducted the first studies of premature babies in 1989 after giving
up on the development of a liquid breathing device for deep sea divers. He
created a full liquid breathing method and used a different perfluorocarbon than
in the current human studies. And though his severely premature infants
eventually died, Shaffer demonstrated that humans can indeed breathe a liquid;
the babies survived longer than anyone expected.

   "In 1968, I first became interested in liquid ventilation for diving
applications. I tried to develop a demand-regulated device and that's what the
movie and book The Abyss picked up on," Shaffer says. "Then I became interested
in looking at applications for abnormal lungs and I started studies in the 1970s
with premature lambs.  We had remarkable findings. Not only did they breathe the
fluid, they did better."

   Shaffer's animal research and subsequent human study in 1989 sparked interest
at Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp., which one year ago began the current
five-center study.

   The latest research employs LiquiVent and a partial ventilation technique
developed by Bradly Fuhrman, Buffalo Children's Hospital, Buffalo, N.Y. In this
technique, LiquiVent, which is considered more bio-compatible than most
perfluorocarbons, fills the lungs and expands collapsed air sacs.

   With each breath, LiquiVent travels in and out of the airways and eventually
evaporates from the lungs. This allows air to be ventilated into the lungs at
much lower pressures than would be possible with conventional ventilation, says
Marla Wolfson, who works with Shaffer at St. Christopher's.

   Scientists in the study believe the partial ventilation method will make Food
and Drug Administration approval faster since it involves approval only of the
perfluorocarbon drug. Shaffer's full ventilation technique would require
approval of both the liquid and specialized equipment to circulate it in and out
of the lungs and remove carbon dioxide and add oxygen.

   Results of the five-center trial will be submitted this fall to a medical
journal, says Hal DeLong, executive vice president, Alliance Pharmaceutical
Corp., San Diego, which developed LiquiVent and sponsored the study. Further
studies of LiquiVent on adults and less premature infants may begin this summer.

   Liquid breathing technology also has implications for lung-related diseases,
including lung cancer and cystic fibrosis, Wolfson says.

   "We're moving toward being able to suspend various drugs in the fluid," says
Wolfson. And it may be possible to add chemotherapy agents to deliver
anti-cancer treatment directly to the lungs, or perhaps to add genes to deliver
gene therapy directly to the air sacs or lung's lining.

   Agents that break up mucus in the lungs also may be added. People
theoretically could undergo partial liquid breathing for short periods to
deliver any drug to the lungs.

   And perhaps one day liquid breathing will aid deep-sea divers as originally
envisioned by Shaffer. It may even help humans adapt for long interplanetary
space flights or prevent the lungs of pilots of future high-speed aircraft from
compressing during rapid acceleration.

   And maybe there will be the aquariums, bubbling in the dark, temporary havens
at last for those who come into the world too soon.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, color, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY, Source: American Chemical
Society (Diagram)

LOAD-DATE: June 01, 1994June 01, 1994June 01, 1994June 01, 1994June 01, 1994


                             752 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     May 30, 1994 Monday NEW JERSEY EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. S03

LENGTH: 845 words

HEADLINE: PROGRAM EXPANDING LIVER CANCER TREATMENT THE N.J. CANCER INSTITUTE IS
COMBINING THERAPIES TO TRY AND CUT THE DISEASE'S DEATH RATE.

BYLINE: Linda A. Johnson, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: TRENTON

BODY:

   Tackling one of the most deadly cancers, doctors at the Cancer Institute of
New Jersey have established a program for treating liver tumors using
innovative, state-of-the-art techniques.

   The program's strategies - experimental combinations of chemotherapy, lasers,
surgery, ultrasound and more - are needed because liver cancer kills more than
90 percent of patients within five years, said Dr. T.S. Ravikumar, the center's
chief of surgery and associate director.

   "We want to improve the cure rate to between 25 and 40 percent," he said.

   About 1.2 million people worldwide, 15,000 of them in the United States, die
each year of cancer starting in the liver. But about 85 percent of all liver
tumors are spread from other organs where the cancer began. Such "secondary"
liver tumors kill an estimated 75,000 to 100,000 Americans annually, Ravikumar
said.

   Thus, the program unveiled this month will emphasize early diagnosis to catch
liver tumors when they are small and easier to kill and prevent other tumors
from spreading to the liver.

   By the time 95 percent of liver cancer patients are diagnosed, tumors are too
widespread or too close to arteries or vital organs for high-risk removal
surgery. All doctors can try is chemotherapy - treatment with a combination of
several standard tumor-fighting drugs.

   "Systemic chemotherapy rarely, if ever, cures the patient. It just prolongs
the survival a little," Ravikumar said.

   Chemotherapy also sickens most cancer patients, sapping energy and causing
side-effects such as nausea and hair loss. The drugs kill the fast-dividing
cancerous cells, but in circulating through the bloodstream also kill many
normal, specialized cells that divide quicker than other cells.

   Ravikumar said two experimental techniques solving that toxicity problem are
giving patients a better quality of life.

   One, a double-balloon catheter system with catheters inserted at the groin
and neck, allows very high doses of chemotherapy drugs to be injected near the
liver. Blood is withdrawn through the neck catheter, purified to remove the
toxic levels of drugs and returned to the body. The operation requires an
overnight hospital stay and leaves patients weak for a few days.

   In the other technique, an implant pump is inserted under the skin to feed
continuously high doses of chemotherapy drugs directly into the liver; the pump
is refilled during a one-hour doctor's visit each week.

   Both treatments are being used after visible liver tumors are killed by
cryosurgery, in which tumor cells are frozen with liquid nitrogen.

   "I think the idea of combining chemotherapy and surgery . . . is certainly
worth investigating because clearly the treatments that we have currently by
themselves are not adequate," said Steven A. Curley, chief of gastrointestinal
tumor surgery at the University of Texas' M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in
Houston, which is trying the same new treatments.

   Ravikumar said he believed the New Jersey center was the only one now trying
to perform cryosurgery with a laparoscope, a surgical instrument holding a
miniature camera that is inserted through a tiny incision in the abdomen. The
screen images the camera provides allow surgeons to operate on the liver tumor
through another tiny slit. The smaller incisions mean shorter hospital stays and
lower costs.

   Other experimental innovations include the use of ultrasound images for
diagnosis and surgery, and the use of lasers to "vaporize" liver tumors.
Ultrasound uses high-frequency sound waves to examine layers of tissue, allowing
doctors to spot tumors one-fourth the size of those detected by other
instruments and giving surgeons a better view as they destroy tumors through
such "minimally invasive" operations.

   "I think that those techniques are all interesting and promising," Curley
said, although he questions the benefits of laser surgery.

   Only five or six U.S. medical centers and a handful in Europe and Japan have
staff trained in such techniques.

   Ravikumar said early results from small groups of patients and work with pigs
look promising.

   "The numbers (of patients treated) are very small," he said. "That's why I
want to temper the enthusiasm."

   Both men predict greater success eventually from the fruits of gene therapy
research going on at their centers.

   Ravikumar said having so many treatment options allows his center's staff to
pick the best regimen for its 120 patients as they are enrolled in trials.

   The 17-month-old center, partly funded by the National Cancer Institute as
one of its 27 comprehensive national cancer centers, should move into a new
building in New Brunswick in about a year. In the meantime, its clinic is in New
Brunswick and its research facility is at the state's Center for Advanced
Biotechnology and Medicine in Piscataway.

   The center is a partnership of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, St. Peter's Medical
Center, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital and New Brunswick Affiliated
Hospitals.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             753 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                         May 27, 1994 Friday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: SENATORS TOLD DRUG PRICE CONTROLS COULD POSE DANGER TO SICK CHILDREN

BYLINE: STACEY MacGLASHAN; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON --

BODY:

   The Clinton administration's health care reform proposal could slow progress
toward cures for such childhood diseases as cystic fibrosis, researchers,
investors and parents -- including New York Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason --
told Sen. Joseph I. Lieberman, D-Conn., Thursday.

   The proposal's biggest problem is price controls on drugs, they said in a
hearing before the Senate Small Business Committee, which Lieberman chairs.

   Harry Penner, president and chief executive officer of Neurogen Corp., a
biomedical company in Branford, said the value of his company's stock has
dropped 60 percent since 1992 because investors are afraid that price controls
will limit returns.

   Lieberman said he is concerned about the effect health care reform could have
on biotechnology research.

   "We must [create reform] in a way that does not suck the life out of the
biotechnology industry," he said. "If we replace the private sector with too
many public sector rules and reforms, we will deprive ourselves and our children
of cures."

   Clinton proposed price controls on pharmaceutical companies after offering
evidence of inordinately high industry profits, which, the president said, have
driven up health care costs.

   But researchers and parents told the committee other medical advances besides
drug development are also at risk if health care reform is not handled
carefully.

   Esiason's 3-year-old son, Gunnar, was diagnosed last year with cystic
fibrosis, a fatal genetic disease in which the body produces a sticky mucus that
clogs the lungs and other organs and causes deadly infections. There is no cure,
and, so far, no one has survived the disease.

   But recent developments have given parents like Esiason hope that a cure soon
will be found.

   Biomedical companies are experimenting with gene therapies, in which the
defective genes that cause the disease are isolated and removed and then
replaced with healthy ones. And, new drugs are being developed to help patients
experience a higher quality of life while they await a cure.

   Neither new drugs nor advances toward a cure will be possible in the future
unless health care reform promotes innovation, Esiason said.

   "I look forward to a day when the future of CF [cystic fibrosis] families
doesn't hang on the development of new drugs; a day when we don't need any more
new therapies," he said. "But until that day arrives, we as CF parents can only
have faith in the therapies being invented."



LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1994


                             754 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 26, 1994 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: IRC sets test of AIDS vaccine

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Immune Response Corp., emerging from a squabble with its major corporate
partner, said yesterday it will begin testing its AIDS treatment on thousands of
patients by year-end. The study would differ from earlier tests by assessing the
impact of the company's AIDS vaccine on patient survival, said Dennis Carlo,
chief scientific officer of the company, at the firm's annual meeting yesterday.
Because of the slow progress of AIDS, such a study is expected to take years.
Earlier tests by IRC have involved about 300 patients and measured so-called
surrogate markers, such as the levels of HIV -- the virus that leads to AIDS --
or certain disease-fighting cells within a patient's body.

   The previous tests have not attempted to determine if patients receiving
IRC's treatment live longer than those untreated. IRC is attempting to develop a
vaccine using killed HIV. The approach was first suggested by polio vaccine
pioneer Dr. Jonas Salk, a co-founder and director of the company. IRC also said
yesterday it will publish within a month results from its earlier work
indicating that patients treated with IRC's vaccine had better results than a
control group in every parameter measured. The results, some of which were
announced by the company last year, would represent the first journal report of
a treatment that slows the increase of HIV virus within infected patients, said
Dr. Brandon Fradd, biotechnology analyst with Montgomery Securities in San
Francisco. Fradd explained that such an effect could be significant because
another study has demonstrated that patients with lower levels of HIV move more
slowly to AIDS than those with higher levels of the virus. James McCamant,
editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley, said he has wondered
why IRC has waited to launch its larger study. "If the data from the study last
year is as good as they say it is, the question has been what have they been
doing for the past year," said McCamant.

   "But probably the dispute with (Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.) was one reason for
the delay." James Glavin, chief executive officer of IRC, said the large patient
test has awaited the completion of talks with the Food and Drug Administration
over how the trial should be be structured.

   He declined to predict specifically when the test would begin or when IRC
might file for approval to market its AIDS treatment. "We don't negotiate with
the FDA in public," Glavin said. Glavin emphasized to shareholders at the
meeting that the company's recently settled dispute with its AIDS project
partner, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., had put IRC in control of the AIDS project.

   The dispute was settled earlier this month by binding arbitration. IRC also
said it plans to start testing a treatment for psoriasis next year and said its
gene therapy program was proceeding. The company currently has about $69 million
in cash and plans to enter 1995 with about $50 million.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             755 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     May 25, 1994, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 12D

LENGTH: 742 words

HEADLINE: Ohio biotech firm to move to city

BYLINE: Timothy J. Mullaney, SUN STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   An Ohio biotechnology firm will move to Baltimore this summer, bringing 20
 jobs initially but promising several hundred in the next few years and
 giving the region's biotechnology initiative a boost.

   James S. Burns, chairman of Osiris Therapeutics Inc., said the presence of
 Johns Hopkins University and Health System and a $ 3 million state-backed
 loan to develop laboratories were key to the selection of Maryland over
 states from Massachusetts to North Carolina.

   Osiris is developing drugs that will help bone marrow and cartilage
 regenerate, Mr. Burns said at a news conference at the Saga Building on
 Aliceanna Street in Fells Point, where Osiris will move from Cleveland by
 year's end. The drugs will be developed using rare bone marrow cells already
 present in the human body, Mr. Burns said.

   David W. Baird, vice president of Belt's Corp., which will be Osiris'
 landlord, said the 2-year-old firm initially will lease 30,000 square feet.
 The company has short-term options to lease 50,000 more square feet, and
 options to lease the entire 183,000-square-foot waterfront facility as other
 tenants move out. He said Belt's will move its own headquarters out of the
 building to make way for its new tenant.

   Although Osiris will start with about 20 employees in Baltimore, Mr. Burns
 said the number will expand to "several hundred within a three-year period."

   State officials greeted the move as a step forward in developing
 Maryland's future.

   "This is another building block, another part of the foundation" of a life
 sciences industry that can be one cornerstone of the state's 21st-century
 economy, said Mark L. Wasserman, secretary of the state Department of
 Economic and Employment Development.

   Maryland has been trying throughout Gov. William Donald Schaefer's tenure,
 especially during the governor's second term, to make the state a player in
 biotechnology. While heavy public investment and the state's strong base of
 scientific research at such institutions as Hopkins and the National
 Institutes of Health have helped more than 150 Maryland biotech companies
 open their doors, Maryland companies so far have remained much smaller than
 hugely successful firms that have driven leading biotech corridors in
 California and Massachusetts.

   Mr. Wasserman said the state will get warrants to buy stock in Osiris as
 part of the deal for the $ 3 million loan. Baltimore may also have the right
 to buy equity in the company.

   Theoretically, the company's drugs could help orthopedic patients avoid
 hip or knee replacements and help breast cancer patients endure heavier
 chemotherapy by protecting their bone marrow from chemotherapy's side
 effects, Mr. Burns said.

   "The technology is complex, but the concept is simple," Mr. Burns said.
 "We're looking to replace devices and metallic orthopedic technology with
 biology."

   But Mr. Burns said the company has not yet begun human trials on the
 drugs. On average, a drug company spends from four to seven years doing
 trials on a drug before submitting it to the Food and Drug Administration
 for marketing approval.

   Mr. Burns said Osiris is moving to the northern end of the
 Baltimore-Washington corridor to be close to Johns Hopkins, which he said
 has one of the two best orthopedics departments in the nation. The other is
 at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, he said, where three
 scientists began the research Osiris is pursuing.

   "I could potentially have a problem locating in the Midwest and at

   tracting people," he said. In other Eastern areas such as Boston,
 expensive housing was a problem, he added.

   Mr. Burns himself has been sold on Maryland for some time. Before taking
 charge of Osiris, he was a founder of HealthCare Ventures, an affiliate of
 HealthCare Investment Corp., an Edison, N.J., venture capital firm.
 HealthCare Investment has supported Maryland biotech hopefuls such as Human
 Genome Sciences Inc., Genetic Therapy Inc., MedImmune Inc. and Pharmavene
 Inc., all based in Montgomery County.

   Mr. Burns said the company is privately held, with about 100 stockholders.
 He said research progress, market conditions and the availability of
 partnerships with bigger drug companies to fund Osiris research will all
 factor into the company's decision about when to sell stock to the public.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, Osiris plans to convert the Saga Building on Aliceanna
  Street in Fells Point, as seen in this artist's rendering, into
  laboratories.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             756 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       May 24, 1994 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: A NOVEL TECHNIQUE FIGHTS AIDS VIRUS FROM INSIDE CELLS

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In an effort to use gene therapy to fight the AIDS virus, scientists at
Thomas Jefferson University have figured out a way to virtually stop the virus
from multiplying inside human cells.

   The novel technique, announced yesterday in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, involves the creation of genetically engineered antibodies
that fight the battle inside infected cells rather than outside.

   "You are attacking HIV where it lives (inside cells)," said Dr. Roger J.
Pomerantz, chief of infectious disease at Jefferson, who headed the research
team. "Instead of turning things inside out, we are turning things outside in."

   Normally, antibodies work by binding to viruses outside the cells to prevent
infection.

   "This is a novel approach, but we have a long way to go from the (laboratory)
bench to the bedside," Pomerantz said.

   Pomerantz said he expected to seek federal approval this summer to try the
approach in people. If approved, a small safety trial in people might begin here
later in the year, he said.

   The Jefferson researchers targeted an HIV gene known as Rev - one of 10 known
genes in the AIDS virus. Rev directs the production of a protein that is
essential for HIV to multiply in human cells.

   First, the scientists induced laboratory mice to produce the antibody to the
Rev protein. Then, they cloned the gene responsible for producing that antibody.

   A fragment of the gene was created by clipping out the two tips of the Y-
shaped antibody and linking them together with another molecule. The synthetic
gene fragment was inserted into human cells, which were then exposed to massive
doses of HIV.

   The result: While the cells did become infected, viral reproduction was held
to dramatically low levels, researchers said.

   "There was a decrease in HIV replication greater than 99 percent compared to
when you don't immunize the cells," Pomerantz said. The drop lasted for more
than three months, indicating that HIV may not be able to quickly mutate to
avoid the intra-cellular attack, he said.

   Although the Jefferson researchers targeted only Rev, they said the technique
could be used to interfere with other HIV genes and the proteins that they
control.

   "Using this system, we can target whatever we want, from the entrance of the
virus (into a human cell) to its release (to another human cell)," said Lingxun
Duan, assistant professor at Jefferson and lead author of the paper. "That's the
beauty of this system."

   Several leading AIDS researchers said yesterday that the approach had
promise.

   "It's another twist to gene therapy," said Dr. Nava Sarver, who oversees gene
therapy for HIV at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
Although the technique is in its infancy, "it looks like it's going to work."

   Dr. Martin Hirsch, director of AIDS research at the Massachusetts General
Hospital, called the Jefferson findings "very exciting."

   But he cautioned that this particular gene therapy approach to HIV, along
with the handful of others now in the early stages of development, faces
difficult challenges. One big question is how to get genetic material to all of
the cells in the body affected by HIV.

   "It may be a little simpler for a localized cancer," Hirsch said. "But when
you are talking about HIV infection, you are talking about millions of virus
particles in millions of different kinds of cells throughout the body."

   So far, the federal government has approved nine human gene experiments for
HIV. Of those, only a few are now in the early stages of testing on a small
number of patients.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             757 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                        May 24, 1994 Tuesday PM EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 06

LENGTH: 552 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHROUGH IN AIDS STUDY 'VACCINATED' CELLS STUDIED

BYLINE: Ron Goldwyn, Daily News Staff Writer

BODY:

   A Thomas Jefferson University research team says it has found in the
laboratory a way to alter human antibodies, normally useless in halting the
spread of AIDS, to get them back into the immunity business.

   The gene-altering research, described today in a national science journal,
points to a way to "vaccinate" cells from the inside, says Dr. Roger Pomerantz,
leader of the research team.

   So far, all the work has been done in Jefferson labs. Officials are careful
to downplay any immediate impact as they move toward testing in humans.

   "It's very early on in the research. I don't want to call it the greatest
thing since sliced bread," said spokeswoman Patricia Donahue. "But it is very
exciting. It's a different approach that was highly effective."

   In the next phase, which will last up to two years, researchers must figure
out a delivery system - how to test the altered antibodies in humans. By
spreading the news through Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
Donahue said, researchers elsewhere can join in that effort.

   The Jefferson research was called "clearly one of the pioneering works" by
Dr. Nava Sarver, chief of the targeted drug discovery section, AIDS division, in
the developmental therapeutics branch of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases.

   "It's at the very forefront of what we like to call cutting-edge science,
specifically in the area of gene therapy."

   Sarver cautioned however it was premature to say what the outcome of the
Jefferson discovery would be until it has been tested in humans and its safety
and effectiveness determined.

   Jefferson has taken a major role in AIDS and HIV-related genetic research
through its division of infectious diseases. Pomerantz is also chairman of a
National Institutes of Health committee on gene therapy for HIV.

   Pomerantz, who was out of town yesterday, described in a statement how HIV is
a disease of the DNA molecules inside the cell. Vaccines and viral drugs haven't
worked, he said, because they "target the envelope around the virus," not the
virus itself, and the envelope quickly changes to ward them off.

   One hopeful aspect of the Jefferson approach, he said, is that it uses a
human's own antibodies rather than introducing a drug or other outside
substance.

   In a healthy human, antibodies that flow through the bloodstream surround
diseased cells and block them from causing harm or replicating themselves. But
they can't get inside the cells themselves, which renders the antibodies
useless in battling the HIV virus where it's doing its deadly work.

   The Jefferson researchers say they have genetically altered the antibody
gene, in a laboratory Petri dish, to pass through cell walls using a special
transmission agent and get to the HIV virus at the core.

   Once inside the cell, the gene-altered antibodies developed at Jefferson have
stopped the virus from spreading by replicating itself in other cells.

   Left unchecked the HIV virus inexorably replicates and spreads. As AIDS, it
destroys the body's immune system so that normally curable diseases such as
pneumonia become fatal.

   "It's a large leap from (lab) bench to bedside," Pomerantz said. "We hope to
go to Phase I (human patient) trials within the next two years . . . But we
still have a long way to go."

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             758 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          May 24, 1994 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 571 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IS HAILED IN FIGHT AGAINST HIV

BYLINE: By HUNTLY COLLINS Knight-Ridder Newspapers

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   In an effort to use gene therapy to fight the AIDS virus, scientists at
Thomas Jefferson University have figured out a way to virtually stop the virus
from multiplying inside human cells.

   The novel technique, announced Monday in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, involves the creation of genetically engineered antibodies
that fight the battle "inside" infected cells rather than "outside."

   "You are attacking HIV where it lives (inside cells)," said Dr. Roger
Pomerantz, chief of infectious disease at Jefferson, who headed the research
team. "Instead of turning things inside out, we are turning things outside in."

   Normally, antibodies work by binding to viruses outside the cells to prevent
infection.

   "This is a novel approach, but we have a long way to go from the (laboratory)
bench to the bedside," Pomerantz said.

   Pomerantz said he expected to seek federal approval this summer to try the
approach on people. If approved, a small safety trial on people might begin
later in the year, he said.

   The Jefferson researchers targeted an HIV gene known as Rev - one of 10 known
genes in the AIDS virus. Rev directs the production of a protein that is
essential for HIV to multiply in human cells.

   First, the scientists induced laboratory mice to produce the antibody to the
Rev protein. Then, they cloned the gene responsible for producing that antibody.

   A fragment of the gene was created by clipping out the two tips of the
Y-shaped antibody and linking them together with another molecule. The synthetic
gene fragment was inserted into human cells, which were then exposed to massive
doses of HIV.

   The result: While the cells did become infected, viral reproduction was held
to dramatically low levels, researchers said.

   "There was a decrease in HIV replication greater than 99 percent compared to
when you don't immunize the cells," Pomerantz said. The drop lasted for more
than three months, indicating that HIV may not be able to quickly mutate to
avoid the intracellular attack, he said.

   Although the Jefferson researchers targeted only Rev, they said the technique
could be used to interfere with other HIV genes and the proteins they control.

   "Using this system, we can target whatever we want, from the entrance of the
virus (into a human cell) to its release (to another human cell)," said Lingxun
Duan, assistant professor at Jefferson and lead author of the paper.

   Several leading AIDS researchers said Monday that the approach had promise.

   "It's another twist to gene therapy," said Dr. Nava Sarver, who oversees gene
therapy for HIV at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
Although the technique is in its infancy, "it looks like it's going to work."

   Dr. Martin Hirsch, director of AIDS research at Massachusetts General
Hospital, called the Jefferson findings exciting.

   But he cautioned that this gene therapy approach to HIV, along with the
handful of others now in the early stages of development, face difficult
challenges. One big question is how to get genetic material to all the cells in
the body affected by HIV.

   So far, the federal government has approved nine human gene experiments for
HIV. Of those, only a few are now in the early stages of testing on a small
number of patients.

   Researchers have turned to gene therapy because HIV has resisted attempts to
tame it through standard drugs such.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1994


                             759 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 24, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z7

LENGTH: 1362 words

HEADLINE: Evenings With Medicine's Brightest Stars;
Students at 'Mini-Med' School Boldly Go to the Scientific Frontier

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Imagine wanting to learn about cancer, then finding yourself chatting with
Harold Varmus, the head of the National Institutes of Health and winner of a
Nobel prize for his groundbreaking research on cancer viruses.

   Or imagine wanting to get up to speed on human genetics and gene therapy,
then finding yourself munching on chocolate chip cookies with Francis Collins,
the world's foremost gene-mapper and the man in charge of the national effort to
identify every gene in the human body.

   This is exactly what has been happening on Thursday evenings for 280
Washington-area people, aged 15 to 81, enrolled in a free "Mini-Med School" at
the National Institutes of Health. The nine-week experiment in public education
will end this week with a final lecture on the biology of aging and a
"graduation" ceremony -- complete with "interminable, pedantic graduation
speeches," jokes Bruce Fuchs, an immunologist who organized the successful
program through the NIH's Office of Science Education Policy.

   "The response has been amazing," Fuchs said. "It tells me that we scientists
who think that people are not interested in what we do are really missing the
bus."

   Interviews with several people at last week's class on genetics confirmed the
program's popularity.

   "These guys are the ones in the scientific journals, they're the ones
actually making the discoveries, and here they are talking right to you," said
Susan Anthony, who drives from her home in Richmond each Thursday night to
attend the series with her 16-year-old daughter. "The talks have been great."

   Leo Stern, an 80-year-old Kensington retiree who used to work for the
department of Housing and Urban Development, said he's been fascinated by the
presentations, which have focused on such topics as immunology and AIDS,
neuroscience, toxicology and alternative medicine. "Just think," he said,
propping his glasses over his forehead and squinting his eyes in wonder, "every
cell has the entire blueprint to make everything you need to make an entire
human body. It's just wonderful. I'm really enjoying it."

   Fuchs, who is "on loan" to NIH for two years from his faculty position at the
Medical College of Virginia, modeled the Bethesda course on a similar program he
developed in Richmond in 1992. At the time, he was involved in a program to get
middle-school children interested in science. "These kids' parents kept coming
along and wanting to play with all the experiments," he said. "They'd say, 'Can
I look in that microscope or is it just for kids?' "

   To satisfy this adult thirst for news from the scientific frontier, Fuchs got
the medical college and a local pharmaceutical company to provide some support
for a 10-week evening lecture series that would cover various medical topics. A
newspaper article about the planned series ran one morning in the Times
Dispatch, and by breakfast that day Fuchs's phone was ringing.

   "It was a small article, back on the obituary page," Fuchs said. "But by
mid-afternoon, all 275 spots were full. The ads we had designed weren't even set
to run until later that week."

   When it came to planning the NIH course, Fuchs had no trouble lining up an
all-star faculty. In addition to Varmus and Collins, the faculty included Joe
Jacobs, director of the NIH Office of Alternative Medicine, Anthony S. Fauci,
who for years has led the nation's research effort against AIDS, and David
Pickar, who oversees research into new psychiatric drugs at the National
Institute of Mental Health.

   But there were unique hurdles too. Fuchs learned it was illegal to use
federal funds to advertise, so he placed a free public service announcement in
the Post's Health section and hoped for the best. More than 1,300 people
responded, the vast majority only to learn that the course had filled
immediately.

   "There's obviously a lot of interest out there," Fuchs said. "Apparently we
scientists have not been doing a good enough job of providing a forum to talk
about our work. But these are the people who pay for what we do, so we really
owe them that."

   Last week's lecture and discussion on human genetics, led by Collins, the
director of the National Center for Human Genome Research, was by most accounts
one of the highlights of the series. The amicable Collins invited his audience
to interrupt with questions. But with few exceptions he kept the crowd too
spellbound to speak up during his two-hour presentation, offering lucid
descriptions of DNA, genes and chromosomes and poignant descriptions of how
minuscule defects in a person's DNA can cause the disfiguring tumors seen in
people with neurofibromatosis or the mucus-loaded lungs of people with cystic
fibrosis.

   In his overview of the many kinds of DNA mutations that can cause disease,
Collins referred to "Murphy's Law of the human genome: Anything that can go
wrong, will go wrong, in some gene at some point."

   To personalize his description of the molecular underpinnings of Huntington's
chorea, a genetic disease that causes dementia in middle age, he flashed slides
of Woody Guthrie, who at age 55 succumbed to the disease; Arlo Guthrie, Woody's
47-year-old son, who so far shows no symptoms but has a 50 percent chance of
having inherited the deadly gene; and a large Huntington's-prone family living
in a shack on stilts in Venezuela, whose willingness to donate hundreds of
samples of their blood helped scientists discover the Huntington's gene last
year.

   At one point, Collins slipped into a fairly blatant sales pitch for the Human
Genome Project that he directs -- the $ 3 billion effort to pinpoint the 100,000
genes that together make up the blueprint for making a human being. At another,
he politely warned his listeners that he was about to introduce the most
difficult concept of the evening: a detailed description of how to clone a gene.
The journey was intellectually harrowing, but Collins was rewarded in the end by
a gratifyingly audible "aha" from the audience.

   Collins wrapped up his presentation with an update on the consuming search
for the hereditary breast cancer gene (he expects its discovery any month now),
a discussion of the ethical issues surrounding genetic testing, and a glimpse at
the future of gene therapy, in which inherited defects will be corrected before
they have a chance to cause disease.

   Afterward, he lingered outside the auditorium for more than half an hour,
answering questions informally over cookies and soda supplied by NIH.  District
resident Helene Scher, a German language teacher, said that she had worried she
might be hampered by her decidedly "liberal arts" background but that Collins
paced his talk magnificently.  "He was organized," she said.  "He didn't lose me
for one second."

   Not every teacher earned such high grades. One distinguished scientist took a
beating in the course evaluations that students fill out at the end of each
lecture, for being too stiff and unwilling to take questions. Another, whose
talk was heavily peppered with science jokes, got mixed reviews, with some
appreciating his comic routine and others wishing for a little more substance.

   But for the most part, students said, faculty members inserted just enough
fun to get their facts across. Paula Gregory, teaching the anatomy course,
explained why the structural qualities of human bone preclude the possibility of
our growing to the size of skyscrapers. And Stephen E. Straus, in his lecture on
microbiology, reminded all those in the audience who might be feeling lonely
that there are ten times as many bacteria living in their intestinal tracts than
there are cells in the entire human body.

   Indeed, Fuchs said, compared to the jargon-rich dronings typically heard at
scientific meetings, the Mini-Med School talks have been remarkably free of
lingo.

   "Usually, when you put a scientist in front of a slide projector, the
strangest things happen: With the best of intentions, these weird words start
coming out of their mouths," he said. "I emphasized to each faculty that we must
speak plain English. I tried to find people who display a passion for what they
do, because when you have that passion then the audience can catch it too."


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, WILLIAM L. BROWN FOR TWP

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1994


                             760 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                       May 22, 1994, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: OBITUARIES; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 276 words

HEADLINE: Connie McNally, at 46; was active in cancer patients' support group

BODY:

    Connie (Anderson) McNally of Charlestown, a founder and treasurer of The
Wellness Community-Greater Boston, died Friday in her home of cancer. She was
46.

   She held the job of treasurer for the organization from 1990 until the time
of her death. The Wellness Community offers free psychological and social
support service for cancer patients and their families.

   A native of Marquette, Mich., Mrs. McNally graduated from the University of
Michigan-Ann Arbor in 1969. She spent two years as a Peace Corps volunteer on
the Caribbean Island of St. Lucia. In 1971 she moved from Michigan to Boston.
She married Paul D. McNally, a Boston lawyer, in July 1979.

   In the 1970s she worked as an assistant to former Mayor Kevin H. White, and
she was the first administrator of the Parkman House, a Beacon Hill town house
used by the city for ceremonial occasions.

   Mrs. McNally earned her master's degree in finance from Boston University in
1978. She served as a financial analyst for Boston Edison Co. from 1979 until
the time of her death.

   Recently, her battle with cancer was profiled in a PBS Nova television
special, "The Secrets of Life." The program followed her and her family as she
participated in a gene therapy cancer treatment program at the UCLA Medial
Center.

   For the past six years she was a member of the parent community at her
daughter's school, The Learning Project Elementary School in Boston.

   She leaves her husband, Paul McNally, and a daughter, Kristin R., both of
Charlestown; and her father, Kenneth R. Anderson of Marquette, Mich.

   Burial will be in Marquette.  A memorial service will be held in Boston at a
later date.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1994


                             761 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                      May 22, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BUFFALO MAGAZINE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 4720 words

HEADLINE: LESLIE'S LIFE

BYLINE: Fletcher Doyle,

BODY:

    Diagnosed with cystic fibrosis at age 12, a young woman fought bak with
love, laughter and an indomitable spirit.
 It was a day we knew would come, and sooner not later, when my little sister
died. The whole family knew the odds of survival. Doctors level with all
patients with cystic fibrosis, a disease that slashes at the lungs until they
are too scarred to work. It is a death sentence present at birth with almost no
chance at clemency. The reward for good behavior is a little more time.

   Leslie Doyle Bowen had more time than most. She was first diagnosed at the
Public Health Hospital in Baltimore at the age of 12 -- over 3,000 cases are
diagnosed each year -- and she lived beyond her 32nd birthday. Life expectancy
at the time of her diagnosis was 17.

   The first comprehensive report of CF as a separate disease wasn't made until
1938, only 22 years before Leslie was born. Therefore, many doctors in the 1960s
were unfamiliar with the particulars of the illness, and her childhood symptoms
were so mild they might not have seen them had they known what to look for.

   The symptom that tipped off the public health doctor was pneumonia, a chronic
problem for CF sufferers. Our mother said that, at the time, she was relieved to
be given a reason for Leslie's difficulties, ignorant of the disease's
consequences. After all, her daughter didn't appear to be in danger.

   However, there were many clues that she was. There were the expanded rib cage
on an otherwise skinny frame, the enlarged fingernails and toenails, the hacking
cough and the digestive problems. Doctors couldn't piece together these puzzling
symptoms, prescribing only a change in diet to foods that didn't contain wheat.
This change -- to baloney roll-ups and rice cakes, setting her apart from the
peanut butter and jelly crowd -- brought ridicule at both the cafeteria and
dining room tables. Her toilet troubles were pointed out to her in the
not-so-gentle way children have of elevating themselves on the schoolyard
pecking order. The effect was to make her maddeningly defensive and too
embarrassed to use a public restroom for the rest of her life.

   Dr. Beryl Rosenstein, director of the Cystic Fibrosis Center at the Johns
Hopkins Hospital, confirmed the diagnosis. But even when he spelled out the grim
scenario she faced, there was no shattering of a preteen's belief in her own
indestructibility. Leslie was going to beat this disease for which there is no
cure, or at least live a full and normal life. Doctors helped her in her
pursuit, giving her pills to replace digestive enzymes her body would not
produce. She took them by the handful with each meal, leaning her head back like
a hungry baby robin and swallowing as many as a dozen at a time. These allowed
her finally to take sandwiches in her lunch box. Potato chips were devoured by
the bag, her need for calories and salt -- CF sufferers secrete two to five
times more salt in their sweat than those not afflicted -- providing a handy
excuse for overindulging.

   Leslie gave herself a mandate to live, and cited it to waive off
remonstrations that she should take care of herself. Rather than become
melancholy over her outrageous fortune, she honed a sense of humor that would
make her a delight to be around. She left no joke untold, no song un-danced, no
curfew unmissed. That made her not atypical of other teens of the 1970s, except
that others' indiscretions might not tear the pages off the back of a thin
calendar.

   Leslie played her way through high school, even spending two years on the
badminton team -- proving our dad, a collegiate tennis player, passed something
on to her besides the gene for CF. (He died of cancer in 1966, leaving our
mother alone to raise two boys and two girls between the ages of 5 and 15. This
was before Leslie's illness was identified.) Her athletics were something others
similarly afflicted could only dream about.

   She once told me she didn't set any long-term goals because she didn't expect
to live long enough to see them realized. The gravity of her situation was
impressed upon her during nearly every visit to the Johns Hopkins Hospital, as
the number of her peers decreased. But still she carried on like a person with a
future.

   She enrolled at Villa Julie College, a two-year school, studying by day to
become a medical secretary. She also joined the disco craze, catching Saturday
Night Fever several evenings a week.

   "She was my most disobedient child," our mother says affectionately. "She was
just a fun lover."

   "She liked to party and used to tell us about it, show us pictures of her
trips to the Caribbean," Dr. Rosenstein says. "Every experience was a wonder to
her. She didn't let things keep her down. She wanted to do everything."

   One of two big breaks in her life happened at the end of her time at Villa
Julie, when she interned in the office of a doctor who was not put off by her
disease.

   "We were well aware of her physical condition," Dr. Lee Gresser, a family
practitioner, says. "The school told us about it, that she was a fair to good
student who would need supervision for awhile, and would we take on such a
person to train."

   Dr. Gresser hired Leslie after her internship and employed her the rest of
her life, even though she took a lot of sick days and needed long lunch breaks
so she could do her chest therapy.

   "There were times she would be ill and we would compensate for it," Gresser
says. "We understood Leslie's problems and respected that."

   Leslie's problems allowed her to empathize with the doctor's patients, and so
she treated them as she wished to be treated. "She thought she was Dr.
Gresser," Gresser says. "She would treat people on the phone; she was trying to
help people in her own way. She let people cry on her shoulder, never let her
disease cry on theirs. She never talked to people about her disease.  Patients
wondered why she coughed so much.

   "Her one problem was she was so nice to patients she would spend too much
time on the phone. . . . Despite Leslie's minor faults, she had such a great
personality that we tolerated it."

   Her second big break was meeting Duke Bowen when she was in her early 20s.
Bowen knew the sacrifices he would need to make to live with her, that there was
no chance of growing old with her. Still, he says, "I didn't see it as an
undertaking, I thought of it more as selfishness on my part. I loved everything
about Leslie, she had such a strong spirit. She taught me a lot of things. I
miss her so much. I always will. She was my everything, everything I see as
positive in life."

   He picked the beach, Leslie's favorite place, to make his marriage proposal
but she wouldn't cooperate. They were there with another couple and she resisted
his pleas to go off somewhere by themselves.

   "Why are you being so gooey?" she would cackle when telling others this tale.

   "She finally agreed to take this mysterious walk down to the water," Duke
says. "On our way to the water I put the ring on the pinky finger of my right
hand, and tried to flash it to get her to notice. As we sat by the water, I put
hand on knee and thigh, but still no response.

   "I said, 'Do you notice anything?' and said the ring was for her. I think she
forgot to answer. . . . When I proposed she just dropped her jaw, said 'Oh my
gosh,' and took off. She wanted to spread the news and ran up the beach to tell
(our friends). She did remember to take the ring.

   "In a way, that was my answer."

   They were married June 18, 1988, so Leslie had a chance to taste all of the
flavors of adult life except parenthood. Her maternal instincts were lavished
instead on animals. She would stop her car to admonish people who were too
harshly disciplining their pets. Her boss would bring his golden retriever to
the office, and the dog would spend the day at her feet. She adored the family
dog, a black Lhasa Apso who returned her affection. On the morning of her
wedding, the photographer tried to shoo the dog from his accustomed position at
her feet, only to be told by the bride the pose was perfect. It was Leslie's
favorite photo of the day.

   But not all was picture perfect. In 1986, one of her lungs collapsed, and
with it her confidence in her ability to beat CF. If that were to happen to an
otherwise healthy person, doctors would simply reinflate the lung. Leslie
required surgery. Doctors created adhesions in the reinflated lung so it would
stick to the chest cavity, then stapled the holes closed so it wouldn't collapse
again.

   The lung collapse brought her face-to-face with her future, and with it the
fear of the hardships she had seen her late friends suffer at the CF clinic.
Worse yet was the removal of the tubes inserted through her chest during
surgery. Leslie had asked to be tranquilized during the procedure.

   "She hated procedures as a patient. Hated most anything," Dr. Rosenstein
says. "She admitted she was a coward."

   While one of the nurses was getting the medication, a tired intern grew
impatient with the wait and yanked out the tubes without warning.

   Hurting and furious, she cried and cried. "It was the worst experience she
had," our mother remembers.

   A far more cruel blow was delivered just three weeks before her wedding.  Her
other lung collapsed. She required more surgery, and there was concern she
wouldn't be healthy enough to make the walk down the aisle. When Leslie arrived
at the rehearsal dinner, our family's worries multiplied. Her face was the color
of creme sauce, the smile absent. She left while everyone was still on the
entree; we finished eating subdued, without appetite.

   No one could have imagined then the joy of the next day. Mom said Leslie
seemed to get a shot of adrenaline from having her attendants, which included
her sister and my 3-year-old daughter, around her. Cliches such as "radiant
bride" fit her as well as her wedding dress. When the new Mrs. Bowen
triumphantly faced the rice-clutching crowd at the top of the church's steps, I
greeted her with a shower of tears.

   "The circumstances around her wedding were unbelieveable," says Dr.
Rosenstein. "It was incredible she was able to recover from her surgery, get on
her feet and walk down the aisle as a beautiful bride. It was amazing."

   The doctor attended almost as a proud father who guided Leslie through life's
trials. And he came because these happy occasions were a payoff for working with
patients who never recover.

   "Being able to go to her wedding was a reward," he says, "because years back
patients didn't have weddings."

   The reception was held at the Baltimore Museum of Art; cocktails were served
in the sculpture garden and crab-stuffed chicken in a magnificent room inside.
Leslie stayed until the end, requiring only a short rest to make it through the
celebration.

   Leslie and Duke waited months to go on their honeymoon to the Caribbean, and
in that time her condition worsened. She could hardly walk down the hall of
their hotel without getting winded, but she pushed herself so as not to spoil
the occasion. She came home with pneumonia, which forced her on oxygen in early
1989; she could never get by without it again.

   She didn't allow her spirit to drop with her condition, keeping up the
pleasant demeanor that gave patients such a good first impression of Dr.
Gresser's practice.

   "She didn't dwell, or tried not to dwell on the ultimate problem she would
have to face," says Judy Gresser, the doctor's wife and Leslie's first office
manager. "She didn't ask for sympathy, she just wanted to be known as Leslie."

   If there was tension in the office, Leslie broke it, carrying laughter with
her, along with the oxygen bottle which perpetually hung on her shoulder.

   "Her facial expressions could just break you up," Mrs. Gresser says. "It was
like a running comic strip, her whacky kind of offbeat humor. You could tell she
was having a bad day if she was quieter."

   Sometimes even that didn't slow her down. The family took Leslie to see
"Alien 3," and she needed several rest stops just to navigate the theater lobby.
The effort of the evening took its toll: After the less-than memorable movie,
her skin had turned blue, and everyone's mood matched. Still, she delivered a
comic critique of the film far more devastating than two thumbs down, contorting
the family's looks of concern into convulsions of laughter.

   But inside, no one was smiling, because we knew the statistics. Every year,
2,000 babies are born with cystic fibrosis -- the most common fatal genetic
disease in the United States -- but there are only 30,000 people alive with the
disease today. That number is much larger than in years past: When Leslie was
diagnosed, the life expectancy was 17 years; when she died it was 27. The
increase was brought on by antibiotics that could fight the damaging infections.

   The infections grow as the disease produces a thick, sticky mucous that clogs
the lungs and makes digestion difficult. The CF patient submits to pounding of
the chest and back to loosen the mucous enough to spit it into a bucket. There
are drugs to thin the mucous so it can be expectorated faster.  But all of the
treatments so far only delay the patient's demise, they don't prevent it.

   In her late 20s, Leslie was spending as many as five hours a day doing the
nauseating therapy. She had a gastrotomy feeding tube inserted -- Dr.
Rosenstein says it took two years of negotiating before she would consent to it
-- so she could keep on the weight needed to fight on. She required quarterly
"tune-ups," a two-week intravenous course of antibiotics -- stronger than you
can get by mouth or aerosol -- in the hospital and more intensive chest therapy.

   There was no such thing as popping out of bed in the morning; she needed two
hours for pounding and then time to force some breakfast into her roiling
stomach. She worked a noon to 10 p.m. shift that gave her two hours at lunch for
more therapy.

   The good-time girlfriends were gone now, leaving behind a loyal group that
would gather at their apartment, play Monopoly, fix meals and watch the pets
play while Leslie would go through her treatments.

   People were always waiting for her. She never ate a holiday meal with her
gathered relatives. After work and more therapy, she would make a grand entrance
during dessert and entertain us while eating our leftovers.

   We began gobbling up news of the latest medical advances, hoping that in the
tortoise and the hare race between research and the breakdown of her body, the
tortoise would again miraculously win. While we watched this race being lost,
she won our hearts.

   "Leslie was a role model for the other patients who knew her; the nursing
staff and medical staff had a lot of love for Leslie," Dr. Rosenstein says.
"She wasn't just waiting for 32 years to die. She was determined to make
something of her life and she did it."

   "She was intensely proud that she was a physician's personal secretary, proud
this was her responsibility," Judy Gresser says. "If I felt the way she felt, I
could never have dragged myself in (to work). It had to be a tremendous effort,
a tremendous amount of determination."

   And then, there was a ray of hope. There was a doctor at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill Medical Center who was having success with lung
transplants. Leslie talked on the phone to a man in his late 20s who had
undergone the procedure; he had just finished playing tennis and was having fun
filling the time he used to spend in chest therapy.

   I begged her to apply for the surgery right away, but Leslie was leery and
afraid of the rehabilitation -- "She had more fear of pain and painful
procedures than of dying," Dr. Rosenstein says. She also feared dying on the
operating table and preferred to live all the days her lungs would allow rather
than take a chance on giving up even one.

   She took months to gather her courage, but finally she, Mom and Duke headed
for North Carolina. There, she was subjected to days of grueling tests. In the
worst of these, an incision was made in the femoral artery in her leg, where a
catheter was inserted and pushed all the way to her heart. When the catheter was
removed, the surgeon stopped the bleeding by applying so much pressure to the
wound that it caused severe bruising. Then, a 10 or 15 pound bag of sand was
placed on her leg and she was told to lie still, on her back, for eight hours.
"This made it very difficult for her, because she didn't breathe well lying
flat. That was very scary to her when she couldn't get a breath," her husband
says.

   This pain paled next to what she felt when the doctors turned her down. She
was relieved at not having to go through the surgery, but devastated that there
was nothing more that could be done for her.

   Surgeons had seen through the catheter a heart damaged by the stress of two
lung collapses. Removing lungs attached to her pleura cavity would cause so much
bleeding her weakened heart couldn't cope. The surgery she couldn't live without
she wouldn't live through. Checkmate.

   I had a week off from my job as a sports copy editor at The News at
Thanksgiving, a few months after her rejection, and so drove with my family from
Buffalo to Baltimore. My mother's four children used her home as a gathering
point. This is where we usually saw Leslie, who because she was dependent on
Mom, never lived more than a few miles away.

   But on this occasion, I made a point of taking my family for a long visit to
her apartment. She showed it off proudly, and we spent hours watching our dogs
play and laughing as if nothing was wrong. My wife, Tracy, a physical therapist,
performed the therapeutic pounding for my grateful sister, exhausted by the
holiday demands and too tired to do it herself.

   On the way back to Mom's, recalling Leslie's  tubes, her lack of color and
her face made puffy by Prednisone, Tracy and I wondered if this would be the
last time we would see her.

   With the end of hope, Leslie's spirits drooped. She had longer and more
frequent periods of depression. To combat this, Duke and their friends hatched a
plan. The B-52's, an upbeat band which was a favorite of theirs, would be in
concert at Georgetown University's Smith Center on Jan. 16, 1993.

   "As soon as I heard they were on tour I ordered tickets," Duke says. "Then I
worried Leslie wouldn't want to go; she didn't want to get too far from the
hospital or her mother. She was self-conscious in public carrying the oxygen,
she felt she was being stared at. It was against her nature to have those
feelings because she still loved people and parties, but she felt isolated.

   "I wanted to make sure she felt comfortable so I called the Smith Center, got
ahold of the production manager there, and made some special arrangements so we
could be seated without a lot of walking; she wasn't strong enough to do all
that maneuvering. They were very accommodating. He made sure we had a special
entrance, he made sure we were escorted by the shortest route possible to our
seats. He had reserved a spot for her on the floor, and made sure we didn't have
to deal with any steps.

   "As Leslie put it, it was just like the old times. We hadn't really been out
to any event, out on a date, in a long time. We just really had the best time. I
was so happy to see her forget about things for awhile. She forgot about the
oxygen, and was dancing.

   "After the concert, the limo driver was very nice, and we drove about
Washington. It was around inauguration time so he pointed everything out. On the
way home, Leslie talked the driver into taking us through the drive-in lane at
Taco Bell. We had around a quarter-inch clearance on both sides of the stretch
limo. We just sat there pigging out, as Leslie would say."

   My mother called, ecstatic, to tell me the news, that Leslie had actually
gone dancing, an act for which she had been admonished half a life ago.

   It was just nine weeks later that Tracy called me at work -- it was 11 p.m.,
crunch time in the sports department -- and said: "Leslie has died." The day was
March 24, my other sister's 36th birthday.

   The Sabres were battling for playoff position; March Madness was upon us; the
NBA was in the stretch run and there was just an hour to get all the results in
the paper. I muddled my way through to the midnight deadline, then excused
myself to go home to pack.

   The next day I had to pick up our airline tickets, purchased on a special
bereavement fare. Before issuing these, the clerk is required to ask if the
deceased is a close relative: when giving my answer, I felt more sorry for the
clerk than for myself.

   Our family, spread out from the Gulf Coast to the Great Lakes, began
assembling on March 26. The mood was surprisingly upbeat. Leslie had feared
lingering in the hospital, tied down by tubes and pinned down by needles, as our
father had been while losing his bout with cancer. She didn't want to suffer,
and at the end, she didn't.

   On her last morning, as Leslie was again struggling to prepare for work, she
was having trouble breathing. So she phoned Dr. Gresser's office to tell them
she wouldn't be in.

   "The day that she died, I heard from her that morning and knew she was
supposed to go to the clinic," Dr. Gresser says. "Two hours later they called us
to tell us she was dead. We couldn't believe it; we had just seen her. We thank
God she lived that long. She appreciated the fact that she was one of the oldest
living CF patients. She was that way when she came to us."

   Leslie phoned Dr. Sandra Walden, head of adult CF patients at Hopkins, and
told her she was feeling worse than she ever had before. Dr. Walden told her to
come right in. Our mother was in Florida; she had passed up many trips to stay
near Leslie in those last years, but had allowed herself this pleasure.  Leslie
declined an ambulance ride so she could make the half-hour trip with her
husband. Duke said he assumed she just needed another tune-up.

   Doctors at Johns Hopkins recognized Leslie was deteriorating quickly and
asked permission to intervene aggressively. When Leslie, who had been preparing
for this moment for years, refused, the physicians got Dr. Walden on an
emergency room phone and asked for her support. She told them they were told to
keep their hands off.

   Dr. Walden then met with Leslie and told her she was dying. She accepted the
news with a glance at her husband.

   "I was with Leslie the whole way, they kicked me out for just a few minutes,"
Duke says. "I was holding hands with her the whole time, trying to encourage her
to stay with us."

   Dr. Rosenstein said blood gases often get out of whack for those with CF,
causing them to get hazy, then comatose. This is what happened to my sister.
Dr. Walden says Leslie was alert for about 15 minutes after arriving at the
hospital, and then she just slipped away. She died about an hour after arriving
at Hopkins.

   And so we celebrated her life instead of her death. Photographs were spread
out on the church piano -- she had taken lessons for more than a decade -- for
us to laugh over. My brother, in delivering the eulogy, demonstrated for the
mourners the face -- top lip left, bottom lip right so that they draw a diagonal
line -- that only he and Leslie were talented enough to make. We all laughed in
recognition.

   The gene that causes CF was located in 1990 and Dr. Rosenstein believes it
will be at least seven more years before gene therapy can solve the pulmonary
problems that killed Leslie. However, there are some people, Boomer Esiason's
toddler son, Gunnar, is one, for whom this cure may not come too late. And so we
take part in the Great Strides walk (there were two last weekend in Western New
York), a fund-raiser for the CF Foundation; we donate money; we vow never to
stop fighting this disease. Leslie never did.

GRAPHIC: Leslie Doyle Bowen at the beach, her favorite place, and with her
husband, Duke Bowen.; Leslie was a master of the funny face. A friend looks on
as Leslie creates her famous diagonal smile.; Leslie lavished her maternal
affections on the family dog. This photo with her Lhasa Apso was her favorite
from the wedding day. Leslie married Duke Bowen June 18, 1988.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1994


                             762 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 2;   Column 3;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: May 15-21;
Out of the Lab, Into the Grocery Store: Gene Therapy for Tomatoes

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY

BODY:

   Consumer surveys suggest that 80 percent of food shoppers do not like the
tomatoes they find on the shelves most of the time, particularly during winter.
Knowing that consumers too often face a choice of green and hard or soft and
mushy, both equally tasteless, the budding biotechnology food industry decided
to provide an alternative -- a firm, red fruit that developers say has that
fresh-from-the-garden taste all year round.

   The Food and Drug Administration said last week that genetically engineered
tomatoes developed by Calgene Incorporated of Davis, Calif., are just as safe as
the ordinary garden variety, clearing the way for their sale in some grocery
stores in the West and Midwest this week and nationwide within a year. The
industry says Calgene's Flavr Savr tomato, altered to ripen longer on the vine,
heralds a new era in custom food production, with more than 50 other food items,
including potatoes that absorb less fat when fried and vegetables that require
less water and fewer pesticides, posed to flood the market soon.

    Critics, however, who call the Flavr Savr "Frankentomato," complained that
the F.D.A. will not require all genetically altered food to be proven safe and
that the agency does not mandate that these foods be specially labeled. The Pure
Food Campaign has promised to meet the Flavr Savr with boycotts, tomato dumpings
and lawsuits. Industry spokesmen say, however, that once people try the new
foods they will welcome the improvements.   WARREN E. LEARY

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1994


                             763 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 22, 1994 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 1029 words

HEADLINE: Cancer cures? These San Diegans expect it

BYLINE: Neil Morgan

BODY:

   It is clear why so much emotion and commotion are swirling around cancer
research.

   After years of hearing about scientific breakthroughs, we see loved ones
pumped full of killer poisons in the same old desperate way and dying in the
same old way. True, rare forms of cancer have surrendered.

   Leustatin (2-CDA), developed at Scripps Research Institute, was proven in
tests at Scripps Clinic to be a phenomenal success in curing hairy-cell
leukemia.

   At the San Diego Regional Cancer Center, human gene therapy has been
initiated.

   UCSD School of Medicine has a pioneering gene therapy trial to treat HIV
infection. Salk Institute, in addition to its work in human genome mapping, has
developed 9-cis-retinoic acid, a vitamin A derivative now in clinical testing
for cancer treatment. Nearby, on a campus shaded by Torrey pines and marked with
the precision and discipline of first-line basic research, Finnish-born Erkki
Ruoslahti oversees the 18-year-old La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation.

   Its work is now being hailed as pioneering. "We are much bigger," he says
with a shy but engaging directness, "and much more accomplished and noteworthy
than most San Diegans realize." In fact, Ruoslahti's 270 researchers, almost
half of them with advanced degrees, go about cancer research differently from
those who seek headlines and blurbs on the evening news. LJCR, like some
more-renowned campuses, holds high rank in the medical hierarchy.

   Along with Salk Institute, it is classed by the National Institute of Health
as a basic-science cancer center.

   There are only 14 so ranked in the United States; the only other one in
Southern California is at Caltech. Ruoslahti's center has world rank, along with
its neighbor Salk Institute, in a popular measurement of research quality and
influence: the average number of citations per paper published by its
scientists. A tall, thin man with a jutting chin and ready smile, Ruoslahti is
intense when he talks about the thresholds being approached in his laboratories.
"Of course people are frustrated," he says.

   "They don't see results of cancer research in the past 15 years because
treatment has not changed. Back then we were looking for a suspect, like a
policeman looking for a killer, without knowing what he looks like.

   That is behind us. "T here are about 100,000 genes in the human body, and
only about 100 of them are involved in cancer," he adds.

   "Maybe about five genes change in any given cancer.

   We know most of these cancer genes now.

   We can spot which ones change.

   So treatment can be less toxic and more focused. "Important compounds are
entering development at pharmaceutical companies or are in clinical trials.

   In the next two or three years we will see therapies based on the learning of
these past years.

   In another 10 years, many therapies will be available." Ten years ago
Ruoslahti made breakthroughs in cell adhesion.

   At that time most of the research community regarded the adhesion molecules
in our bodies as little more than the glue that held cells together.

   But Ruoslahti saw the chance to manipulate the stickiness of cells as a path
to healing in heart disease, stroke, arthritis, shock and cancer. "I peddled our
technology then to the drug companies and was turned down," Ruoslahti recalls
with a wry smile. Belated recognition has come.

   Time magazine covered Ruoslahti's work in 1992 in a piece called "The Glue of
Life."

   La Jolla researchers had inserted a CAM (cellular-adhesion molecule) gene
inside a tumor to manufacture "biological Velcro," gluing the cancer into place.

   In a variation, researchers controlled a tumor by "walking on ice" --
creating inverse stickiness, denying tumor cells traction to move and implant
elsewhere. Now papers that Ruoslahti published as long as 10 years ago are
reprinted, and adhesion has emerged as a central research theme.

   "Cell adhesion fever," the magazine Science reported recently, "has taken
over in biotech." Years ago Ruoslahti researched a simple peptide known as RGD
as the basis of new treatments.

   In conjunction with the center's biotech ally, Telios, wound-healing gels are
being tested to provide "footholds" for healing cells to treat wounds, including
cancers. "W e seek to glue the tumor in place, using an adhesive protein to
surround a cancerous tumor and prevent cells from invading surrounding tissue,"
Ruoslahti says.

   "That way you can live with it.

   This research has already entered into medicine in healing diabetic ulcers to
prevent the loss of a foot or leg.

   It's not hope.

   It's a fact.

   Cell adhesion has become a vital part of biology.

   RGD started with us here, and now the whole biotech world is busy with
`sticky science.' " Within the quiet of the Torrey pines, scientists wearing
goggles work in dark laboratories at computer screens, decoding the behavior of
cells. "There is a new level of excitement here," Ruoslahti says, pausing
outside the window of one such lab.

   "New discoveries allow us to learn what turns something on in the body.

   This gives confidence. `We know what turned this on,' one of these
researchers said the other day. `We'll find out how to turn it off.' " It is no
coincidence that Ruoslahti, who grew up in the house of a Russian nobleman on
the Finnish side of the border near St. Petersburg, has found himself in
California. "Life is not set up to stifle you here," he says.

   "This is only in America, perhaps only on the West Coast." His laboratory, in
fact, began in 1976 after Lillian and Bill Fishman got into their car at Tufts
University School of Medicine and decided to move their research out West. They
saw La Jolla and stopped.

   They had no institutional contact.

   They went to work and moved to the Torrey Pines site in 1978. At 80, he still
comes in. "Someone suggested to me recently that we try something the
old-fashioned way," Ruoslahti said, "But nothing in this field any more is
old-fashioned. Partly because it understands change, San Diego is an uncommon
place for this kind of work.

   We have pioneered on this little campus in a field that is now one of the
frontiers of cancer research.

   This community is already a vital part of the world of biology." NEIL
MORGAN'S column appears on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             764 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1994 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              May 22, 1994 Sunday
                                 SECOND Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D08

LENGTH: 1352 words

HEADLINE: SPORTSWRITING ONLY ONE GAME THAT HOLDS INTEREST FOR DEFORD

BYLINE: BONNIE MILLER RUBIN, Chicago Tribune News Service <

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:

   Sunday, May 22, 1994 SPORTSWRITING ONLY ONE GAME THAT HOLDS INTEREST FOR
DEFORD

   ``I've always been divided between being a journalist and being a  writer,
but I could never just cut and run. For one thing, sports pays the  bills. But I
do like to step away from it -- try something that's a stretch -- and then I can
come back fresher.'' -- Frank Deford

   When Frank Deford, arguably the nation's pre-eminent sportswriter, strolls
the campus of Notre Dame, you might expect him to take at least a moment to
inhale tradition.

   Instead, he takes long, purposeful strides, powered by a 6-foot-4-inch
frame, and makes no passing references to Knute Rockne, the Four Horsemen or
Touchdown Jesus; no small talk about the Irish prospects for a national
championship or pithy anecdotes about Lou Holtz.

   Deford has managed to become the ultimate inside guy by keeping himself at  a
distance, where the view is better.

   His slant on football, for example, could never be written by someone
blinded by the Golden Dome.

   ``While baseball is a pastime, intellectual and family, football is an  event
-- emotional and sexy,'' he observed in a Vanity Fair profile of Dallas  Cowboys
owner Jerry Jones. ``Some sage old soldier long ago observed that we  fight wars
for the women watching and so too with football, our party to  violence . . .
those huge helmeted V-shaped men crushing each other, donating  their knees to a
grateful nation.''

   It's not that Deford, 55, is tired of sports; it's just that he's
invigorated by everything else. During a recent speaking engagement on the
Notre Dame campus in South Bend, he was eager to discuss a variety of  subjects,
from Rwanda to gene therapy.

   ``I've always been divided between being a journalist and being a writer,
but I could never just cut and run,'' he said. ``For one thing, sports pays  the
bills. But I do like to step away from it -- try something that's a  stretch --
and then I can come back fresher.''

   Deford has enjoyed such freedom because of his ability to find a poignant
story and tell it well -- even when it happens under his own roof, as it did
when his 8-year-old daughter died of cystic fibrosis in 1980.

   Three years later, he wrote ``Alex: The Life of a Child,'' just one of 10
books on an illustrious resume, which includes a Princeton education and a
27-year stint as a writer at Sports Illustrated. It was there that his  profiles
-- which could be unflattering, but never unkind -- made him a star.

   His next job as executive editor of the National, the now-defunct sports
daily, brought him even more notoriety. Other accolades, such as his Emmy for
his TV coverage of the Seoul Olympics in 1988, barely rate a mention.
Currently, he is a contributing editor for Vanity Fair and writes and delivers
weekly commentaries on ESPN and National Public Radio.

   His latest stretch is a historical novel called ``Love and Infamy''  (Viking)
the story of two men -- one the son of American missionaries who was  raised in
Japan and the other a Japanese raised and educated in America. As  Dec. 7, 1941,
approaches, they are forced to choose between loyalty to their  countries and
loyalty to one another.

   ``I was always interested in Pearl Harbor and I was curious about what it
would have been like to have been an American in Tokyo; it would have been
different, than say, being an American in Berlin, where race wasn't a  factor,''
he said.

   He also wrote the book, in part, because he has an Asian daughter, Scarlet,
adopted a year after Alex died, at the the suggestion of Carol, his wife of
almost 30 years. The family -- a son, Chris, is a student at Colorado State
University -- live in the Volvo-saturated suburb of Westport, Conn.

   ``We recently went back to the Philippines and we joked with Scarlet  because
she was in the majority. That was a new experience for us, to be a  minority,''
Deford says.

   Race relations have been on Deford's mind a lot, especially since his
friend, Arthur Ashe, died of AIDS a year ago.

   Theirs was a deeply nourishing bond that dated from the '70s. Ashe served  as
a pallbearer at Alex's funeral.

   The last time Deford saw Ashe was in his hospital room, just a week before
his death. ``He had invited us to a father-daughter Valentine's Day party and
his parting words to me were, `Now, don't forget to wear red.' ''

   But Ashe died Feb. 6, and instead of going to a party, Deford was  eulogizing
his friend in Newsweek, extolling the ``essential goodness (of a  man who)
really was honored more for his nobility than his celebrity.''

   That nobility was evident when Ashe was forced to reveal his condition or
risk having the news announced by USA Today.

   ``(The USA Today editors) acted professionally, but not as sensitively as
they could have,'' said Deford, who helped the tennis star draft his  statement.
``Some good did come of it, though. . . . It gave Arthur a chance,  in a sense,
to read his obituary while he was still alive. As angry as he was, I think the
outpouring of affection really touched him.''

   When Deford read Ashe's book, ``Days of Grace,'' which was published  several
months after his death, one paragraph leaped off the page: ``I have  experienced
some sad days in my life, but few as harrowing as the day when I  was a
pallbearer at the funeral of Alex Deford . . . so I take nothing about  (Ashe's
daughter) Camera for granted. I guess by now I take nothing about  anything for
granted.''

   Said Deford: ``He never told me (how he felt at Alex's funeral). It was  very
chilling.''

   Even now, almost 15 years after her death, Deford frequently refers to  Alex.
As chairman of the National Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, it's almost  impossible
not to.

   ``I felt I owed it to her to stay in the fight a while longer,'' he said.

   Before Alex -- the daughter, the book, the TV movie -- the foundation was
struggling for recognition and money. But the little girl focused attention on
the disease, which, in turn, opened up checkbooks.

   ``Tragedy,'' Deford said, ``needs a face.''

   There are times when Deford is stuck in a meeting in some airless room and
he wants to be somewhere -- anywhere -- else.

   But since Alex's battle there's a new arsenal of treatments; life  expectancy
has increased by 10 years, and researchers believe they are closing in on a
cure. Robert J. Bell, president of the National Cystic Fibrosis  Foundation,
said Deford has been a wonderful ambassador for the cause. ``He's  such an
authentic individual, and that comes through; that sense of integrity  is
contagious.''

   A medical breakthrough would bring only jubilation, without a trace of
regret. ``Maybe if we had just missed a cure, I would be mad, but to say if
only Alex had been born 15 years later? No, I just can't play the `if' game to
that extent.''

   The only other ``if'' in Deford's life is the National, which was lauded  for
its excellence, even as it struggled for readers.

   The paper hit news stands in January 1990, bankrolled by Emilio Azcarraga,  a
Mexican media baron who picked Deford to lead his grand experiment. But
distribution problems doomed it from the start and after only 18 months and an
estimated $100 million loss, Azcarraga pulled the plug.

   ``We were so convinced that we had to do it fast or somebody else would  beat
us to it. And if you have a guy who is waving lots of money in front of  you,
saying `Let's go,' you're going to do it,'' Deford said.

   If there are any regrets, it's that he didn't have the luxury of being just
an editor. He had to be more of a ``corporate guy'' (his lip curls as he says
the words) drumming up advertisers and support.

   But there are no ill feelings -- ``Love and Infamy'' is dedicated to
Azcarraga -- and Deford doesn't lose sleep over that chapter of his life.

   ``Maybe if the paper had been a bad product, I'd still be tossing and
turning, but I was defeated by logistics,'' he said.

   Logistics. Details. A bad break. Deford rolls with the punches.

   His wife, Carol, agrees that resiliency is at his core.

   ``You know,'' she said. ``He hasn't had a whole lot of disappointments. For
the most part, he's led a very lucky life.''

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo by STEVE DIPAOLA/for The Oregonian

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             765 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      May 19, 1994 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: PEOPLE; Pg. G01

LENGTH: 1569 words

HEADLINE: A WOMAN OF ACTION, RESEARCH ON AIDS SCIENTIST AND SOCIALITE MATHILDE
KRIM COULD HAVE IGNORED AIDS. INSTEAD SHE EMBRACED IT.

BYLINE: Roy H. Campbell, INQUIRER FASHION WRITER

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Mathilde Krim, the vibrant leader of the American Foundation for AIDS
Research (AmFar), could have done nothing.

   She was prominent in medical circles, head of the interferon laboratory at
New York's prestigious Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research in 1980,
when the medical community was baffled by a mysterious new disease that attacked
the body's immune system.

   Krim, who will be in Philadelphia Monday for the star-studded Light Up the
Night benefit for AIDS, was also well-known in social circles. She was the wife
of multimillionaire Arthur B. Krim, founder and chairman of the board of the
now-defunct Orion Pictures Corp.

   With her monied and privileged life, Krim could have, as so many did, turned
away from the horrors of a disease that was striking down homosexuals, a disease
apparently transmitted through sexual intercourse. She could have reacted with
the prejudice and hysteria of some of her colleagues and friends who dismissed
AIDS as a gay disease, shunned those afflicted, and espoused radical solutions
for protecting the public from those with AIDS.

   But Krim did not turn away. She refused to watch in silence as people died.
She remembered a time 50 years earlier, when she was a teenager in Switzerland
during World War II, when her parents and others had stood silent as people
died.

   "I became very scandalized by the public reaction to the emergence of the
epidemic," Krim said. "People were saying, 'Let's round them up. Let's isolate
them. Let's imprison them.' . . . During the Holocaust, I heard the same thing
said about Jews. And there it happened. They isolated them and destroyed them.
So to hear the same kind of talk here really pulled a trigger in me."

   That trigger, a previous vow that she would never again in her lifetime do
nothing while evil flourished, led her to the forefront of the national effort
to find a cure for AIDS. Krim co-founded AmFar; well-known for its longtime
association with actress Elizabeth Taylor, AmFar's goal is to support only AIDS
research. Since its conception in 1985, AmFar has granted $65 million to AIDS
research projects.

   Krim, with Taylor and cofounder Dr. Michael Gottlieb, enlisted celebrities,
socialites, philanthropists and others in the fight against AIDS. Those
galvanized by Krim and members of her national council include Warren Betty,
Woody Allen, Burt Bacharach, George Hamilton, Barbra Streisand and Raquel Welch.

   The 8 p.m. benefit Monday at the Academy of Music, a Broadway-style concert,
is an example of AmFar's ability to rally celebrities. It will star Beatrice
Arthur, Celeste Holm, Phyllis Hyman, Jack Klugman and Broadway producer and
performer Tommy Tune. It will benefit AmFar, the Philadelphia AIDS Consortium
and the local chapter of the Minority AIDS Coalition.

   More important than using her social position to pull together such glitzy
affairs, Krim is a tireless advocate and lobbyist. She has taken on the
monumental tasks of prodding government intervention, speaking out against
government policies, rallying the medical and scientific communities and
overseeing the research that her foundation supports.

   Indeed, in an arena in which many of the advocates are gay, Krim, 67, has
become one the few high-profile heterosexual voices speaking out for those too
ill or too poor to fight for themselves. She says of society's indifference to
the plight of those infected with HIV or AIDS the same that she said about those
in Switzerland who ignored Germany's assault against Jewish people.

   "It has been said that to be a criminal doesn't take for you to do the
killing yourself. Just to remain silent when you know it is happening makes you
an accomplice."

   *

   She was 18, studying biology at the University of Geneva, when she saw the
first newsreel depicting the liberation of the German camps.

   In horror, she watched the grisly scenes: stacks of bodies; piles of bones;
ragged, skeletal survivors.

   That newsreel changed her life.

   She said she was "totally unprepared" for the sights. But she also could not
believe that her father and many others dismissed it as propaganda.

   "My father was not an exception. In Europe, there was a latent anti-
Semitism, and part of it is still around," she said during an interview in her
townhouse on the East Side.

   She had encountered anti-Semitism the summer before, as a typist in the
office of a lawyer who handled the cases of Jewish families applying for
immigration to Switzerland. "They were put in a camp and sent back if they could
not put up 10,000 francs per person to stay," she says, indignation still
ringing in her voice 50 years later. "For money, they would accept them. I was
repulsed by that. . . . Some of them went to their deaths. The Germans were
occupying all the countries surrounding Switzerland, so sending them back was
putting them in the hands of the Germans and the Nazis."

   Krim continued her studies, but suddenly she had another purpose in life. She
set out to make friends with Jewish people and for a time worked undercover to
advance the Jewish effort to establish the state of Israel.

   Eventually, she married a fellow student, who was Jewish, and in 1953
immigrated to Israel with her husband and baby girl. (Krim converted to
Judaism.)

   Her husband was immediately drafted in the Israeli army and Krim, with her
doctorate in genetics, began working at the Weizmann Institute of Sciences,
studying human chromosomes.

   Within a few years, the marriage broke up. In 1956, Arthur Krim, an American
lawyer and movie executive, visited the institute. He and Krim met, fell in love
and were married two years later.

   Krim moved to New York and for 25 years immersed herself in cancer research
and a busy social life.

   She wants people to understand that she is no dilettante socialite presiding
over elegant fund-raising events. She is a scientist, a humanitarian and woman
on a mission. That mission began in 1980 when, intrigued by the scientific
puzzle of a new fatal ailment, she studied patients with AIDS.

   "You know it is a mind-boggling experience to feel that one is watching the
beginning of an epidemic. For scientists, there was never a doubt from day one
that if this thing is sexually transmittable, it was going to spread way beyond
the gay community." She recalled the first group of men she studied. "These were
young men who had been healthy, very often in the prime of their lives, becoming
severely sick, and we could see them fall apart, and it was tragic and very
sad."

   When she learned of the prejudice against these AIDS patients - the
physicians who wouldn't treat them, companies that would fire them, insurance
companies that wouldn't insure them - she decided to do something.

   She took $100,000 of her money and founded the AIDS Medical Foundation in
1983. By 1985, she merged it with a similar organization on the West Coast
funded by Rock Hudson. The doctor who treated Hudson before his AIDS-related
death was Dr. Gottlieb, and Hudson gave him $250,000 for a research foundation.
AmFar was formed in 1985 and gained immediate prominence when Taylor, who had
watched her friend Hudson grow ill and die, became its national chair and
spokeswoman.

   But as Krim continued her mission, even appearing on a talk show and kissing
an AIDS patient, she, too, found herself facing AIDS discrimination
from friends and peers. "I know people were afraid of me. I know that there were
people saying that we can't have dinner with Krim with the kind of company she
keeps, she might give us the disease," Krim said. "I thought, 'Well, if that is
the attitude, then I have to show them that there is nothing to be afraid of.' "

   AmFar began funding research into ways to educate AIDS patients. It also
created a system for processing grants more quickly than the government
bureaucratic machine.

   AmFar also has set up a nationwide system of community clinics that provide
free medical care and experimental drugs to patients. In the past, clinical
research was done mostly at universities. Krim said AIDS patients, many poor and
on society's fringe, are intimidated by the atmosphere of universities and are
often too far from them to use their services.

   (Gottlieb disagreed with the commnity program, fearing it would not be
objective and professional enough. That and other issues led to his parting with
AmFar in 1990.)

   Krim, currently an adjunct professor of public health and management at
Columbia University, says the government should do more. She advocates the
federal funding of a brain trust to work for a cure.

   She passionately believes that the U.S. policy prohibiting non-U.S. citizens
with the HIV virus from entering the country is wrong and a terrible form of
discrimination.

   But more important, she argues, the policy forces illegal immigrants already
in this country to fear testing and treatment.

   "They know by now if they are found by the authorities to be HIV-positive,
they are going to be deported," she said. "That is enough to send people
underground with their disease."

   Krim believes that AIDS will be stopped. She says gene therapy, intefering at
the molecular level with the HIV virus' ability to multiply, will likely be the
savior. But that may take more than a decade unless there is increased
government and private funding.

   Still, she says, there will be a cure. And she will not rest until there is.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;

PHOTO (2)
1. Mathilde Krim, co-founder of AmFAR, will host a benefit here Monday night.
(For The Inquirer, DAVID SWANSON)
2. Mathilde Krim, at a party in her honor last week in Bryn Mawr, will
attend the benefit in Philadelphia Monday. (For The Inquirer, DAVID SWANSON)

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             766 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                       May 18, 1994 Wednesday PM EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 08

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: PHILLY'S WISTAR IS NOW WORLD FAMOUS PICKLED BRAINS TAKE BACK SEAT TO
RESEARCH

BYLINE: Ron Avery, Daily News Staff Writer

BODY:

   It was born 100 years ago this month as a medical museum with a $1 million
endowment.

   And until the 1960s that's pretty much what the Wistar Institute remained -
an obscure collection of pickled brains, tumors and bones, with a limited
budget.

   Today the lame arm of Isaac Wistar and the pickled brains of some of the
smartest Philadelphians of the last century are locked up in the basement. The
60-foot-long whale skeleton now hangs in a museum in Chicago.

   The brains that matter at Wistar in 1994 are not in formaldehyde. They're in
the skulls of some of the brightest medical researchers in the world -
post-doctorate graduates of Harvard, Princeton and MIT, and brilliant scientists
from China, Japan, Italy, Germany, Russia and a dozen other nations.

   The annual budget of the West Philadelphia institution now runs about $25
million and comes mostly in federal research grants. And if it still isn't a
household name, Wistar is known by medical research people everywhere.

   Its scientists developed vaccines against rubella and rabies and identified
interleukin-12, a molecule that regulates the immune system and may hold the
secret to fighting AIDS. It developed an anti-rabies shot for animals. It's on
the cutting edge in gene therapy and cancer research.

   So what turned another dusty Philadelphia museum into a great medical
research facility? The answer is Hilary Koprowski.

   A true renaissance man, the Polish-born virologist became director of Wistar
in 1957 and completely revamped the institution over the next 34 years. He
increased the staff from less than 100 to 600 and the annual budget from
$100,000 to $30 million.

   He became famous for being his own guinea pig, trying his own vaccines on
himself first.

   In 1991, however, Koprowski got into a bitter feud with the board of
directors over staff cutbacks and was forced out. He filed a suit alleging age
discrimination that resulted in an out-of-court settlement.

   Koprowski is now back with a new title and office plus a seat on the board of
managers. However, he works out of a lab at Jefferson University.

   Among the centennial events is a symposium May 26 honoring Koprowski and the
dedication of a conference room in his name.

   Other events include a gala Friday night at the Hotel Atop the Bellevue, a
display of Wistar material at the American Philosophical Society and a science
essay contest for high school students.

   The institution was founded by Civil War Gen. Isaac Wistar. There are a
passel of Wisters and Wistars (same family, different spelling) in Philadelphia
history. Perhaps the most well-known was Owen Wister, author of the first great
Western novel, "The Virginian."

   Dr. Caspar Wistar was a famed early-American physician. He died in 1818,
leaving behind a large collection of medical specimens and models. Isaac, the
Civil War vet with the bad arm, funded the institute to preserve his great-
uncle's medical collection.

   In addition to money, Isaac left his arm and brain to the collection.

   The facility was built in conjunction with the University of Pennsylvania's
medical school on the Penn campus at 36th and Spruce streets. However, the
institute is independent of the university.

   Before the Koprowski era, Wistar's big accomplishment was the breeding of the
Wistar rat. In 1906 it started a program to standardize a rat for laboratory
use; lab animals must have the same genetic makeup for reliable results in
testing.

   Eventually, the albino rats bred at Wistar were used in labs around the
world.

   The new Wistar director is Dr. Giovanni Rovera, an Italian-born pathologist
and cancer expert, who joined the staff in 1975. He's reduced the the staff to
about 400, including 130 doctorate-level scientists.

   Among the exciting areas of research is combining Wistar's experience in
viruses with genetic research, says Rovera. "We are modifying viruses to carry
genetic information into the body. They can be used to replace bad genes with
good genes . . . For instance, the herpes virus is used in brain tumor
treatment."

NOTES: POOR RONALD'S ALMANAC

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;

PHOTO (3)
1. Stanley Plotkin gives rabies shot to Hilary Koprowski as Tadeusz Witkor
kids around in 1971 photo (PHOTOS BY WISTAR INSTITUTE)
2. A young scientist studies bones in early days of Wistar Institute
3. Wistar

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             767 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1994 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                          May 17, 1994, Metro Edition

SECTION: Variety; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1161 words

HEADLINE: 2010;
 Arthur Caplan looks at the future of medicine today

BYLINE: Lewis Cope; Staff Writer

BODY:

    Warp ahead to the year 2010:

    Gene transplants and genetic testing are in the forefront of medicine.
Artificial organs are back; organ transplants are out. High-tech medicine has
changed the abortion debate.

    Physician-assisted suicides have become legal, although not with the
poison-dispensing machines that Jack Kevorkian used in 1990s.

    In preventive medicine, Americans are debating whether the nation has become
prudish or just prudent. New vaccines have whipped some old diseases. But
there's an epidemic of cost and ethical questions on all medical fronts.

    These scenarios come from Arthur Caplan, who has headed the University of
Minnesota's biomedical ethics program for the past seven years. The oft-quoted
Caplan leaves in June to head a similar program at the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.

    Keeping in mind that Caplan loves to be provocative, here's his look 16
years into the future:


    Health insurance - The national health insurance plan that Congress passed
in 1994 was phased in over several years, then fiddled with a lot to try to make
it work better."By 2010 we'll have figured out what the plan should look like,"
Caplan said. Cost questions continue - but with changes.

    Back in 1994, for example, experts say there was too much medical testing.
In 2010, many experts will be saying there's not enough.

    "Irresponsible testing will mean you didn't get yourself tested" for
possible genetic flaws before conceiving a child. This will be part of growing
efforts to discourage the birth of children with either obvious birth defects,
or who have genetic patterns that put them at increased risks of developing
various illnesses later in life.


    Deciding to die - "I'm a fervent critic of Kevorkian," Caplan said. "I'm not
a fan of legalizing assisted-suicide by doctors. I will lose this fight. I don't
think we'll have legalized carbon monoxide and dripping stuff. But it will be
legal, at least in some states, to write prescriptions that you could take to
end your life...Americans don't like to be told they can't have options."

    Possible limits: Psychological evaluations of ill patients who want to end
their lives (to assure informed consent); then a waiting period.

    Special concern: Because of the high cost of caring for chronically ill
elderly people, "The pressure to exit could be strong - to say, 'You've lived a
full life - I think you should leave.' I worry about that slope." But don't
blame this on national health insurance. "It was coming anyway" with the growing
elderly population.


    Abortions - Improved contraception in 2010 will reduce the number of
abortions. But the abortion debate will have taken a major shift. Doctors will
have "artificial wombs" that can take a fetus, at the time an abortion would be
done, and keep it alive until its grows strong enough to go home.

    The Roe v. Wade decision legalizing abortions was based on women's rights
not to use their bodies to carry an unwanted fetus to term, Caplan said. With
the artificial womb, "The issue will become whether the government has to grow
unwanted fetuses" to term.


    High-tech medicine - "I would be very surprised if, in 2010, surgeons are
still transplanting organs." They will be transplanting individual cells (for
example, insulin-making cells rather than an entire pancreas). And doctors will
be transplanting individual genes to correct a wide variety of medical problems.

    The artificial heart will be back; "people assume it has gone away, but it's
just gone back to the lab." Artificial livers will be used a lot. "High-tech
medicine will be starting to go into the brain" to repair brain functions.

    The 2010 debate over costs: Do all these advances cost too much? Or can they
be used to head off chronic illness that are costly to care for?


    Prevention - There will be dramatically fewer smokers in 2010 - a trend that
started with the 1994 headlines over nicotine addiction. Many Americans will be
so pleased by this change that they will be putting pressure on heavy drinkers
to stop, and pushing for tougher gun control. But others will say the nation has
become too prudish.


    Mental health - "We will be faced with a fascinating shift in mental health
treatment." As new drugs become available to better treat mental illnesses,
there will be a clamor to use them in efforts to enhance memory and other mental
skills in people who do not have mental illnesses.

    "The penalty [of possible long-term harm] from use of these drugs may not be
understood, but the pressure to use them will be there."


    Vaccines - "We'll have vaccines against some of the diseases like AIDS." But
new mutations of germs, and changes in how other germs behave, "will continue to
trick us." Things will be better than in 1994, but "we won't be in a nirvana
where we've escaped epidemics."


    Caplan leaves an active, continuing biomedical program at the University of
Minnesota. Remaining on the staff are a physician, a lawyer, a nurse and a
philosopher, plus others who work part-time; the new director is yet to be
selected.




   Nonmedical issues are expected to be alive and well


    Medical advances in 2010 are likely to spur debates over nonmedical issues
ranging from ''Who am I?" to how we live with other nations. Bioethicist Arthur
Caplan's predictions about the nonmedical issues:


    Genetic testing - The wide availability of genetic tests will spur national
debates over issues such as the cause of crime: Do genes play a bigger role than
poverty? No firm answers will come, but the avalanche of genetic data will put
the spotlight on genes. Affirmative action programs will be based on genetic
tests. Some people will be surprised by their own test results.


    Childbirth - Today, natural childbirth means having a baby without
pain-relieving medication. In 2010, it may mean avoiding new technologies that
will be designed to help parents increase the changes that they will have a tall
son, a musically-talented daughter or offspring with other wanted
characteristics. These technologies will use combinations of genetic testing,
"test-tube baby techniques" at the start of the pregnancy, and limited gene
manipulations.


    Third-world pressures - Today, developing nations are so busy worrying about
getting safe drinking water and other basics that they aren't clamoring for
America's '90s-era high-tech medicine. But by 2010, they'll be asking: "Where's
our gene therapy ... We want genetic testing for our kids."


    Who am I?  - In the United States, gene transplants, mind-affecting drugs
and other developments will bring "a ton of ethical battles over the moral
question, 'Do we change ourself too much by engineering ourself.' We're not
going to go back - we're not going to say no [to new biomedical capabilities],
we're going to say yes. But we're going to anguish about it."


GRAPHIC: Photograph; Illustration

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1994


                             768 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 16, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F35; WHAT THE ANALYSTS SAY

LENGTH: 965 words

HEADLINE: WHAT THE ANALYSTS SAY

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Edited by Stan Hinden; Compiled by Louie Estrada

BODY:

   The comments below are excerpted from published stock analyst reports on
stocks of local interest. This information should not be used as the primary
basis of investment decisions. Stock analysts and brokerage firms may own or
actively trade stocks of the companies that they review and recommend.

   Brokerages also may participate in public stock offerings for those
companies. Analysts routinely caution that while their information is based on
sources they believe to be reliable, they cannot guarantee the accuracy of their
information. Nor, they say, can they promise that their recommendations will be
profitable.


   Life Technologies Inc.

   (LTEK-Nasdaq; $ 16)

   "Life Technologies, headquartered in Gaithersburg, manufactures and sells
products used throughout the biotechnology industry, in biopharmaceutical and
diagnostic research, in plant biotechnology, in basic life science research and
in industrial-scale biomanufacturing.

   "About 60 percent of sales are cell culture products -- simplistically,
"food" allowing living cells to grow under laboratory conditions. These allow
the scientist to study living cell processes, or support production of a
purified 'genetically engineered' therapeutic such as TPA or neupogen.

   "The remaining 40 percent of revenues are molecular biology products, which
we have called "scissors and paste" allowing researchers to detect and
manipulate genetic material. This technology is also 'scaling up' in emerging
commercial applications such as gene therapy and DNA amplification-based
diagnostics.

   "Life Technologies generates 40 percent of sales overseas, and has operations
in 24 countries. The company sells over 3,000 products to 20,000 customers ...

   "We believe the company enjoys the leading market shares in North America and
Europe, and (partly through a Japanese joint venture) is one of the top three
competitors in the Pacific Rim. The company employs a direct sales force of 108,
and invests extensively in technical support, seminars and training sessions,
teaching laboratories and its worldwide toll-free technical assistance service.

   "The strategy is to become an integral partner early in a customer's research
and development project, so that new business development is often a natural
consequence of the customer's own research successes. The company invested $
14.5 million in R&D in 1993, representing 7 percent of sales, and introduces 400
to 500 new products each year... .

   "Industry leadership tends to be self-perpetuating, and Life Technologies is
well established in the marketplace, tracing its origins to 1915... .

   "Asia-Pacific results show particular strength. The company participates via
a 50 percent joint venture in Japan and has added offices in Taiwan, Australia
and India in recent years. Sales (unconsolidated) in the joint venture grew 50
percent in 1993, to $ 21 million, while other sales in the region grew about
three times faster than the corporate average.

   "Asia contributed almost $ 1 million of incremental profit last year, and has
begun 1994 with a "significant increase" (undisclosed)... .

   "We expect the general pattern of the first quarter to continue: Sales rise
in the low teens year over year; gross margins decline as 'industrial' sales
become more important; [expenses] decline as a percent of revenue for the same
reason... .

   "Biotechnology stocks can be very rewarding, but chances for failure are
high. Bad science, the Food and Drug Administration or simply general market
volatility can torpedo individual issues. We believe Life Technologies
represents a unique way for the average investor to participate in the
industry's growth -- while sleeping at night. (April 22)


    -- George F. Shipp of Scott & Stringfellow Inc.

   Crestar Financial Corp.

   (CF-NYSE; $ 46.62 1/2)

   "Crestar Financial, based in Richmond, is a $ 14.4 billion holding company
that operates three affiliate banks with 321 offices in Virginia, Maryland and
the District of Columbia. Crestar has been an active in-market [acquiring],
closing three acquisitions in the first quarter, adding $ 1.5 billion in assets.

   "Crestar's management has stuck to an acquisition policy that has benefited
its shareholders and fueled earnings expansion from the first day of
acquisition. It has been active [in acquiring] at very good prices. Importantly,
the company has proven itself skillful at the operational side of mergers and
acquisitions; expenses have remained under control... .

   "Crestar's strategy has been in-market growth through acquisitions. Net
interest margins are stable at 4.78 percent with good expense control. Our
aggressive $ 5.50 [a share] estimate for 1995 is based on continued acquisition
of market share, which translates into pricing power.

   "There is still ample opportunity for Crestar to pursue acquisitions in
Virginia. We estimate that Crestar can shop among 320 smaller private and public
banks in the Commonwealth that can provide immediate earnings accretion while
building all-important franchise value that benefits both management and
shareholders.

   "Crestar reported first-quarter earnings of $ 1.07 per share compared with 83
cents a year earlier, exceeding our expectations.

   "In summary, the quarter showed a strength that gave us a high degree of
confidence that Crestar will be able to meet our estimate of $ 4.35 per share in
1994... . Fee income will continue to look toward credit card growth as a
pacesetter... . and fees on deposit accounts and trust income should continue to
dominate. With foreclosed property expenses still at 100 percent below last
year's levels, the expense picture should compare favorably despite
acquisitions." (April 18)

    -- Merrill H. Ross, David C. Stumpf and Faith H. Barnes of Wheat First
Butcher Singer Inc.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1994


                             769 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     MAY 15, 1994, SUNDAY, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A2, ALMANAC

LENGTH: 359 words

BYLINE: COMPILED BY ALICE DEMETRIUS STOCK

BODY:


   ON THIS DATE

   One year ago (Saturday, May 15, 1993)

   -- Mother Teresa of Calcutta, 83-year-old Roman Catholic nun and winner of
the 1979 Nobel Peace Prize, was ''in good spirits'' as she recovered from a fall
in which she broke three ribs.

   -- At Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Andrew Gobea became the first newborn
to undergo gene therapy. ''Stem cells'' from Andrew's blood drawn from an
umbilical cord for the first time were also used in this ''highly experimental''
attempt at genetic engineering. Doctors were attempting to alter a faulty immune
system that, if left untreated, could become fatal.

   Five years ago (Monday, May 15, 1989)

   -- In Beijing, Chinese President Yang Shangkun and Soviet President Mikhail
Gorbachev called for a ''new stage'' in their relationship as they began the
first summit meeting between their two countries in 30 years.

   Ten years ago (Tuesday, May 15, 1984)

   -- Four Duquesne University basketball players were accused of raping an 18-
year-old business school student in a dormitory. The players were charged with
rape, involuntary deviant sexual intercourse and terroristic threats.

   Twenty-five years ago (Thursday, May 15, 1969)

   -- The Apollo 10 astronauts sharpened their flying skills in jet aircraft.
The weatherman predicted satisfactory conditions for liftoff on their upcoming
around-the-moon journey.

   -- Dr. Wesley W. Posvar, University of Pittsburgh chancellor, said Pitt
trustees had approved a plan to pay renters up to $ 500 to move their personal
and household effects to new quarters. Pitt was buying houses and apartments in
the area around Forbes Field in Oakland in order to expand the campus.

   Fifty years ago (Monday, May 15, 1944)

   -- Swedish sources estimated 1.5 million American and Allied troops were
poised in Britain for the impending invasion of Western Europe.

   -- In Hollywood, all federal charges against comedian Charlie Chaplin
collapsed when Federal Judge J.F.T. O'Connor dismissed indictments charging him
with forcing Joan Barry to leave Beverly Hills in violation of her civil rights.
Barry was trying to establish Chaplin's paternity of her daughter.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Mother Teresa

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             770 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     MAY 14, 1994, SATURDAY, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. B1

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: LUNG LOBE DONORS: WE DID ALL WE COULD

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   The father and the uncle who donated pieces of their lungs for a 25-year- old
cystic fibrosis patient's transplant expressed no regrets after his death on
Thursday, a University of Pittsburgh doctor said yesterday.

   ''They said they hoped we wouldn't stop doing these transplants, despite what
happened in this case,'' said Dr. Robert Keenan, director of adult lung
transplantation at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

   The recipient's father and uncle each donated a lower lobe of their lungs
during the April 29 transplant operation. The family, which is from Western
Pennsylvania, has asked to remain anonymous.

   ''There have been no regrets,'' Keenan said yesterday. ''They felt good about
what they had done.''

   ''They really, literally, gave a part of themselves,'' said Pat Root,
executive director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's Western Pennsylvania
chapter. ''They are comforted that they did all they could do.''

   The family's 23-year-old daughter, who also had cystic fibrosis, died in
March while waiting for a lung transplant. The son was close to death last month
when the father and uncle donated parts of their lungs in an attempt to save his
life.

   Despite the disappointing outcome to this operation, one of about 15 such
surgeries performed in the United States since 1991, local families who have
members with cystic fibrosis continue to be upbeat about the prospects of future
lung transplants from living, related donors, Root said. They are encouraged
that Pitt is making this type of procedure available here, she added.

   Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disorder that causes the production of thick,
sticky mucus that clogs the lungs, leading to infection and lung damage. The
defective gene responsible for the disease was discovered in 1989, and
researchers recently have begun attempts to cure the disease by transferring
healthy genes into the airways of cystic fibrosis patients.

   Even if gene therapy proves successful, however, ''there are many patients
who will not benefit from that,'' Root emphasized. For those who already have
suffered extensive lung damage, lung transplantation is the only hope for a
cure. And, because of a shortage of transplantable lungs from cadavers, living,
related donors may be the only source of organs for many patients, she
explained.

   ''We will certainly be doing more (living, related lung transplants) in the
future,'' Keenan agreed.

   Pitt's first case ran into trouble from the start. Surgeons knew the man was
extremely sick before they performed the operation, Keenan said, but were
dismayed once the procedure was under way to find he was battling an emerging
infection.

   The airways of cystic fibrosis patients are always contaminated to some
degree with infectious agents, Keenan said. Though the patient was not actively
infected before surgery, it soon became clear that ''something was starting to
brew.''

   Doctors were initially upbeat because the technical aspects of the operation
had gone well. Because of the infection, however, ''we knew everything had to go
perfectly,'' Keenan said. The man was weak from battling respiratory failure
before the operation, the surgeon noted, and the anti- rejection drugs he
received afterward further reduced his ability to fight the infection.

   His progress was ''touch and go'' for the first week in the intensive care
unit, Keenan said, but he began to improve slightly four days ago. ''Then, as
often happens, he suddenly took a turn for the worse.'' His heart, unable to
cope any longer with the infection, failed late Thursday afternoon.

   ''He was a tough guy,'' Keenan added. ''He withstood a lot.''

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             771 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                       May 13, 1994, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: Season finales are not so grand;
Television

BYLINE: By Frederic M. Biddle, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Smack in the middle of the all-important May sweeps, network TV is - well,
middling. It sure isn't up to last February, the most recent sweeps month, when
Tonya and Nancy almost singlehandedly matched the networks' schedule hype with
surprises.  This sweeps-month surprise is that the grand finale of network TV's
most successful season in years is a bore.

    Even the finales of cult hits aren't among the season's best shows, despite
their hype. Tonight's episodes of "Picket Fences," "The X-Files" and "Adventures
of Brisco County, Jr." - and later this month, the finale of "Law & Order" - are
more concerned with tying up plot threads than with cliffhanging. As finales,
they're a bit tepid, with one exception.  Had the nighttime soap opera "Dallas"
done it this way, "Who shot J.R.?" would have been "Who shoved J.R?"
"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr." 8 p.m., WFXT (Ch. 25) ** (two-part
episode airing tonight and May 20) ** 1/2 (season average)
 There's always a bit less than meets the eye in this anything-goes Western.
It's a TV "Blazing Saddles" that substitutes hip sci-fi hokum for the satire of
the Mel Brooks movie.  That gives it a fun, Saturday-morning serial feel, but
the gimmicks - like the Elvis-impersonating sheriff who shows up tonight - can
wear out their welcome, not to mention the Swiss cheese plots.  But "Brisco" 's
sloppy high spirits sometimes work for it, too. The show recently won a TV Guide
viewers' poll of low-rated shows that should be saved (Fox will announce later
this month whether it will renew). The comic chemistry of Brisco (Bruce
Campbell) and Bowler (Julius Carry) is ripe in tonight's show.  They're charged
with high treason after crossing the Mexican border to rescue a newspaper
mogul's daughter. But stretched over two episodes, the plot slows them down.
"The X-Files," 9 p.m., Ch. 25 *** (tonight's episode) *** 1/2 (season average)
 "The Truth is Out There," this superb '90s retake of "The Twilight Zone"
announces in its opening credits.  Tonight, the ominous axiom is finally
explained by FBI agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian
Anderson). In their rookie season, their investigations of unexplained
phenomena, ingeniously written by Chris Carter, have made this a show for
viewers who are skeptics of the supernatural - as is Agent Scully.  No matter
how boldly its plots step into the sci-fi loony bin, one foot always stays
grounded, if only by the little toe, in scientific fact.  That keeps the scripts
consistently creepy, in a way that "Twilight Zone," with its flights into
fantasy, sometimes did not.  In this season's best episode, for example, Scully
and Mulder battled an arsonist whose weapon was a substance that burned so hot
it melted steel, concrete and all evidence of the crime.  In real life, there
are no "human torches" who survive 4,000-degree fires - but the hyperarsons
really happen, in several US cities.

   Tonight's current-events tie-in is the case in which California hospital
workers were apparently overcome by fumes from a recently deceased body.  In
this case, the killer odor belongs to a man, very much alive, who is the subject
of secret government gene-therapy experiments - and the long-awaited link to the
fabled 1947 UFO crash in Roswell, N.M., that stumped Scully and Mulder earlier
this season.  Whenever they snoop too close to their own employer, Uncle Sam,
there's trouble. Tonight, even the straitlaced Scully acknowledges, finally,
that she works for the enemy.  Gratifying, yes, but we knew that halfway through
the season.  Also unresolved is the incipient romance of Mulder and Scully.
It'll take another arsonist to set that one aflame . . .
"Picket Fences," 10 p.m., WHDH (Ch. 7) ** 1/2 (tonight's episode) *** (season
average)
 Everybody knows everybody in Rome, Wis.  That's the plot weakness and (mostly)
the strength of this hothead drama, now ending its sophomore season.  It's for
viewers who like their social-issues debates writ in bold, melodramatic strokes,
in a small-town setting of diluted "Twin Peaks" wackiness.

   These well-acted Romans, from the district attorney/lone African American
John Littleton (Don Cheadle) to Sheriff Jimmy Brock (Tom Skerritt), have each
built sympathies, taking viewers for a wild, entertaining emotional ride.  But
it happens in every show.  It's too frequently over the top - earlier this
season, for example, a school-bathroom fight eventually escalated into a nearly
lethal standoff between Brock and a small army of State Troopers.  Tonight,
"Picket Fences" pushes our emotional buttons again and breaks them off.  In a
symbol for Rome and society itself, the mayor (Richard Cornthwaite) is suffering
from Alzheimer's disease.  That his son shoots him to put him out of his misery
is as predictable as surgeon Jill Brock's complicity in the killing - she
refuses to order treatment that might have saved the mayor.  It's all convoluted
and passionate in a forced way.  Still, "Picket Fences" is a drama that knows
what it wants.
"Law & Order" 10 p.m. (Wednesday, May 25), WBZ (Ch. 4) *** 1/2 (final episode)
*** (season average)
 This efficient, well-acted legal drama typically focuses on the case, not the
cops trying to solve it.  It's an ancestor of the rival "NYPD Blue," but
spiritually it's the flip side. In the last few minutes of its fourth- season
finale, "Law & Order" takes a striking turn to send off series veteran Michael
Moriarty.  Moriarty, who left "Law & Order" earlier this season in a dispute,
will be missed by fans as the ultimate ruthless district attorney.  This episode
shows why.
 * * * * Worth staying home for * * * Worth watching if you're home * * Worth
watching if you're tired * Worth watching if you're sick - Worthless

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Gillian Anderson (left) and David Duchovny, as FBI agents,
investigate unexplained phenomena in "The X-Files."

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1994


                             772 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      May 13, 1994, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F3; MICHAEL SCHRAGE

LENGTH: 954 words

HEADLINE: NIH's New Chief Makes It a Lab For Change as Well as Science

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: MICHAEL SCHRAGE

BODY:

   The most ambitious experiment at the National Institutes of Health today is
being run out of the director's office. Nobel laureate Harold E. Varmus can
check up on it every time he looks in a mirror.

   That's because Varmus, who had never run anything larger than a gang of
bright post-docs at his University of California lab, has spent the last six
months trying to figure out how to manage the largest and most important
biomedical research institution in the world.

   As it turns out, winning a Nobel Prize is easier than winning over America's
multibillion-dollar health sciences bureaucracy.

   "I'm always fighting the Defense Department mentality that if I say
something, it's supposed to happen," said Varmus, who accepted the directorship
on the nonnegotiable condition that he could continue his San Francisco research
in Bethesda. "I'm used to being surrounded by really smart 22-year-old students
who have no problem saying that something I suggested is not a very good idea.
Now I have 50-year-old section chiefs saying okay to things I say. I'm used to
being contradicted by people who know that half the things I say, I'm just
trying to be provocative. I have to constantly remember that whatever I say here
is taken seriously."

   A brilliant experimentalist but no natural technocrat, Varmus is swiftly
mapping the administrative genome of his $ 11 billion-a-year complex of 24
institutes and centers that, in effect, sets America's health sciences agenda.
How he wants to reengineer the NIH's organizational DNA is still uncertain. But
he brings the insights of a scientist to the task, not the sensibilities of an
institution builder.

   "You know, I never even had the urge to build a department," said the lanky
molecular biologist, who is far more comfortable discussing the public effect of
NIH science than the Byzantine politics of NIH budgets.

   The $ 11 billion question, however, is whether Varmus will have made a
greater contribution to science and public health with his Nobel-quality
research or with his leadership of the NIH.

   From AIDS to breast cancer to gene therapy to Alzheimer's, it is still NIH,
rather than the giant pharmaceutical companies or the aspiring biotech
start-ups, that funds the majority of basic research into the nature of disease.
This research -- paid for by tax dollars and conducted by hospitals and
universities across the country -- frequently serves as the essential source for
commercial drug designs.

   It is almost impossible to overstate the NIH's influence on medical
innovation. America's leadership in biotechnology -- and Varmus's own 1989 Nobel
Prize as co-discoverer of cancer-causing oncogenes -- can be traced directly to
the NIH's lavish support of investigator-driven research during the 1960s, '70s
and early '80s. Our Genentechs, Chirons and Biogens are all commercial offspring
of NIH research, Varmus stressed. NIH research is a medical bargain. "I keep
encouraging the pharmaceutical companies to put more money into R&D," said an
exasperated Varmus.

   What do they say?

   Varmus grimaced: "They say, 'We pay taxes.' "

   But unlike the CEOs and research vice presidents he implicitly chastises,
Varmus has never had to "bet the company" on a breakthrough or try to transform
an institution under extraordinary pressure. He now has his chance.

   The NIH has been under intense budget pressure and public scrutiny.
Congressional critics want reforms; every creative life scientist has a pet
hypothesis to test; every constituency has a disease it is desperate to cure.
Varmus desperately wants more money for the institutes, but he's not going to
get it. "Our biggest single theme is trying to make the NIH work better with the
same amount of money," he said.

   Given the astonishing rise of biotechnology and the U.S. balance of trade
leadership in global medical markets, you might think Varmus would try to
position NIH under the banner of industrial competitiveness as a way to attract
additional funding. Yet "that has not been the forward argument," he
acknowledged.

   Expect that to change. In fact, expect circumstances to make Varmus far more
aggressive in encouraging new kinds of research relationships between the NIH,
academe and industry.

   "We're not interested in giving grants to Merck," Varmus said now. "We're
interested in giving grants to smaller business."

   But don't be surprised if the Mercks and DuPonts are brought into research
consortiums as Varmus's budget constraints drive him to create coalitions that
can attract commercial grants as well as fiscal support on Capitol Hill. As
Varmus noted, only five years ago most of his graduate students went on to jobs
in academe. Today, "over half of them are taking jobs in industry."

   You can also expect Varmus -- a scientist of global prominence -- to become
more vocal about encouraging foreign financial support for the institutes. No
country on Earth has a biomedical establishment even a fraction the size of the
NIH; the entire world relies on the fruits of its funding.

   There is no question that the European Union and the growing economies of
Asia need to be persuaded to be more active collaborators in the global battle
against disease. Varmus will spend more time overseas than his predecessors if
he hopes to snag an extra $ 300 million or $ 400 million in research funding.

   But for now, Varmus the scientist is focusing on how science is done at the
NIH. He's revamping the institutes' internal research programs -- which take up
about 11 percent of the NIH's budget. He's also pushing a reevaluation of peer
review, the mechanism for determining the grant-worthiness of research funding
requests.


   Michael Schrage is a columnist for the Los Angeles Times.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1994


                             773 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      May 12, 1994, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

HEADLINE: INNOVATION / MICHAEL SCHRAGE:  PIONEERING THE BIOMEDICAL FUTURE AT NIH

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHRAGE, Michael Schrage is a writer, consultant and research
associate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He writes this column
independently for The Times.

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   The most ambitious experiment at the National Institutes of Health today is
being run out of the director's office. Nobel laureate Harold E. Varmus can
check up on it every time he looks in a mirror.

   That's because Varmus -- who had never run anything larger than a gang of
bright post-docs at his UC San Francisco lab -- has spent the last six months
trying to figure out how to manage the largest and most important biomedical
research institution in the world.

   As it turns out, winning a Nobel Prize is easier than winning over America's
multibillion-dollar health sciences bureaucracy.

   "I'm always fighting the Defense Department mentality that if I say
something, it's supposed to happen," says Varmus, who accepted the directorship
on the non-negotiable condition that he could continue his San Francisco
research in Bethesda. "I'm used to being surrounded by really smart 22-year-old
students who have no problem saying that something I suggested is not a very
good idea. Now I have 50-year-old section chiefs saying OK to things I say. I'm
used to being contradicted by people who know that half the things I say, I'm
just trying to be provocative. I have to constantly remember that whatever I say
here is taken seriously."

   A brilliant experimentalist but no natural technocrat, Varmus is swiftly
mapping the administrative genome of his $11-billion-a-year complex of 24
institutes and centers that, in effect, set America's health sciences agenda.
How he wants to re-engineer the NIH's organizational DNA is still uncertain. But
he brings the insights of a scientist to the task, not the sensibilities of an
institution builder.

   "You know, I never even had the urge to build a department," says the lanky
molecular biologist, who is far more comfortable discussing the public effect of
NIH science than the Byzantine politics of NIH budgets.

   The $11-billion question, however, is whether Harold Varmus will have made a
greater contribution to science and public health with his Nobel-quality
research or with his leadership of the NIH.

   From AIDS to breast cancer to gene therapy to Alzheimer's, it is still the
NIH, rather than the giant pharmaceutical companies or the aspiring biotech
start-ups, that funds the majority of basic research into the nature of disease.
This research -- paid for by tax dollars and conducted by hospitals and
universities across the country -- frequently serves as the essential source for
commercial drug designs.

   It is almost impossible to overstate the NIH's influence on medical
innovation. America's leadership in biotechnology -- and Varmus' own 1989 Nobel
Prize as co-discoverer of cancer-causing oncogenes -- can be traced directly to
the NIH's lavish support of investigator-driven research during the 1960s, '70s
and early '80s. Our Genentechs, Chirons and Biogens are all commercial offspring
of NIH research, Varmus stresses. NIH research is a medical bargain.

   "I keep encouraging the pharmaceutical companies to put more money into R&D,"
says an exasperated Varmus.

   What do they say?

   Varmus grimaces: "They say, 'We pay taxes.' "

   But unlike the CEOs and research vice presidents he implicitly chastises,
Varmus has never had to "bet the company" on a breakthrough or try to transform
an institution under extraordinary pressure. He now has his chance.

   The NIH has been under intense budget pressure and public scrutiny.
Congressional critics want reforms; every creative-life scientist has a pet
hypothesis to test; every constituency has a disease it is desperate to cure.
Varmus desperately wants more money for the institutes, but he's not going to
get it.

   "Our biggest single theme is trying to make the NIH work better with the same
amount of money," he says.

   Given the astonishing rise of biotechnology and America's balance of trade
leadership in global medical markets, you might think Varmus would try to
position the NIH under the banner of industrial competitiveness as a way to
attract additional funding. Yet "that has not been the forward argument," he
acknowledges.

   Expect that to change. In fact, expect circumstances to make Varmus far more
aggressive in encouraging new kinds of research relationships between the NIH,
academe and industry.

   "We're not interested in giving grants to Merck," Varmus says now. "We're
interested in giving grants to smaller business."

   But don't be surprised if the Mercks and DuPonts are brought into research
consortia as Varmus' budget constraints drive him to create coalitions that can
attract commercial grants as well as fiscal support on Capitol Hill. As Varmus
notes, only five years ago most of his graduate students went on to jobs in
academe. Today, "over half of them are taking jobs in industry."

   You can also expect Varmus -- a scientist of global prominence -- to become
more vocal about encouraging foreign financial support for the institutes. No
country on Earth has a biomedical establishment even a fraction the size of the
NIH; the entire world relies on the fruits of its funding.

   There is no question that the European Union and the growing economies of
Asia need to be persuaded to be more active collaborators in the global battle
against disease. Varmus will spend more time overseas than his predecessors if
he hopes to snag an extra $300 million or $400 million in research funding.

   But for now, Varmus the scientist is focusing on how science is done at the
NIH. He's revamping the institutes' internal research programs -- which take up
about 11% of the NIH's budget. He's also pushing a re-evaluation of peer review,
the mechanism for determining the grant-worthiness of research funding requests.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Harold E. Varmus, director of the National Institutes of Health.
Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1994


                             774 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    May 11, 1994, Wednesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 756 words

HEADLINE: Biotech seeds sprouting in Texas - especially here

BYLINE: JANE BAIRD; Staff

BODY:

   The state of Texas so far has seen only the beginnings of a
biotech industry, but it is concentrated in Houston, according
to a survey released Tuesday.

   The survey, conducted by Arthur Andersen for the Bio-Texas
biotechnology association, identified 76 bioscience companies
in the state, employing 3,293 people full time.  Houston is
home to 43 of those companies.

   ""This is the tip of the iceberg as far as what is going to
happen in the state of Texas over the next 10 years,''
predicted Jacqueline Northcut, a manager in Arthur Andersen's
enterprise group.

   ""It truly will be the year 2000, before we have a critical
mass of products and revenues,'' and the industry will have a
noticeable impact on the state's economy, from employment to
revenues to real estate, she said.

   The survey results were presented at the BioInternational '94
Conference and Exhibition, which is being held at the George
R. Brown Convention Center through Thursday.

   Scientific discoveries are pushing the development of the
industry, said Dr. Michael S. Brown, Nobel laureate, genetics
professor in Dallas and speaker at the conference.  ""These are
exciting days for this science. ''

   Two or three years ago, for example, Brown believed that gene
therapy was still 20 years away, he said.  ""Now, I expect to
see in five or six years real treatments for certain
diseases. ''

   In the past year, the entire biotech industry has come under a
cloud in the eyes of investors who worry that health care
reform might hurt biotech research.  Even so, Arthur Andersen
is working with several Houston companies putting together
initial public offerings of stock, Northcut said.

   The survey identified 24 companies in the state developing
therapeutic drugs, but only two have products on the market:
Houston-based LifeCell is selling a skin graft to treat severe
burns, and Carrington Laboratories of Irving sells a lotion
for dressing wounds.

   Houston's biotech effort, while the largest in Texas, is still
small compared to biotech activity in cities such as San
Francisco; Cambridge, Mass.; San Diego, Calif.; Montgomery
County, Md.; and Seattle, said Carl Feldbaum, president of the
national Biotechnology Industry Organization on a recent visit
to Houston.  ""Houston is way down on the list, maybe No. 12 or
No. 13.

   ""What is holding it back is the lack of venture capital here,''
he said.

   Feldbaum does not expect Houston to continue to lag: ""Houston
is not the kind of place that is going to stand being left
out. ''

   The city needs only one well-publicized success story to take
off, he predicted.

   But a major product by a Houston company is still at least two
years away, said James Chubb, president of Bio-Texas and of
the Triplex Pharmaceutical Corp

   ""There is a lot of money in Texas, but it doesn't understand
biotech,'' Northcut said.  Investors here are not accustomed to
waiting 10 years for a company to be able to commercialize its
product as it goes through testing and government approvals,
she said.

   Houston biotech companies now get most of their venture money
from the East or West coasts, Chubb said.

   Texas investors usually contribute only 10 percent or 15
percent of a financing transaction, he said.  When Triplex
raised $ 15 million in venture capital two years ago, for
example, about $ 13 million of that came from out of state, he
said.

   Out-of-state venture capital firms that invest in one Houston
biotech company, however, soon invest in others, he said.  The
investor travels here for board meetings and other reasons and
begins to see other opportunities.

   Texas also must import people with expertise in the
development and commercialization of biotech products, from
pharmacologists to marketers, Chubb said.

   ""We are moving in the right direction.  It is just going to
take some time,'' he said.

   Of the 70 Texas companies that responded to the Bio-Texas
survey, 45 reported revenues that altogether totaled more than
$ 75 million in 1993.  Thirty of the companies projected
combined revenues of more than $ 1.8 billion by 2000.

   Another survey, Bioscience Industries of the Southwest, which
has tracked Texas bioscience companies for five years,
identified 131 companies involved in some facet of bioscience
research or commercialization in 1994, 83 of them in Houston
and the surrounding Gulf Coast area.

   Northcut at Arthur Andersen said it narrowed the list by
adding criteria such as whether the company does or pays for
lab research.


LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1994


                             775 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     May 11, 1994, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 398 words

HEADLINE: Science contender also fights leukemia

BYLINE: Dennis Kelly

BODY:

    Rong Tsay would rather be in Birmingham, Ala., today so he can talk to
judges in person about the project he's entered in the International Science and
Engineering Fair.

   But because he's suffering from leukemia, he's doing the next best thing.
Tsay, 18, of West Springfield High School, in Springfield, Va., has set up a
video player at the science fair that runs a tape of himself explaining his
project. Meanwhile, there's a phone hookup at his project booth so that judges
can call him.

   The phone line connects to Tsay's room at Children's Hospital in Washington,
D.C., where he's been for a few weeks, ever since he found out the leukemia he
suffers from has flared anew. It was in remission when he won the regional
Fairfax County, Va., science fair, but now it's made a new assault on his body.

   "I'm feeling pretty good right now," he says by phone from the hospital. He's
waiting for a bone marrow transplant early in June.

   Tsay is one of more than 900 students from around the world competing through
Saturday in the International Science and Engineering Fair. They'll battle for
cash and awards that include all-expenses paid trips to the Nobel Prize awards
ceremonies in Stockholm, Sweden.

   Fred McLaren, president of Science Service, which conducts this science fair,
calls Tsay "gutsy" for sticking with his project. "This is the least an
organization like Science Service can do to make everything possible" for him to
compete.

   Tsay's project, with a mile-long title, boils down to a new way of delivering
gene therapy.

   A native of Taiwan whose parents moved here when he was 8, Tsay was first
diagnosed with leukemia as a high school freshman. He was out of school for
parts of his freshman and sophomore years, and now doubts he'll be able to make
his high school graduation, coming as it does so close to his transplant
surgery.

   But his classmates and teachers are trying to be supportive.

   "There's been a great outpouring by his faculty and peers here," says Stephen
Scholla, physics teacher at West Springfield High.

   "He's a good student. He's diligent.  He's gifted," Scholla says. "If I had a
whole classroom full of Rong Tsays, I'd be a happy teacher."

   Tsay's only regret is that he can't pitch his project in person.

   Still, he says, "I'm pretty confident. I don't know if I can win. I know it's
very competitive. But I have my hopes up high."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w


                             776 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      May 10, 1994, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 12C

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: Health service companies now attracting investors

BYLINE: Joel Obermayer, SUN STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   With impending reform sending jitters through the health care industry,
 investors are eschewing biotech companies that develop new drugs and genetic
 therapies -- the rage of just a few years ago -- in favor of service
 companies that can fill market niches.

   At least that's the word from many of the venture capitalists and
 investment advisers at a health care seminar sponsored by Alex. Brown & Sons
 Inc. in Baltimore yesterday. The seminar brings together 135 health care
 firms and more than 1,000 potential investors and industry executives for
 three days of presentations.

   Jeffrey M. Krauss, a general partner with New York-based Nazem and Co.,
 said his firm has put together a venture capital pool, but unlike in the
 past, will not be seeking out small, research-oriented firms.

   "We expect to do very few biotech investments this time around, given
 what's happening in Washington," he said. "One of the federal proposals is
 for price controls on new products. . . . That would definitely cut down the
 returns."

   For investors, the opportunities are much more likely to be found among
 companies that provide services that help make hospitals and health
 maintenance organizations more efficient, or companies that provide services
 to nursing homes and other long-term care facilities.

   One such company is Baltimore-based health care information company HCIA
 Inc., whose presentation at the seminar yesterday was standing room only.
 The company provides customized data bases to hospitals that help them
 pinpoint how their clinical operations can be run more efficiently.

   "Historically, hospitals have been some of the poorest-run businesses out
 there," said company President and Chief Executive Officer George D.
 Pillari. The firm serves about 4,000 hospitals nationwide, and its sales
 have risen from $ 2.9 million in 1991 to about $ 25 million in 1993.

   Mr. Pillari said the company, owned by New York-based insurer AMBAC
 Indemnity Corp., is likely to offer up a minority stake in an initial public
 offering soon.

   M. Fazle Husain, an executive with Morgan Stanley Venture Partners in New
 York, said HCIA is in a strong position to catch investors' attention.

   "This is the hottest area of heath care right now," he said. "These
 service companies are providing real product with real cost savings."

   Another company that played to a attentive audience was nursing home
 operator Genesis Health Ventures Inc. of Kennett Square, Pa. The company
 caught local attention when it bought Meridian Healthcare Inc. last year and
 became the largest provider of nursing home services in the Baltimore area.

   In addition to its core business of running nursing homes, Genesis also
 provides specialty services such as drug distribution to other nursing home
 operators in its markets. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Michael R.
 Walker said the company expects its specialty services operation to
 represent 50 percent of its total revenue by 1996, up from 29 percent in
 1993.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             777 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 10, 1994 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: Transplanted cells fight brain cancer, UCSD study finds

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Transplants of genetically engineered cells not only eradicated brain tumors
in lab rats but apparently prevented the virulent tumors from regrowing, UCSD
scientists are reporting. The technique apparently acted as a vaccine to
stimulate an immune response that prevented the return of the cancer, a type
called glioblastoma that almost always recurs and is almost always fatal, the
researchers said.

   The UCSD technique is similar to one that has been used elsewhere in trials
to treat people with the tumors. "We are excited about this finding because it
offers the chance that the immune system can be harnessed to fight brain
cancer," Dr. David Barba said. The study by Barba and neuroscientist Fred Gage
is reported in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science. The tests give a deeper understanding of how the technique may affect
the brain and raises the possibility that the immune system, not just the
genetic treatment technique, plays a key role in defeating the cancer, Barba
said. "In the past with this (technique), the immune system has not been
recognized as participating," Barba, a neurosurgeon, said. About 14,000 people
in the United States are diagnosed with the tumors each year.

   The tumors almost always regrow after they are excised with surgery. The gene
therapy eradicated the tumor in 20 percent of the animals tested. Barba and Gage
tested the technique in rats that had been injected with glioblastoma cells, a
cancer that is usually fatal. The rats' brains then were injected with healthy
cells that had been altered to contain genes which make a retrovirus that can
only infect dividing cells.

   Thus, the virus only infects the cancer cells, not healthy brain tissue. The
virus is programmed to make an enzyme called thymidine kinase, which makes the
cells susceptible to a traditional medication for viral infections, gancyclovir.

   The thymidine kinase activates the gancyclovir, allowing it to kill the
cells. The tumors were eradicated in six of the 30 rats in the experiment.

   And 90 days later, cancer cells injected into the rats were unable to form
tumors, suggesting a lingering vaccine effect from the original gene therapy
treatment, Barba said. Dr. Ed Oldfield, at the National Institutes of Health,
has used a similar technique in people; the results of those trials are under
study. Understanding the vaccine effect noticed in the rats could help doctors
in tailoring treatments, Barba said.

   For example, it might be important not to suppress the immune system with
other drugs, such as steroids, that are used to treat cancer, he said. One
possibility for making the treatment more effective in a greater percentage of
rats is to boost their immune systems with other genetically altered cells
before the treatment, Barba said. The UCSD group hopes next to test the
technique in monkeys.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             778 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 10, 1994 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 314 words

HEADLINE: Gen-Probe to work on HIV treatment

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Declining to sit on a profitable business, Gen-Probe Inc. said yesterday it
is attempting to develop a treatment for HIV. Gen-Probe said it has identified
several drug candidates for HIV, which leads to AIDS, and hopes to begin testing
a drug in humans by early next year.

   A spokesman said the company planned to meet with the Food and Drug
Administration within two months to prepare its application for testing.
Nanibhushan Dattagupta, senior director of therapeutics research for Gen-Probe,
said the company already has spent $10 million on drug development and would
invest profits from its medical-test business to develop treatments for HIV and
other diseases. The new drug-development unit, which expects to increase its
employment from 30 to 50 by year's end, has leased a 30,000-square-foot
facility. Gen-Probe employs a total of 325 people. The 10-year-old, privately
held company has focused on diagnostics until now because they can be brought to
market faster than therapeutics.

   But the same technology is directly applicable to therapeutics, Dattagupta
said. To develop drugs, Gen-Probe will use so-called antisense technology, which
seeks to short-circuit disease by turning off certain proteins encoded by human
genes. "Therapeutics is a long-term process," he said. Although many HIV efforts
were launched nearly a decade ago, Gen-Probe's entry into the race to develop a
treatment is timely, Dattagupta said. "We have as good chance as anybody," he
said.

   "The big difference is that in diagnostics, our technology is applied outside
the body, and conditions can be what we want.

   Therapeutics are done inside the body under conditions we do not control."
Gen-Probe had operating income of $5.5 million on sales of $41 million in 1992.
Sales increased to more than $51 million last year, and while Dattagupta said
income has increased, the company has not announced the figure.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             779 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                       May 9, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

NAME: J. CRAIG VENTER; WILLIAM A. HASELTINE

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 2149 words

HEADLINE: Biotech's Dynamic Duo;
Despite Differing Styles, Scientists Share a Dream In Probing Human Genes

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   It's a match made on Wall Street: two scientists brought together by
well-heeled investors to decipher the secrets of human life -- and turn them
into marketable drugs.

   J. Craig Venter and William A. Haseltine work blocks apart in Gaithersburg
and Rockville on the cutting edge of one of the most important undertakings in
the history of biology, the description and cataloguing of the human genetic
code.

   They have very different personal styles and interests. But they share
enthusiasm for a maverick scientific approach that has attracted large financial
support while alienating many in the national medical research community.

   Critics say Venter and Haseltine are trying to profit for themselves by
staking legal claims to gene research that should be available to all at no
cost. The two respond that they will give their information free to scientists
for nonprofit research, but reserve the right to make money off the data.

   Venter, 47, is a soft-spoken biochemist who rarely dons a tie and drives
himself to work from a modest home in Potomac. His wife, scientist Clare Fraser,
works with him at the nonprofit laboratory that he heads.

   Haseltine, 49, a biophysicist on leave from Harvard University, almost always
wears a tie in the office and is chauffeured to work. He and his wife, society
personage and perfume creator Gale Hayman, divide their time between New York
and Washington. Their Georgetown apartment recently was described by gossip
columnist Suzy in W Magazine as "only a teensy bit smaller than the White House
without the Oval Office."

   Venter's role in the partnership is doing much of the critical scientific
work, based on techniques that he perfected when he was a researcher at the
National Institutes of Health.

   His side of the alliance is the Institute for Genomic Research, or TIGR
(pronounced "tiger"). The institute is two years old and employs 80 people.
Venter wanted TIGR to be nonprofit, so he could do his research free from the
hassles of worried investors trying to hurry him up or otherwise tell him what
to do.

   At the very least, Venter said, his work will "accelerate medical progress."

   Haseltine is chairman and chief executive of Human Genome Sciences Inc., a
for-profit company created to develop commercial products from Venter's work. By
knowing the codes of human genes, scientists believe it will be possible to
develop drugs to combat inherited genetic defects and diseases such as cancers,
immunological disorders, and hemophilia and other blood ailments.

   "We intend to become a fully integrated pharmaceutical company, discovering,
testing, making and marketing breakthrough drugs," Haseltine said.

   Haseltine and Venter hit it off as science and business partners when they
were introduced in 1992 by Wallace H. Steinberg, chairman of the venture capital
firm of HealthCare Investment Corp. He thought up the idea for Human Genome and
TIGR and bankrolled their creation that year.

   "Our styles are different, but our roles are very different," Venter said in
a recent interview. "He's a scientist who's become a businessman. I'm head of a
research institute."

   But while Venter is focused on the nonprofit side, he stands to make money if
his profit-making ally succeeds: He owns a substantial stake of stock in
Haseltine's Human Genome.

   The companies' backers have staked tens of millions of dollars on the
alliance. They are betting that a computerized tool developed largely by Venter
at the NIH will cut years off the time it takes to decipher the very complicated
sequences of chemicals that make up the 60,000 to 200,000 genes that contain the
core information needed to produce a human being.

   The hope is that this shortcut in turn will enable Human Genome to speed up
discovery and production of drugs to correct genetic defects -- a process called
gene therapy -- or supply substances to patients that genetic defects prevent
their cells from making.

   HealthCare Investment, the largest venture capital firm specializing in
health care, led an investment group that started the two firms with a $ 10
million investment in Human Genome. Human Genome, in turn, has promised to fund
TIGR with $ 85 million over 10 years in exchange for marketing rights to the
institute's research. Last year, drug giant SmithKline Beecham PLC promised
Human Genome $ 125 million over three years in exchange for access to the
genetic information the company is collecting.

   And in December Human Genome successfully raised $ 31 million in its first
public stock offering, selling 2.8 million shares, or 20 percent of the company.

   So far, Human Genome has no products on the market and won't for several
years. But if all goes as Steinberg envisions, SmithKline will play a key role
in manufacturing and marketing Human Genome products. The partnership, as well
as partnerships with other big drug firms, are expected to supply the company
with cash in its early life as it struggles to reach its longer-term goal in 10
to 15 years of becoming a major pharmaceutical company, Haseltine said.

   Steinberg thinks the outlook for Venter's research is so bright that
HealthCare plans to start two more companies this year in Gaithersburg to turn
Venter's research into agriculture and industrial products. Together, this
collection of companies will help the Washington area continue as a leader in
the burgeoning field of gene research.

   Human Genome and TIGR have a prominent and unusual role in what scientists
call the human genome project. A genome is the complete set of genetic material
of a living being; and the project, broadly defined, is the search by scientists
at universities and companies worldwide for the chemically encoded instructions
for manufacturing a human being. It includes the U.S.-funded portion of the
project, the Human Genome Project, which is being financed by the NIH and the
Energy Department with $ 3 billion over 15 years.

   Most scientists work to decipher the human genome focus on a disease or body
function, and then work backward to try to find the responsible gene. Venter and
Haseltine are working in the opposite direction. The benefit is that they can
identify a code more quickly; but, having done so, they do not know what the
gene's function is in the body.

   Using rows of computers, many mounted on autopsy tables in an old ceramics
factory, they are cranking out the chemical code of large chunks of human
hereditary material -- about 1,000 partial sequences of genes a day. They take
those partial sequences and try to figure out which genes they want to decipher
completely. Then they work to figure out what the genes do, and if that
knowledge can produce a commercial product.

   They aren't alone in their approach, but Venter was key in making it
technically feasible. And no company is doing it on the scale of TIGR and Human
Genome Sciences.

   Not everyone likes the Venter-Haseltine approach. Critics, many of them
eminent scientists, scorn it as fast-food science, quick but with little
intellectual sustenance. They question if the time it might save will amount to
much in the hunt to describe the human genome, which is estimated to have 3
billion bits of chemical information on the 23 pairs of chromosomes in each
person's cells. Only about 3 percent of the information on the chromosomes is
estimated to be genes; the rest is related genetic material that scientists
don't understand.

   It's the 3 percent that Venter and Haseltine are focused on.

   Both seem able to shrug off the naysayers. "You'll never appease all your
critics," Haseltine said. "Some people are jealous. Some people are competitors.
Some people would like to be doing things differently."

   Though Human Genome and TIGR were founded two years ago, they've been up and
running for only a little over a year. Since the two companies first plugged in
their computerized gene-finding machines in January 1993 they have spent about $
20 million and identified what Haseltine and Venter estimate to be 20,000 genes.
That compares, the two men said, to the 3,000 genes it took scientists worldwide
10 years to discover in the 1980s at a cost many times what Human Genome and
TIGR have spent so far.

   "Within a year or two we will have identified and characterized virtually a
complete set of human genes," Haseltine said during a recent interview.

   Statements such as that, which both Haseltine and Venter are fond of making,
rankle many colleagues, who describe the two as good scientists who nonetheless
hype their role in the human genome project to the detriment of others.

   One typical criticism came from a well-known scientist, who heads the
genetics department at a major university but did not want to be identified. The
scientist likened the Venter-Haseltine approach -- of identifying the partial or
complete chemical makeup of a gene, before knowing what the gene does -- to
walking down the street and finding a bolt but having no idea whether it belongs
to the space shuttle or to a child's toy.

   But the most irritating thing about Venter and Haseltine, for the rest of the
scientific community, is the misleading implication that their research will
catalogue the human gene set faster and for much less money than the federal
government's effort, NIH spokesman Leslie Fink said. It scares officials at the
NIH and the Energy Department who must go to Congress over the next 15 years to
justify the $ 3 billion they will be seeking.

   When a member of Congress "picks up the newspaper and reads that these guys
have mapped [sequences of parts of] thousands of genes for a few million
dollars, he may say, 'Why give NIH money to do this?' " Fink said.

   She and others stress that the government-funded genome project intends to
decipher the entire genome -- including the mysterious material that accompanies
the human gene set when it is transmitted by parents to offspring.

   "They're not competitive approaches," Venter said. "They are perfectly
complementary."

   Venter developed his technique while he was at the NIH in the late 1980s. In
essence he mastered how to use an existing, computerized chemistry apparatus
called a DNA sequencer. The sequencer is used to decipher snippets of DNA -- the
chemical building blocks of hereditary material.

   TIGR grows a sufficient quantity of very pure DNA, treats it with a
fluorescent dye, and sends it through the computerized sequencing machine. The
machine uses a laser beam to read the dye and figure out the patterns of
chemicals that make up genes.

   The NIH decided to seek a patent on several thousand such sequences that
Venter found. That set off a shouting match among the most eminent gene
scientists in the world over whether patents should be granted on genes whose
function is unknown, let alone on partial sequences of genes.

   At issue is what should be the property of the science community worldwide in
its quest to unravel the human genetic code, and what should be the patentable
property of private companies.

   Venter became a target in the criticism, and his work was vilified by many as
less intellectually wholesome than that done by scientists who painstakingly
find one gene at a time, said Robert Gook-Deegan, author of "The Gene Wars," a
book to be published this month that chronicles the evolution of efforts to
catalogue the human hereditary code.

   But the dispute also brought fame -- and investors such as Steinberg knocking
on the door. The government has dropped any attempt to patent the genes Venter
found while at the NIH and that has softened some of the criticism of Human
Genome and TIGR. Helping win over some critics, too, was the recent
collaboration among researchers at Johns Hopkins University, Human Genome and
TIGR to identify a gene that, when defective, causes colon cancer.

   Still, statements by Venter and Haseltine that they soon will have a complete
readout of the human genetic code angers the science community. And old wounds
may reopen if Human Genome wins any of the 25 patents it has applied for. As
Human Genome's financial statements make clear, there is no guarantee that the
company will win any of the patents. The criticism over NIH's attempt to patent
Venter's early findings led to a major review of genetic patent law by the
Office of Technology Assessment, which is expected to issue a report this
summer.

   Big brains bring big egos in science -- that's nothing new and certainly
Venter and Haseltine are not alone in having both. But, said Many Ann Liebert,
owner and publisher of Genetic Engineering News, some of their statements are
misinterpreted.

   "There is envy that Craig Venter has gone and done this outside of NIH and
created the possibility of becoming a wealthy individual in the process," she
said. But Venter and Haseltine also have an "unabashed enthusiasm" for what they
are doing and "that enthusiasm is sometimes misinterpreted as overstatement,"
she said.



GRAPHIC: PHOTO, CRAIG VENTER, LEFT, AND WILLIAM HASELTINE_WITH DIFFERING
PERSONAL STYLES AND INTERESTS_SHARE AN ENTHUSIASM FOR A QUEST: DESCRIBING AND
CATALOGUING THE HUMAN GENETIC CODE. TOM ALLEN; ILLUSTRATION, KAREN STOLPER FOR
TWP; ILLUSTRATION, TWP

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1994


                             780 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                       May 9, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

NAME: J. CRAIG VENTER; WILLIAM A. HASELTINE

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 2149 words

HEADLINE: Biotech's Dynamic Duo;
Despite Differing Styles, Scientists Share a Dream In Probing Human Genes

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   It's a match made on Wall Street: two scientists brought together by
well-heeled investors to decipher the secrets of human life -- and turn them
into marketable drugs.

   J. Craig Venter and William A. Haseltine work blocks apart in Gaithersburg
and Rockville on the cutting edge of one of the most important undertakings in
the history of biology, the description and cataloguing of the human genetic
code.

   They have very different personal styles and interests. But they share
enthusiasm for a maverick scientific approach that has attracted large financial
support while alienating many in the national medical research community.

   Critics say Venter and Haseltine are trying to profit for themselves by
staking legal claims to gene research that should be available to all at no
cost. The two respond that they will give their information free to scientists
for nonprofit research, but reserve the right to make money off the data.

   Venter, 47, is a soft-spoken biochemist who rarely dons a tie and drives
himself to work from a modest home in Potomac. His wife, scientist Clare Fraser,
works with him at the nonprofit laboratory that he heads.

   Haseltine, 49, a biophysicist on leave from Harvard University, almost always
wears a tie in the office and is chauffeured to work. He and his wife, society
personage and perfume creator Gale Hayman, divide their time between New York
and Washington. Their Georgetown apartment recently was described by gossip
columnist Suzy in W Magazine as "only a teensy bit smaller than the White House
without the Oval Office."

   Venter's role in the partnership is doing much of the critical scientific
work, based on techniques that he perfected when he was a researcher at the
National Institutes of Health.

   His side of the alliance is the Institute for Genomic Research, or TIGR
(pronounced "tiger"). The institute is two years old and employs 80 people.
Venter wanted TIGR to be nonprofit, so he could do his research free from the
hassles of worried investors trying to hurry him up or otherwise tell him what
to do.

   At the very least, Venter said, his work will "accelerate medical progress."

   Haseltine is chairman and chief executive of Human Genome Sciences Inc., a
for-profit company created to develop commercial products from Venter's work. By
knowing the codes of human genes, scientists believe it will be possible to
develop drugs to combat inherited genetic defects and diseases such as cancers,
immunological disorders, and hemophilia and other blood ailments.

   "We intend to become a fully integrated pharmaceutical company, discovering,
testing, making and marketing breakthrough drugs," Haseltine said.

   Haseltine and Venter hit it off as science and business partners when they
were introduced in 1992 by Wallace H. Steinberg, chairman of the venture capital
firm of HealthCare Investment Corp. He thought up the idea for Human Genome and
TIGR and bankrolled their creation that year.

   "Our styles are different, but our roles are very different," Venter said in
a recent interview. "He's a scientist who's become a businessman. I'm head of a
research institute."

   But while Venter is focused on the nonprofit side, he stands to make money if
his profit-making ally succeeds: He owns a substantial stake of stock in
Haseltine's Human Genome.

   The companies' backers have staked tens of millions of dollars on the
alliance. They are betting that a computerized tool developed largely by Venter
at the NIH will cut years off the time it takes to decipher the very complicated
sequences of chemicals that make up the 60,000 to 200,000 genes that contain the
core information needed to produce a human being.

   The hope is that this shortcut in turn will enable Human Genome to speed up
discovery and production of drugs to correct genetic defects -- a process called
gene therapy -- or supply substances to patients that genetic defects prevent
their cells from making.

   HealthCare Investment, the largest venture capital firm specializing in
health care, led an investment group that started the two firms with a $ 10
million investment in Human Genome. Human Genome, in turn, has promised to fund
TIGR with $ 85 million over 10 years in exchange for marketing rights to the
institute's research. Last year, drug giant SmithKline Beecham PLC promised
Human Genome $ 125 million over three years in exchange for access to the
genetic information the company is collecting.

   And in December Human Genome successfully raised $ 31 million in its first
public stock offering, selling 2.8 million shares, or 20 percent of the company.

   So far, Human Genome has no products on the market and won't for several
years. But if all goes as Steinberg envisions, SmithKline will play a key role
in manufacturing and marketing Human Genome products. The partnership, as well
as partnerships with other big drug firms, are expected to supply the company
with cash in its early life as it struggles to reach its longer-term goal in 10
to 15 years of becoming a major pharmaceutical company, Haseltine said.

   Steinberg thinks the outlook for Venter's research is so bright that
HealthCare plans to start two more companies this year in Gaithersburg to turn
Venter's research into agriculture and industrial products. Together, this
collection of companies will help the Washington area continue as a leader in
the burgeoning field of gene research.

   Human Genome and TIGR have a prominent and unusual role in what scientists
call the human genome project. A genome is the complete set of genetic material
of a living being; and the project, broadly defined, is the search by scientists
at universities and companies worldwide for the chemically encoded instructions
for manufacturing a human being. It includes the U.S.-funded portion of the
project, the Human Genome Project, which is being financed by the NIH and the
Energy Department with $ 3 billion over 15 years.

   Most scientists work to decipher the human genome focus on a disease or body
function, and then work backward to try to find the responsible gene. Venter and
Haseltine are working in the opposite direction. The benefit is that they can
identify a code more quickly; but, having done so, they do not know what the
gene's function is in the body.

   Using rows of computers, many mounted on autopsy tables in an old ceramics
factory, they are cranking out the chemical code of large chunks of human
hereditary material -- about 1,000 partial sequences of genes a day. They take
those partial sequences and try to figure out which genes they want to decipher
completely. Then they work to figure out what the genes do, and if that
knowledge can produce a commercial product.

   They aren't alone in their approach, but Venter was key in making it
technically feasible. And no company is doing it on the scale of TIGR and Human
Genome Sciences.

   Not everyone likes the Venter-Haseltine approach. Critics, many of them
eminent scientists, scorn it as fast-food science, quick but with little
intellectual sustenance. They question if the time it might save will amount to
much in the hunt to describe the human genome, which is estimated to have 3
billion bits of chemical information on the 23 pairs of chromosomes in each
person's cells. Only about 3 percent of the information on the chromosomes is
estimated to be genes; the rest is related genetic material that scientists
don't understand.

   It's the 3 percent that Venter and Haseltine are focused on.

   Both seem able to shrug off the naysayers. "You'll never appease all your
critics," Haseltine said. "Some people are jealous. Some people are competitors.
Some people would like to be doing things differently."

   Though Human Genome and TIGR were founded two years ago, they've been up and
running for only a little over a year. Since the two companies first plugged in
their computerized gene-finding machines in January 1993 they have spent about $
20 million and identified what Haseltine and Venter estimate to be 20,000 genes.
That compares, the two men said, to the 3,000 genes it took scientists worldwide
10 years to discover in the 1980s at a cost many times what Human Genome and
TIGR have spent so far.

   "Within a year or two we will have identified and characterized virtually a
complete set of human genes," Haseltine said during a recent interview.

   Statements such as that, which both Haseltine and Venter are fond of making,
rankle many colleagues, who describe the two as good scientists who nonetheless
hype their role in the human genome project to the detriment of others.

   One typical criticism came from a well-known scientist, who heads the
genetics department at a major university but did not want to be identified. The
scientist likened the Venter-Haseltine approach -- of identifying the partial or
complete chemical makeup of a gene, before knowing what the gene does -- to
walking down the street and finding a bolt but having no idea whether it belongs
to the space shuttle or to a child's toy.

   But the most irritating thing about Venter and Haseltine, for the rest of the
scientific community, is the misleading implication that their research will
catalogue the human gene set faster and for much less money than the federal
government's effort, NIH spokesman Leslie Fink said. It scares officials at the
NIH and the Energy Department who must go to Congress over the next 15 years to
justify the $ 3 billion they will be seeking.

   When a member of Congress "picks up the newspaper and reads that these guys
have mapped [sequences of parts of] thousands of genes for a few million
dollars, he may say, 'Why give NIH money to do this?' " Fink said.

   She and others stress that the government-funded genome project intends to
decipher the entire genome -- including the mysterious material that accompanies
the human gene set when it is transmitted by parents to offspring.

   "They're not competitive approaches," Venter said. "They are perfectly
complementary."

   Venter developed his technique while he was at the NIH in the late 1980s. In
essence he mastered how to use an existing, computerized chemistry apparatus
called a DNA sequencer. The sequencer is used to decipher snippets of DNA -- the
chemical building blocks of hereditary material.

   TIGR grows a sufficient quantity of very pure DNA, treats it with a
fluorescent dye, and sends it through the computerized sequencing machine. The
machine uses a laser beam to read the dye and figure out the patterns of
chemicals that make up genes.

   The NIH decided to seek a patent on several thousand such sequences that
Venter found. That set off a shouting match among the most eminent gene
scientists in the world over whether patents should be granted on genes whose
function is unknown, let alone on partial sequences of genes.

   At issue is what should be the property of the science community worldwide in
its quest to unravel the human genetic code, and what should be the patentable
property of private companies.

   Venter became a target in the criticism, and his work was vilified by many as
less intellectually wholesome than that done by scientists who painstakingly
find one gene at a time, said Robert Gook-Deegan, author of "The Gene Wars," a
book to be published this month that chronicles the evolution of efforts to
catalogue the human hereditary code.

   But the dispute also brought fame -- and investors such as Steinberg knocking
on the door. The government has dropped any attempt to patent the genes Venter
found while at the NIH and that has softened some of the criticism of Human
Genome and TIGR. Helping win over some critics, too, was the recent
collaboration among researchers at Johns Hopkins University, Human Genome and
TIGR to identify a gene that, when defective, causes colon cancer.

   Still, statements by Venter and Haseltine that they soon will have a complete
readout of the human genetic code angers the science community. And old wounds
may reopen if Human Genome wins any of the 25 patents it has applied for. As
Human Genome's financial statements make clear, there is no guarantee that the
company will win any of the patents. The criticism over NIH's attempt to patent
Venter's early findings led to a major review of genetic patent law by the
Office of Technology Assessment, which is expected to issue a report this
summer.

   Big brains bring big egos in science -- that's nothing new and certainly
Venter and Haseltine are not alone in having both. But, said Many Ann Liebert,
owner and publisher of Genetic Engineering News, some of their statements are
misinterpreted.

   "There is envy that Craig Venter has gone and done this outside of NIH and
created the possibility of becoming a wealthy individual in the process," she
said. But Venter and Haseltine also have an "unabashed enthusiasm" for what they
are doing and "that enthusiasm is sometimes misinterpreted as overstatement,"
she said.



GRAPHIC: PHOTO, CRAIG VENTER, LEFT, AND WILLIAM HASELTINE_WITH DIFFERING
PERSONAL STYLES AND INTERESTS_SHARE AN ENTHUSIASM FOR A QUEST: DESCRIBING AND
CATALOGUING THE HUMAN GENETIC CODE. TOM ALLEN; ILLUSTRATION, KAREN STOLPER FOR
TWP; ILLUSTRATION, TWP

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1994


                             781 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 6;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1998 words

HEADLINE: Rehabilitation of a Biotech Pioneer

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

DATELINE: SOUTH SAN FRANCISCO, Calif.

BODY:

   BIOTECHNOLOGY companies do not use pop songs to hawk their wares as the
makers of athletic shoes or sports coupes do. But if they did, Genentech Inc.
could well be singing Steve Winwood's 1987 hit, "Back in the High Life Again."

   As it happens, 1987 was the low point for Genentech, the world's first
biotech company. That was the year an advisory panel to the Food and Drug
Administration recommended against approval of the company's flagship drug,
Activase, used to dissolve blood clots in heart attack patients. Though Activase
was ultimately approved in 1988, Genentech was unable to show that its
$2,200-a-dose drug was any more effective than a competing drug selling at
one-tenth the price, and sales failed to meet early expectations. The result:
Roche Holdings Ltd., a big drug maker based in Switzerland, acquired majority
ownership of the weakened Genentech in 1990.

    Roche retained an option to acquire the remaining 40 percent of Genentech at
$60 a share, effectively putting a cap on the stock price. Meanwhile, growth
slowed, and many analysts stopped following Genentech.

   But free from Wall Street's impatient scrutiny and free as well, courtesy of
Roche's deep pockets, from the endless need to raise research money, Genentech
stuck to its goals. The last year, and more particularly the last six months,
have been a vindication of the company's long-term strategy: to develop novel
genetically engineered drugs to treat unmet medical needs, including a drug to
treat cystic fibrosis and another to spur growth in children.

   Genentech now has multiple products, and profits, both rare among biotech
companies. In 1993, it earned $58.9 million on sales of $649.7 million, a
healthy jump from earnings of $20.8 million on revenues of $544.3 million in
1992. And it has a pipeline full of promising new drug candidates in advanced
clinical trials.

   "Genentech is executing with perfection," said Mark Simon, an analyst with
Robertson, Stephens, an investment firm in San Francisco. "It's like an engine
hitting on all eight cylinders. They have thoroughly learned from their disaster
of 1987. They're patient, they're methodical, and they don't shoot for the
moon."

   Added William Hambrecht, chairman of Hambrecht & Quist, which underwrote
Genentech in the first public offering of a biotech company in 1980: "When the
Roche thing was first announced, the initial reaction on everybody's part was,
'That's it, it's over for Genentech,' that with a large company acquiring a
small one it would disappear. But clearly, it hasn't happened that way. They
have a lot of momentum, and morale is strong."

   NOW the question is, will the new high life last?

   By drug industry standards, Genentech remains small, and the cloud hanging
over its future is whether Roche will exercise the option to acquire the balance
of the company at $60 a share by July 1, 1995. After that date it can still buy
but only at market rates, which could go higher. (The stock closed on Friday at
$49.125, off 50 cents.)

   Roche has not said what it intends to do, although some company executives
have said they are not inclined to alter the current relationship as long as it
is working well. Roche executives now fill just 2 of Genentech's 12 board seats.
A complete takeover might well submerge Genentech's entrepreneurial culture,
which attracts top research scientists because of the freedom they are offered
and which rewards every employee with stock options.

   Amidst the continuing consolidation in the drug industry, however, Roche's
$5.3 billion acquisition last week of the Syntex Corporation, based just 25
miles south of Genentech's headquarters here, raised speculation anew about
Genentech's future. Syntex, best known for birth control pills and for Naprosyn,
the leading arthritis pain reliever, has had a very different technology focus
from Genentech, but there is considerable overlap in research efforts between
the two, as well as with Roche itself. Analysts say Roche could seek to reduce
costs by consolidating.

   Roche isn't talking about any such plans, but its acquisition of Syntex,
which has been struggling for lack of strong new products, points to another
challenge facing Genentech.

   Syntex, an innovator in the 1960's and 70's, failed to embrace the emerging
science of biotechnology and fell behind. Some analysts say that Genentech,
while clearly the industry leader in developing drugs from protein molecules,
has been slow to invest in second- and third-generation biotech developments,
like antisense and gene therapy, two approaches that treat disease at the
genetic level.

   "Genentech has not done nearly as many deals as it could have or should
have," said Viren Mehta, an analyst with Mehta & Isaly, an investment firm based
in New York that specializes in health-care technology.

   Genentech is in a strong position to enter joint ventures with new companies
in emerging fields, he said, but has done relatively few compared with a
competitor like Chiron. "Genentech is the most successful company in the first
generation of biotechnology; there is no one better," Mr. Mehta said. "But does
it still think it has control of the frontier?"

   G. Kirk Raab, Genentech's president and chief executive, said Genentech gets
the deals it wants and has passed up several when the terms were not favorable.
But while the company has both internal and collaborative ventures in the
up-and-coming technologies of drug discovery, he said it intends to focus for
many years on what it knows best: duplicating naturally occurring proteins of
therapeutic value. Such drugs will drive Genentech well into the next century,
he said.

   Genentech's recent trek back to the bright lights was built around such
drugs. The rebound began with the April 1993 publication of the results of a $55
million, 41,000-patient study, known as the Gusto trial, which finally did
demonstrate that more lives were saved with the Activase blood-clot dissolver
than with Streptokinase, the less expensive alternative. Activase sales, which
had been in decline, have since surged. Then last December, Genentech received
F.D.A. approval for Pulmozyme, the first drug treatment for cystic fibrosis, a
life-threatening genetic disease characterized by thick mucous secretions in the
lungs. And in March, it received approval for Nutropin, a new form of human
growth hormone.

   Genentech's founding scientist, Herbert Boyer, pioneered the process of using
recombinant DNA to produce therapeutic proteins, and the company's prowess in
the field has never been in doubt.

   What is new, analysts say, is a corresponding excellence in navigating the
political and regulatory shoals that lay between drug development and product
approvals. Pulmozyme went from conception to market approval in just five years,
about half the industry average, and sailed through the F.D.A.'s review process
in just nine months.

   MUCH of what went right can be attributed to the company's shift in attitude
toward the F.D.A. "The company used to be very combative with the F.D.A.," said
M. David MacFarlane, Genentech's vice president for regulatory affairs, who was
recruited from Glaxo Holdings, the giant British drug company. "We decided not
to do that; we listened to their concerns."

   Part way through the human clinical trials of Pulmozyme, the F.D.A. requested
that Genentech alter the criteria being measured, to get a more direct
indication of whether the drug did indeed reduce the lung infections that
ultimately kill most cystic fibrosis patients. The agency also asked that the
number of patients in the final trial be increased to nearly 1,000, to add to
the statistical validity of what would be the first major trial of a cystic
fibrosis drug.

   For Genentech, the shift meant scaling up production rapidly, and the company
started a $37 million expansion of its manufacturing operations even before
beginning the final trial.

   The F.D.A. liked what it saw. "It was a large trial; it had clinical
endpoints of statistical power; and it was able to demonstrate unequivocally
that the drug worked," said David A. Kessler, the agency's commissioner.
"Sometimes we see 25 trials on a drug, and in the end we have more questions
than answers. This is a very scientifically sophisticated company that knew that
a more definitive trial might have more at risk but also more to gain in the
long run."

   It was also indicative of Genentech's hands-on culture that the two
scientists who led the research and development effort on Pulmozyme -- Steven
Shak and Henry Fuchs -- were practicing pulmonologists who had cystic fibrosis
patients before joining the company.

   Genentech began shipping Pulmozyme commercially just two weeks after
approval, and the drug had sales for the first quarter of 1994 of $22.4 million.
The company recently completed intermediate trials of Pulmozyme for the
treatment of chronic bronchitis, a disease commonly suffered by long-term
smokers, which affects far more people than does cystic fibrosis. Data from the
trial showed significantly reduced deaths among severe chronic bronchitis
patients receiving the drug, compared with those getting a placebo.

   WHILE plowing new ground with Pulmozyme, Genentech was also making a
defensive move with Nutropin, which was approved for the treatment of short
stature in March. Protropin, Genentech's original genetically engineered growth
hormone, had 1993 sales of $216.8 million, up 5 percent from 1992, but the drug
will soon face competition from three generic products currently being reviewed
by the F.D.A.

   By introducing Nutropin first, Genentech got a jump on the competition. "They
are now in the best possible position to defend Protropin," said Kevin Wilson,
an analyst with S. G. Warburg. "The quality of their marketing has not been
recognized" for its role in capturing the market for growth hormone or, for that
matter, for blood-clot dissolvers, he said. "What they did with Activase,
pre-Gusto, to hold it where it was, was remarkable."

   Actually, Genentech's aggressive marketing of Activase was of some concern in
the medical community, as was the spending of $55 million to show that the drug
was marginally more effective than its much less expensive competitor. Indeed,
some scientists and other biotech executives suggested that Genentech should
lower Activase's price significantly after the Gusto trial, on the theory that
it could both play the hero and increase market share.

   Mr. Raab said the company did some market research and found that price cuts
would have dire effects on profitability without significantly increasing sales.

   "From a public relations standpoint, the point where it would have made a
difference was $500, cutting the price to $1,700" for the single dose given
shortly after a heart attack, Mr. Raab said. "That would have cost us $50
million, which is about the total profit Genentech made last year. And we could
not find a doctor who said he would use it at $1,700 but would not at $2,200."

   Manufacturing genetically engineered proteins is more costly than producing
traditional drugs, but the real driver behind the high prices is the phenomenal
cost of research and development. Genentech's R.& D. expenses for 1993 were $299
million, up from $279 million in 1992.

   "The single most important reason to do the Roche deal was the alternative:
to devastate this organization in research and development," Mr. Raab said.

   In fact, several younger biotech companies have since agreed to partial
acquisitions by large drug manufacturers as an alternative to toughing out the
public equity markets.

   Still, grateful to Roche as Mr. Raab is, he would prefer Genentech to remain
a separate entity.

   "I have told them we do not want them to buy the rest of the company, but
it's completely their decision," Mr. Raab said of Roche's top management, adding
hopefully, "If they do buy the rest of us, I think that will be fine, because I
think they'll leave us alone, as they have so far."

GRAPHIC: Photo: G. Kirk Raab, center, chief of Genentech, with Henry Fuchs,
left, and Steven Shak, the scientists who directed the development of the
company's new treatment for cystic fibrosis. (Fiona McDougall for The New York
Times)

Chart: "At Genetech, Products and Profits" shows revenues and net income of
Genetech and Genetech's current and planned drugs. (Source: Genetech)

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994


                             782 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      MAY 7, 1994, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: Bill Gates Backs Darwin

BYLINE: Alex Barnum, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Bill Gates and Paul Allen, the multibillionaire co-founders of Microsoft
Corp., have invested $ 10 million in a start-up biotechnology company that is
trying to unravel the secrets of the human genome.

   Darwin Molecular Corp., a Seattle- based firm that was co-founded two years
ago by former Cetus Corp.  Chairman Ron Cape and other leading lights of the
biotech industry, said Gates and Allen made the investment as part of a larger
private financing.

   Gates has made several large investments in biotech, but Darwin is seen as
particularly important because of the key role that computer technology is
expected to play in the company's success. Gates and Allen also are joining the
company's board of directors.

   Mark Pearson, president and chief executive of Darwin, said that Gates and
Allen will be valuable additions to the Darwin board.

   ''They're extremely smart guys who have taken a vision of technology and made
it into a huge successful company,'' Pearson said. He added that their expertise
in computing will also be an asset.

   Darwin is one of about a dozen ''genomics'' biotechnology companies that are
mounting large, expensive efforts to decipher the 50,000 to 100,000 genes that
make up the human genetic instruction set, called the human genome.

   In a collaboration with Dr. Leroy Hood at the Unversity of Washington, Darwin
is developing new techniques to decipher genes 10 to 100 times faster than
possible using existing methods. And it is developing new software to analyze
the genetic information and identify promising drug compounds.

   Once a promising compound is found, Darwin employs a process called
''molecular evolution'' to turn it into a better drug.  Millions of variations
of the compound are generated in the lab and then tested for better
disease-fighting properties. The ''fittest'' molecules are selected and the
process is repeated until the best drug is found.

   Darwin is focusing on developing drugs for cancer, AIDS and autoimmune
diseases. Pearson said Darwin expects to begin testing its first drugs in 1996
and will commercialize them by partnering with larger drug companies. So far the
company has raised $ 14 million.

   Gates has a strong interest in the biotechnology industry. He reportedly
reads biology texts in his spare time and has called computers and biotechnology
the two most important technologies of the 20th century.

   His first foray into the industry came three years ago when he invested $ 5
million in Icos Corp., a Bothell, Wash.-based firm that was co-founded by George
Rathmann, the founder of Amgen Inc. Rathmann is also a founder of Darwin.

   Since then, Gates has invested $ 5 million in Targeted Genetics, a privately
held Seattle-based firm that was spun off from Immunex Corp. and is working on
gene therapy treatments, and $ 7.5 billion in Ligand Pharmaceuticals Inc., a San
Diego- based company.

   In addition, Gates gave the University of Washington $ 12 million in 1991 to
establish a new Department of Molecular Biotechnology and to recruit Dr. Hood
from the California Institute of Technology.

   Allen has made some smaller investments in biotechnology, but is primarily
known for financing and creating companies associated with information
technology. He is a big investor in America Online.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2),(1) Gates, (2) Allen

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1994


                             783 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                       May 6, 1994, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 979 words

HEADLINE: New doubt on how far to take genetics

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Is genetic science spiraling out of control? Could we be headed for a new
era of eugenics - less flagrant, but perhaps just as worrisome, as the
sterilization of "undesirables" in Nazi Germany?

   Critics inside and out of the exploding field of genetics seem to be voicing
such concerns more loudly and widely than at any time since the research went
into overdrive a decade ago.

   "I think there is a strong backlash against the whole genetic enterprise,"
said Dr. Robert Cook-Deegan, a molecular biologist and author of a new book,
"The Gene Wars." Cook-Deegan, of the National Institute of Medicine in
Washington, says that ambivalence about and distrust of genetic technology is
not new, but that recently he has been "encountering it in a wider slice of the
population."

   There were abundant questions yesterday about where society is headed as
genetic research is translated into medical options, as a two-day conference
opened in Boston on "The Ethical Implications of the New Genetics." Sponsored by
the organization Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research and by Tufts
University Medical School, the conference drew scientists, ethicists, activists
and health care providers from around the country.

   "Genetics is more and more in the news, changing our view of ourselves and
how we view other people and groups that are different from ourselves," Jonathan
Beckwith, a geneticist at Harvard Medical School, said in one panel discussion.

   This view, to some critics, represents a strong swing in the so-called
nature-nurture debate toward "biological determinism." This view holds that
humans are defined and predestined by the hereditary information in their genes.

   A Harvard biologist, Richard Lewontin, writing in the New York Review of
Books last month, used the term "genomania" for this trend. "There is, at
present, no aspect of social or individual life that is not claimed for the
genes," he wrote.

   Lewontin listed what he believes are dubious and dangerous claims: "genes for
schizophrenia, genes for sensitivity to industrial pollutants and dangerous
workplace conditions, genes for criminality, genes for violence, genes for
divorce and genes for homelessness."

   A Harvard biology professor emeritus, Ruth Hubbard, argued at the conference
that the emphasis on genes draws attention and resources away from other
determinants of health, and from social justice.

   Cook-Deegan, who spoke at the conference yesterday, said he is also concerned
about an "either-or" view of genes and environment as they relate to health.
Inherent genetic factors and a range of enviromental influences combine to
produce traits, including illness, he said. Genes are a strong influence, as
when a mutant gene causes Huntington's disease, Cook-Deegan added, but often the
effect of genes is outweighed by environmental factors.

    "The tools of genetics have gotten so powerful so fast that research has
gotten tilted toward genetics," he said. But he also voiced optimism that the
"workings of democracy" would prevent serious misuses.

   Over the past two decades, scientists have gained the means to locate,
isolate and decipher the biochemical units of heredity, or genes, of which all
humans have 50,000 to 100,000. Information contained in the genes directs cells
to make different proteins: All individuals have a different set of genes and
therefore varying assortments of proteins.

   Because a person's genes influence many traits, including health, disease and
behavior, geneticists are working to decode human genes in hopes of
understanding human biology and, scientists hope, curing many diseases.

   This promise remains largely unfufilled, even though the "new genetics" has
increased the number of diseases or conditions that can be diagnosed, some
before birth.

   As a result, health care providers, ethicists and many people with
disabilities are troubled by the question of when - or if - it is right to
introduce widespread testing of individuals for such diseases. If the results
were to have no benefit, many say, their value could be outweighed by the risks
that people could be hurt, that the information from the tests could be used
against them, or that the tests could be used to prevent the births of children
with potential genetic anomalies.

   The last possibility inevitably prompts critics to recall the ugly history of
using genetic techniques - mainly crude measures such as sterilization of
"unfit" people - to further political or social goals. Often referred to as
"eugenics," such practices had a vogue in the early 20th century in the United
States and were part of the Nazi "master race" agenda in Germany.

   But Dr. Phillip Reilly, a physician and lawyer who is executive director of
the Shriver Center for Mental Retardation in Waltham, pointed out that attempts
at eugenic policies persist. He referred to legislation introduced in the
Colorado House of Representatives this year that would shorten a prison inmate's
sentence by 10 days if he or she agreed to be sterilized or use long-term birth
control. The bill, which sponsors said aims "to assist in reducing the crime
rate in the state," assumes that criminality is determined by genes.

   Reilly, in a keynote address at the conference, said his concern is not that
a government will impose Nazi-style eugenics policies. Rather, he said, he fears
that "technology will drive us to a neo-eugenics" of selective abortion to
prevent the births of infants with disabilities.

   Ultimately, Reilly said, genetic technology, with its promise of treating a
long list of disorders with gene therapy, "has the potential for human good."
But he urged society to "back off from the gee-whiz" approach and work to
educate doctors, nurses, scientists and the public about genetics.

   "We don't want to relive the past," he concluded, "nor do we want to be
chained by it."

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1994


                             784 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                        May 6, 1994 Friday THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 016

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Cancer docs, patients to push gene research

BYLINE: MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Doctors and patients from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute are heading to
Washington to ask Congress not to forget cancer genetics as it debates
health-care reform.

   'We are going to send a message that a whole lot is happening in cancer
research,' said Dr. Priscilla Schaffer, director of the women's cancers program
at Dana-Farber, who is organizing a May 13 forum on Capitol Hill.

   Schaffer, a professor of microbiology and genetics, said cancer researchers
are concerned that the health-care reform debate has not mentioned genetic
screening.

   'We have identified and will continue to identify genes responsible for human
cancers,' she said. 'Screening is coming on line faster than we think.'

   She said it won't be long before all Americans can be screened for genes that
may predispose them to cancer. It's important that insurance be required to
cover such tests and no one testing positive be dropped from coverage.

   Those who test positive could then be monitored closely and, if they develop
cancer, have it treated quickly. While widespread screening for cancer genes may
be costly, Schaffer said it will save money in the long run by catching and
treating cancers early, before they spread.

   The forum, which will include officials from government health departments
and the drug industry, as well as doctors and patients from Dana-Farber and
other hospitals, also seeks to urge Congress to maintain funding for cancer
research.

   In addition to genetic screening, Schaffer said major advances in cancer
treatment using gene therapy are on the horizon. Such therapy can target bad
genes with chemicals, repair bad genes or replace them with good ones, either
preventing cancer or inhibiting its spread - all without damaging good cells as
do chemotherapy and radiation.

   'We want to be sure these new avenues are covered and emphasized,' Schaffer
said.

   --


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 1995


                             785 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                        May 6, 1994 Friday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 016

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Cancer docs, patients to push gene research

BYLINE: MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Doctors and patients from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute are heading to
Washington to ask Congress not to forget cancer genetics as it debates
health-care reform.

   'We are going to send a message that a whole lot is happening in cancer
research,' said Dr. Priscilla Schaffer, director of the women's cancers program
at Dana-Farber, who is organizing a May 13 forum on Capitol Hill.

   Schaffer, a professor of microbiology and genetics, said cancer researchers
are concerned that the health-care reform debate has not mentioned genetic
screening.

   'We have identified and will continue to identify genes responsible for human
cancers,' she said. 'Screening is coming on line faster than we think.'

   She said it won't be long before all Americans can be screened for genes that
may predispose them to cancer. It's important that insurance be required to
cover such tests and no one testing positive be dropped from coverage.

   Those who test positive could then be monitored closely and, if they develop
cancer, have it treated quickly. While widespread screening for cancer genes may
be costly, Schaffer said it will save money in the long run by catching and
treating cancers early, before they spread.

   The forum, which will include officials from government health departments
and the drug industry, as well as doctors and patients from Dana-Farber and
other hospitals, also seeks to urge Congress to maintain funding for cancer
research.

   In addition to genetic screening, Schaffer said major advances in cancer
treatment using gene therapy are on the horizon. Such therapy can target bad
genes with chemicals, repair bad genes or replace them with good ones, either
preventing cancer or inhibiting its spread - all without damaging good cells as
do chemotherapy and radiation.

   'We want to be sure these new avenues are covered and emphasized,' Schaffer
said.

   --


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 1995


                             786 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                               May 6, 1994 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 307 words

HEADLINE: Cancer docs, patients to push gene research

BYLINE: MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Doctors and patients from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute are heading to
Washington to ask Congress not to forget cancer genetics as it debates
health-care reform.

   "We are going to send a message that a whole lot is happening in cancer
research," said Dr. Priscilla Schaffer, director of the women's cancers program
at Dana-Farber, who is organizing a May 13 forum on Capitol Hill.

   Schaffer, a professor of microbiology and genetics, said cancer researchers
are concerned that the health-care reform debate has not mentioned genetic
screening.

   "We have identified and will continue to identify genes responsible for human
cancers," she said. "Screening is coming on line faster than we think."

   She said it won't be long before all Americans can be screened for genes that
may predispose them to cancer. It's important that insurance be required to
cover such tests and no one testing positive be dropped from coverage.

   Those who test positive could then be monitored closely and, if they develop
cancer, have it treated quickly.

   While widespread screening for cancer genes may be costly, Schaffer said it
will save money in the long run by catching and treating cancers early, before
they spread.

   The forum, which will include officials from government health departments
and the drug industry, as well as doctors and patients from Dana-Farber and
other hospitals, also seeks to urge Congress to maintain funding for cancer
research.

   In addition to genetic screening, Schaffer said major advances in cancer
treatment using gene therapy are on the horizon. Such therapy can target bad
genes with chemicals, repair bad genes or replace them with good ones, either
preventing cancer or inhibiting its spread - all without damaging good cells as
do chemotherapy and radiation.

   "We want to be sure these new avenues are covered and emphasized," Schaffer
said.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             787 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                               May 6, 1994 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 307 words

HEADLINE: Cancer docs, patients to push gene research

BYLINE: MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Doctors and patients from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute are heading to
Washington to ask Congress not to forget cancer genetics as it debates
health-care reform.

   "We are going to send a message that a whole lot is happening in cancer
research," said Dr. Priscilla Schaffer, director of the women's cancers program
at Dana-Farber, who is organizing a May 13 forum on Capitol Hill.

   Schaffer, a professor of microbiology and genetics, said cancer researchers
are concerned that the health-care reform debate has not mentioned genetic
screening.

   "We have identified and will continue to identify genes responsible for human
cancers," she said. "Screening is coming on line faster than we think."

   She said it won't be long before all Americans can be screened for genes that
may predispose them to cancer. It's important that insurance be required to
cover such tests and no one testing positive be dropped from coverage.

   Those who test positive could then be monitored closely and, if they develop
cancer, have it treated quickly.

   While widespread screening for cancer genes may be costly, Schaffer said it
will save money in the long run by catching and treating cancers early, before
they spread.

   The forum, which will include officials from government health departments
and the drug industry, as well as doctors and patients from Dana-Farber and
other hospitals, also seeks to urge Congress to maintain funding for cancer
research.

   In addition to genetic screening, Schaffer said major advances in cancer
treatment using gene therapy are on the horizon. Such therapy can target bad
genes with chemicals, repair bad genes or replace them with good ones, either
preventing cancer or inhibiting its spread - all without damaging good cells as
do chemotherapy and radiation.

   "We want to be sure these new avenues are covered and emphasized," Schaffer
said.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             788 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                      May 5, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: CITY TIMES; FOCUS ON VOLUNTEERS; Pg. 6

DISTRIBUTION: CITY TIMES

LENGTH: 275 words

BYLINE: CATHERINE FLAHERTY

BODY:


   (ran E, S editions)

   Helpline, an agency of Family Resources Inc., has a free telephone
information, referral and crisis counseling service that operates day and
night. There is no such thing as a typical call that is placed to Helpline.
Some of the calls are from people threatening suicide or from people needing
counseling because of rape or abuse. Other calls are requests for phone  numbers
for a local government agency, an alcohol and drug treatment center or  senior
services. Helpline also offers special services such as the statewide  Runaway
Hotline, Parental Stress Line and telecommunications for the  hearing-impaired.
Micki Thompson is a program specialist in charge of  volunteer recruiting and
training for Helpline. Thompson said, "The majority  of the service is
information and referral and problem-solving counseling.  Because there are so
many issues covered, the Helpline volunteers must  complete 60 hours of training
before they start answering any calls." All  calls that are made to this service
are kept confidential. If you would like  to know more about Helpline or would
like to volunteer, call 341-2200.

Fund-raisers

   A bowl-a-thon to benefit Tampa Bay Research Institute will be held May 21 at

 Sunrise Lanes, 6393 Dr. M. L. King (Ninth) St. N in St. Petersburg. The
benefit begins with registration at 12:30 p.m. Teams of four must collect a
minimum of $ 50 per bowler. Bowl-a-thon proceeds will be used to buy a special
incubator to grow cells for the institute's new gene therapy program to  benefit
cancer research. For more information, call Sue or Judy at 576-6675.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1994


                             789 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
                              Journal of Commerce

                              May 2, 1994, Monday

SECTION: COMMODITIES, Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 475 words

HEADLINE: COMMODITY / CHEMICAL BRIEFS

BYLINE: From Wire and Staff Reports

BODY:


   CME REBUFFS REQUEST

   FOR CLINTON'S RECORDS

   CHICAGO - The Chicago Mercantile Exchange rebuffed a request from Republicans
on the Senate Banking Committee for records that could shed more light on how
Hillary Rodham Clinton reaped a $ 99,000 profit on a $ 1,000 commodities
investment.

   The exchange recently gathered and sealed the trading data at the direction
of federal regulators but will not release them unless subpoenaed, Andrew Yemma,
exchange spokesman, said Friday.

   ''We take our responsibilities to our customers and member firms very
seriously," he said.

   The records, compiled during a 1980 CME investigation of Refco Inc., the
brokerage firm that handled Mrs. Clinton's trades in 1978-79, could help answer
questions surrounding her spectacular success in the high-risk commodities
markets.  PFIZER MIGHT INVEST

   IN GENE THERAPY FIRM GROTON, Conn. - Pfizer Inc. is in discussions with 10 to
12 biotechnology companies about setting up a corporate partnership in the
emerging field of gene therapy, a senior Pfizer researcher said last week.

   Pfizer is likely to make a decision within a year on whether it will make an
investment in the promising medical field, said Ian Williams, Pfizer director of
molecular genetics, in an interview during a tour of Pfizer's research
headquarters here following the company's annual meeting.

   "I think it's likely we will do something, but it hasn't been determined
yet," Mr. Williams said.

   "We're actively looking at gene therapy technology. We appreciate that it's
an important therapeutic opportunity," Mr. Williams said. "We are actively
talking with, I would say, 10 to 12 biotechnology companies that are in field of
gene therapy . . . We don't have a corporate partner yet." PET PLASTIC RECYCLING

   HITS 30 PERCENT, SURVEY SAYS CHARLOTTE, N.C. - The recycling rate for
post-consumer PET plastic containers in the United States continued to grow last
year, reaching an all- time high of 30 percent.

   In 1993, consumers nationwide recycled 450 million pounds of PET
(polyethylene terphthalate), a 23 percent increase since 1992, according to a
survey conducted by Robert A. Bennett, Ph.D., associate dean, College of
Engineering at the University of Toledo, and commissioned by the National
Association for Plastic Container Recovery (Napcor).  LEAD, ZINC PRICE RISE

   HITS CHINA EXPORTS TOKYO - China's exports of lead and zinc to Taiwan and
South Korea are expected to show sharp decreases this month due to rising
domestic prices, trade sources said.

   Exports of lead to Taiwan from China have fallen dramatically, according to
James Kao, senior metals trader for Taiwan's United Metals Co.

   He said his company will import only about 100 metric tons of lead from China
this month, compared with earlier company projections for May of 1,200 to 1,500
metric tons.

EDITOR-NOTE:
COMMODITY / CHEMICAL BRIEFS

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1996


                             790 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                 May 1, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: MEDLIFE; CHECKUP; Pg. 51

LENGTH: 428 words

BODY:


   Here's a weekly roundup of health news you should know.

   Anorexia kills bone: More bad news about anorexia nervosa: Bone loss during
adolescence stemming from the eating disorder can't be reversed by using calcium
supplements. In a recent study of adolescent girls, researchers from Houston's
Baylor College of Medicine and the Children's National Medical Center in
Washington, D.C., found that anorexia nervosa hampers bone formation while
breaking down existing bone. They also found that the adolescents suffering from
the eating disorder did not absorb calcium supplements as well as their healthy
counterparts.

   Say that again? A new government survey has found that the incidence of
hearing problems in Americans increased by 53.4 percent from the early 1970s to
the early 1990s. The survey found that hearing trouble affected 20.3 million
people ages 3 and older in 1991, up from 13.2 million in 1971. A significant
proportion of this increase is due to the aging of the American population
during these years, according to the National Center for Health Statistics,
which published the survey.

   Beat that melanoma: Get geared up for summer with a free flier from
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company called "Be Aware of the Sun." The flier
gives tips for safely going out in the sun, explains the different types of skin
cancer and gives advice on sunscreens. For a copy, send a self-addressed,
stamped envelope to: Be Aware of the Sun, MetLife, 57 Greens Farms Rd.,
Westport, CT 06880.

   Latest AIDS totals: The latest government figures on AIDS show that 86,986
American men and 16,514 women developed AIDS last year. In California, 16,465
men and 1,321 women developed AIDS; in New York, 12,994 men and 4,240 women; in
Florida, 8,600 men and 2,185 women; in Texas, 6,669 men and 729 women, and in
Pennsylvania, 2,611 men and 496 women. A total of 968 children developed AIDS in
1993 in the United States, 251 of them in New York, 164 in Florida, 58 in New
Jersey, 48 in California, 35 in Texas.

   HIV gene therapy: Researchers in California are testing a type of gene
therapy in patients who are HIV-positive but don't yet have AIDS symptoms. The
study is preliminary, and is meant only to determine the safety of the
treatment, according to researchers at the University of California, San Diego
School of Medicine. The gene therapy will be given to 20 patients in San Diego.
Researchers hope it will boost production of immune-system killer cells known as
cytotoxic T lymphocytes, which destroy HIV-infected cells.

    -- Chicago Sun-Times wires

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1994


                             791 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 30, 1994 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Sym-Tek Systems, which has reached agreement to be bought by Micro Component
Technology Inc. (MCTI), yesterday said that at a price of $6.50 per share for
MCTI, Sym-Tek investors would receive the equivalent of $1.25 a share, with the
potential of receiving an additional 14 cents a share from a later distribution.

   MCTI named Paul Magliocco, an executive in its San Jose office, as head of
the San Diego operation, pending completion of the deal. San Diego golf stocks
got a boost from Wall Street yesterday.

   Aldila closed up $1.50 at $18.75; Callaway closed up $1.50 at $39.63; and
Cobra closed up $1.75 at $32.75. XScribe Corp. said its board will decide
whether the company's reverse stock split will be 1-for-2, 1-for-3 or 1-for-4.
Xscribe also said its board of directors has approved a reorganization that will
spin off Xscribe Legal Systems Division into a wholly owned subsidiary of
Xscribe.

   The company supplies imaging and information management systems. Viagene Inc.
of San Diego and Chiron Corp. have begun a gene therapy clinical study in
patients with advanced metastatic melanoma.

   The companies said the study will involve 10 patients and involve the tandem
use of Aldesleukin, Chiron recombinant interleukin-2, and Viagene's gamma
interferon gene therapy product. Team Rental Group Inc., Daytona Beach, Fla., an
owner of Budget car rental franchises, registered an initial public offering of
2.65 million shares of stock at $17 per share.

   It said proceeds will go to buy assets of Freedom River Inc., including
Budget franchises in Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and Cincinnati and franchise
rights for truck rentals in San Diego County and Imperial County. General
Dynamics' local Space Systems Division yesterday signed a new launch order from
the European Telecommunications Satellite Organization to carry a television
satellite into space.

   The San Diego rocket division, which launched its last Eutelsat satellite in
late 1991, scheduled the launch for August 1996.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             792 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      April 29, 1994 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1552 words

HEADLINE: FOR PIONEERING AIDS ACTIVISTS, IT'S TIME TO REGROUP ACT UP MEMBERS
FROM ACROSS THE NATION WILL GATHER IN PHILADELPHIA. THEIR GOAL: MAPPING A NEW
STRATEGY.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Seven years after Act Up burst on the American scene, shaking the citadels of
power with its single-focus politics and brassy tactics, the AIDS activist group
is struggling to revitalize itself.

   Across the country, many of the most passionate crusaders from the AIDS
Coalition to Unleash Power have died. And others, despite dramatic
accomplishments, are getting burned out.

   Some chapters of Act Up have been torn by internal disputes over race, gender
and personality.

   In some cities, Act Up has split into two chapters - one to focus on science
and medicine, the other to deal with politics.

   The media, which once rushed to cover Act Up's die-ins and other creative
acts of street theater, no longer find such tactics so newsworthy.

   And while Presidents Reagan and Bush provided convenient targets because of
their foot-dragging on AIDS, President Clinton presents a different challenge.
Though failing to keep all his campaign promises about AIDS, he's done enough to
make it hard to cast him as an archenemy.

   "What's happening has the potential for either new beginnings - or for the
movement to fall apart," says Kiyoshi Kuromiya, a founding member of the
Philadelphia chapter of Act Up.

   Beginning tomorrow, more than 200 AIDS activists from across the country are
expected to gather in Philadelphia for a two-day meeting that will address the
future of Act Up and AIDS activism generally.

   The meeting, at Thomas Jefferson University, is sponsored by Act Up/
Philadelphia, which has managed to avoid the bitter factionalism that has
divided some other local groups.

   The conference agenda includes a wide range of topics: AIDS clinical trials,
national health care, the need for confidentiality in AIDS testing, clean-needle
exchange programs for intravenous drug users, and federal lobbying efforts.

   But underlying all this will be larger questions: How can AIDS activism be
kept alive in the 1990s? What form should it take? What should be its goal?

   "This is a critical time for us," said David Acosta, a member of Act Up/
Philadelphia and director of The Galaei Project, an AIDS education program for
gay and lesbian Latinos. "We hope to re-energize people for the battle ahead."

   By any measure, Act Up has been one of the most distinctive - and successful
- of modern American social movements.

   Born in New York in 1987, the group has used down-and-dirty street tactics to
bring more public attention and government resources to the AIDS epidemic, which
has now claimed more than 220,000 American lives.

   Its members - mostly white, middle-class gay men - have temporarily shut down
Wall Street, stormed the gates of the federal Food and Drug Administration,
brought fear and trembling to the boardrooms of pharmaceutical companies, and
challenged the deepest religious values of the Catholic Church.

   As a result, much has changed. The price of AZT, the first anti-AIDS drug,
has tumbled. The federal government has put more money - $1.3 billion this year
- into AIDS research. The average time it takes to get drugs approved by the FDA
has been cut dramatically. And, for the first time, people affected by a disease
have gained a voice in government decisions about its treatment.

   "While Act Up has achieved clear political goals, it has also achieved a
larger goal," said Judith Porter, a sociology professor at Bryn Mawr College and
volunteer in the needle-exchange program begun by Act Up members.

   "It has given people a feeling that they could control what happens to them.
They are not AIDS 'victims' at the mercy of their doctors. They are people who
can play an active role in their own health care."

   Such lessons in empowerment, she noted, are now being copied by the women's
breast cancer movement and other health consumer groups.

   While Act Up's public profile has diminished in recent years, along with the
number and decibel level of its demonstrations, a lot of dogged organizing has
been quietly going on behind the scenes.

   An Act Up bill calling for a Manhattan-like project to find a cure for AIDS
is on its way to the floor of Congress. On May 10, the so-called AIDS Cure Act
will be introduced by U.S. Rep. Gerrold Nadler (D., N.Y.).

   While nobody expects it to be approved anytime soon (it would cost $1.84
billion over five years), many regard it a victory just to get such a sweeping
plan into the legislative hopper.

   Locally, Act Up chapters continue to work on a number of successful projects.

   In Philadelphia, for instance, Act Up members have reached hundreds of
intravenous drug users with the clean-needle exchange program, have kept the
Betak nursing home for AIDS patients open, and have helped to get condoms
distributed at some high schools.

   Still, everyone concedes that AIDS activism in general - and Act Up in
particular - faces difficult challenges in the second decade of the epidemic.

   "We are all plagued by the same lack of understanding on what it will take to
bring us to the next stage of effective power," said Larry Kramer, the New York
activist and writer who founded Act Up.

   "There is a lot of shared belief that the former tactics don't work under
this President (Clinton)," he said. "You can't scream at Clinton the way you
could at a Bush or Reagan."

   THE CLINTON FACTOR

   Although activists applaud Clinton for putting AIDS on the national agenda
and increasing AIDS funding, they say the effort has fallen far short.

   Clinton's AIDS czar, Kristine Gebbie, has little but ceremonial power. The
administration has not removed the immigration ban on people infected with the
AIDS virus. And Clinton, in the coming year, is not calling for an increase in
the area of AIDS prevention.

   Aside from the Clinton question, activists are also struggling with the
changing face of the AIDS epidemic. Although gay white men still make up most of
the nation's AIDS cases, the epidemic is spreading most aggressively in African
American and Latino communities, and among women.

   "The primary problem with maintaining an AIDS activist organization is the
changing numbers and the changing population," said John Stuban, founder of Act
Up/Baltimore.

   "My white, middle-class experience embedded in me the idea that the process
of social activism can work. But that's not the experience of most African
Americans."

   GOING MAINSTREAM

   Act Up is also facing a problem many social movements encounter: Because of
its success, some members have become part of the mainstream.

   "They have become more bureaucratic than the bureaucrats," Kramer complained.
"It's amazing to behold. A lot of them have sort of made a pact with the devil."

   Mary Lucey, a member of Act Up/Los Angeles who sits on numerous mainstream
committees, including the federal government's AIDS Clinical Trials Group, said
she is about to break her own pact with the devil.

   "Our government was very clever," she said. "They used old union tactics: Put
them in and make them feel like they have a voice and then they'll be quiet. We
are all guilty, including myself. Now, I'm backing off
because I know my voice is louder from the outside."

   The activists' biggest problem, though, is to decide exactly how to stop the
AIDS virus, which remains unconquered, despite billions of dollars in research
involving some of the best scientific minds in the world.

   Will more screaming and yelling change that? More money? More lobbying?

   On this issue, too, the activists are divided.

   A PUSH FOR RESEARCH

   Jane Shull, director of Philadelphia FIGHT, which conducts community-based
trials of AIDS drugs, says that a cure is still possible, but that American
research must be radically restructured to achieve it.

   "We have got to get the national will to make the smartest people stop and
focus on this problem," Shull said. She proposes that endowed chairs for AIDS
research be set up at the nation's most prestigious medical schools and that the
President himself tap a cadre of top scientists to work exclusively on AIDS.

   Jonathan Lax, a consultant to drug companies and a member of the local Act Up
chapter, says it's time to change the paradigm of AIDS research. "We need to
move from 'Kill the bug' to 'Support the host,' " he said.

   That would mean shifting resources away from anti-viral drugs like AZT and
toward drug therapies that use the body's own immune system to fight the virus.
"Then we wait for the third model, which is gene therapy," Lax said.

   With a home-run drug still a long way off, many activists think Act Up should
put more of an emphasis on prevention.

   And that might require more radical methods.

   "People have simply got to kiss petit bourgeois manners goodbye," said Scott
Tucker, of Act Up/Philadelphia. "It's a social struggle. It will not be won with
Quaker-style gentility. It will be won by haunting and hounding public officials
and sometimes through physical occupation."

   As part of what he called "homework and hell-raising," Tucker suggested a
concerted campaign to get City Health Commissioner Estelle Richman to demand
comprehensive sex education in the city's schools.

   Whatever the future of Act Up, its founding father is convinced it's not
dead. "Every time someone proclaims its death, it just doesn't seem to die,"
said Kramer. "It's like the very virus itself. It won't go away."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             793 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           April 27, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: EXTRA; Section J; Page 2

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: GWINNETT TODAY

BYLINE: By Elliott Brack

BODY:

   A few wise words from widely scattered parts

   Quote of the day is from L. Grant Glickman: "Behind every successful man is a
woman . . . with nothing to wear."

   If you find that lots of Gwinnett businesspeople are not in their offices on
Mondays when the weather is pretty, there's a reason. During the springtime, the
county seems to break out in charity golf tournaments on Mondays, when country
clubs are closed to members.

   So if you're having difficulty finding your business appointment in the
office on Mondays, he or she may be out working for charity on the golf courses
of Gwinnett.

   Robert McCord, 65, writes in The Arkansas Times: "When I hear or read about
something in the future, I automatically compute what my age will be when it is
likely to occur.

   "You'd be surprised at how often I'm pleased to note that I probably won't be
around to see things like gene therapy . . . longer ZIP Codes . . .
picturephones . . . the end of public schools as we know them . . . all shopping
by TV . . . return of the leisure suit . . . mechanical musical instruments like
drum machines . . . mandatory use of the metric system . . . public financing of
political candidates . . . the golden anniversary of rock . . . professional
American rugby . . . newspapers ordered to taste and delivered by computer . . .
checkless society . . . lawmakers elected by proportional representation."

   We agree. Not every new thing is wonderful!

   A recent advertisement in a newspaper: "We broke a story about two beautiful
women, a jilted lover, backroom intrigue, money, fame, betrayal, lies and a hit
man with a guilty conscience.

   "If it sounds like a bad TV movie, don't worry, it will be."

   This was from The Oregonian, in Portland. In tiny print at the bottom of the
advertisement, the newspaper added: "We don't know if she's innocent. We don't
know if she's guilty. We do know where you'll hear the answer first. Stand by."

   Thought you would like to see how one newspaper promoted itself with what for
it was a local news story.

   Friday's the day when people who are gearing up to run for political office
must qualify as candidates. A reminder for those of you considering this
possibility: Note that the deadline for qualifying indeed is Friday, but it is
at noon Friday, not 5 p.m.

   Now don't go using the excuse that qualifying had closed by the time you
showed up Friday afternoon. If you do go late, don't mention it to anyone, for
it could spell doom for you should you consider running two years from now.

   So, if you're thinking about it, now's the time to put up - or not be heard
from politically for two more years.

   Which brings us to a quote from none other than Nikita Khrushchev, the Great
Communist, who knew something about government on both sides of the world when
he said: "Politicians are the same all over. They promise to build a bridge even
where there is no river.''

   Elliott Brack is associate publisher of Gwinnett Extra and a 20-year resident
of Gwinnett.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1994


                             794 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: Uncovered Short Sales on Nasdaq Show a Small Decline

BYLINE: By LESLIE EATON

BODY:

   Investors who bet on falling stock prices are finally cashing in a few chips
-- probably because prices have indeed dropped.

   For the first time in more than a year, there has been a decline in the
monthly tally of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered. The National
Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday that in the month ended on
April 8 uncovered short sales in Nasdaq stocks fell three-tenths of 1 percent,
to 715 million shares, a drop of two million shares. In that period, Nasdaq's
composite stock-price index fell more than 5 percent. At yesterday's close, the
index was off 5.5 percent for the year.

    By contrast, both the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock
Exchange reported last week that their short-interest levels rose to records in
April. While blue-chip stocks have fallen -- the Dow Jones industrial average is
down about 1.5 percent this year -- their declines have been far less severe
than those of the generally smaller stocks that trade over the counter.

   Though the monthly drop in Nasdaq short interest was small, it was the first
decline since January 1993, when there was a fall of 1.1 percent, to 465 million
shares. Since then, short interest has climbed; despite the April decrease,
Nasdaq short interest is up 40 percent in the last 12 months.

   Short interest represents the number of shares that investors have borrowed
and sold without covering their positions by buying shares. While there are
several reasons someone might sell a stock short, the most common is the
expectation that the stock's price will fall. Shorting is the flip side of
buying a stock in the hope it will go up; a short-seller borrows shares, sells
them and later buys them back to return to the original owner. If the share
price has dropped in the meantime, the short-seller pockets the difference.

   Traditionally, a high short-interest level has indicated that many investors
are bearish on the market. But some analysts say that big short positions are a
positive sign because the short-sellers will eventually have to buy shares.

   For the second consecutive month, the short-sellers' favorite stock was the
Snapple Beverage Corporation, with 9.3 million shares sold short. Still, that
was a decrease of 300,000 shares from March's level. Those who are pessimistic
about the stock cite increasing competition among so-called new age beverages --
iced tea, flavored seltzer and bubbly fruit drinks -- as well as investors'
enormous expectations for the company. Snapple shares sell for about 44 times
last year's earnings, more than twice the average multiple of stocks in the
Standard & Poor's 500 index.

   The Autotote Corporation's class A shares registered the biggest increase in
shares sold short, rising 1.4 million, to 3.5 million. Analysts have been
disappointed in the recent earnings of the company.

GRAPHIC: Chart:

Largest Increases

Security Name                          04/15/94     03/15/94       Change

Autotote Corp cl A                    3,485,674    2,094,934    1,390,740   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     2,765,199    1,404,531    1,360,668   T
U.S. Robotics Inc                     2,015,059      676,302    1,338,757   T
LM Ericsson Tel Add                   1,773,355      439,282    1,334,073
FHP Intl Cp                           2,404,508    1,167,234    1,237,274   T
Apple Computer Inc                    7,138,044    5,912,048    1,225,996   T
Aura Systems Inc                      5,583,214    4,416,023    1,167,191   T
Sunglass Hut Intl                     1,918,302      899,626    1,018,676   T
Mercer Intl SBI                       1,411,637      394,656    1,016,981   T
Electronic Arts Inc                   8,567,841    7,556,866    1,010,975   T
Cott Cp                               6,730,932    5,833,379      897,553   T
DSC Commun Cp                         3,402,820    2,559,694      843,126   T
Cirrus Logic Inc                      1,688,818      890,905      797,913   T
Qualcomm Inc                          2,302,173    1,509,313      792,860   T
Orbital Sciences Cp                   2,344,386    1,602,287      742,099   T
Wall Data Inc                           893,794      189,354      704,440   T
Intl Std Group Ltd                      711,569       11,000      700,569
Microsoft Cp                          2,694,097    2,005,833      688,264   T
Legent Cp                             1,176,066      493,831      682,235   T
Hollinger Inc                         3,544,907    2,884,300      660,607   T
Stac Electronics                      1,461,043      843,023      618,020   T
Hechinger Co cl A                       656,586      158,606      497,980   T
Omega Environment                     3,401,968    2,931,509      470,459   T
Meridian Bncp Inc                       494,261       26,151      468,110   T
Gupta Corp                              918,193      467,860      450,333   T



Largest Decreases

Security Name                          04/15/94     03/15/94       Change

Great Amer Rec Inc                      205,965    4,305,410   -4,099,445   T
Centocor Inc                          1,507,506    4,532,386   -3,024,880   T
Amer Power Convers                    6,312,311    8,344,214   -2,031,903   T
Lotus Development Cp                  1,871,092    3,597,667   -1,726,575   T
Novell Inc                            1,603,491    3,277,239   -1,673,748   T
Wang Labs Inc Del                       412,906    1,870,134   -1,457,228   T
Pres Riverboat Casinos                1,738,377    3,109,651   -1,371,274   T
Southland Cp                          5,927,232    7,125,114   -1,197,882
+Cisco Sys Inc                        4,429,758    5,565,290   -1,135,532   T
Casey's Gen Stores                        8,868    1,116,664   -1,107,796   T
Read-Rite Cp                            854,043    1,806,864     -952,821   T
Komag Inc                               581,950    1,530,652     -948,702   T
Intel Cp                              5,327,598    6,250,653     -923,055   T
Price/Costco Inc                      3,917,473    4,833,653     -916,180   T
Wellfleet Commun Inc                  1,002,932    1,870,408     -867,476   T
Octel Commun Cp                         634,697    1,383,662     -748,965   T
Scimed Life Sys Inc                   2,265,950    3,005,643     -739,693   T
Borland Intl Inc                      3,774,846    4,460,662     -685,816   T
Amer Intl Petro Inc                      22,974      708,168     -685,194   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  4,480,606    5,161,843     -681,237   T
VSI Enterprises                          83,084      748,900     -665,816
Sun Microsystems Inc                  3,187,185    3,810,658     -623,473   T
DNA Plant Tech Cp                       402,318    1,007,421     -605,103   T
Aldus Cp                                 76,101      678,784     -602,683   T
Nextel Commun A                       3,402,490    3,997,490     -595,000   T



Largest Positions

Security Name                          04/15/94     03/15/94       Change

Snapple Beverage Cp                   9,297,894    9,591,123     -293,229   T
Mobile Telecomm Tech                  8,669,200    8,676,250       -7,050   T
Electronic Arts Inc                   8,567,841    7,556,866    1,010,975   T
Dell Computer Cp                      7,810,022    8,374,125     -564,103   T
Comcast Cp cl A Spcl                  7,406,701    7,757,131     -350,430   T
Apple Computer Inc                    7,138,044    5,912,048    1,225,996   T
Food Lion Inc cl A                    6,931,632    7,127,105     -195,473   T
Cott Cp                               6,730,932    5,833,379      897,553   T
Noble Drilling Cp                     6,665,530    6,691,465      -25,935   T
Amer Power Convers                    6,312,311    8,344,214   -2,031,903   T
Southland Cp                          5,927,232    7,125,114   -1,197,882
Aura Systems Inc                      5,583,214    4,416,023    1,167,191   T
Seagate Tech                          5,449,053    5,723,660     -274,607   T
Casino Magic Cp                       5,425,593    5,461,123      -35,530   T
Intel Cp                              5,327,598    6,250,653     -923,055   T
Checkers Drive-In                     5,285,448    5,175,526      109,922   T
Quantum Cp                            5,033,577    5,126,677      -93,100   T
LDDS Commun Inc                       4,956,447    4,529,455      426,992   T
Pyxis Cp                              4,512,132    4,851,431     -339,299   T
+U.S. Healthcare Inc                  4,486,202    4,753,581     -267,379   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  4,480,606    5,161,843     -681,237   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,475,031    4,483,770       -8,739   T
+Cisco Sys Inc                        4,429,758    5,565,290   -1,135,532   T
Starbucks Cp                          4,302,250    4,106,234      196,016   T
Site Holdings Inc                     4,026,541    3,650,963      375,578



Largest Cover Ratios

Security Name                          04/15/94    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

TPI Enterprises                       4,475,031       70,560           63   T
Tokos Med Cp Del                      3,718,247       76,785           48   T
Site Holdings Inc                     4,026,541       93,465           43
Hollinger Inc                         3,544,907      109,881           32   T
Dibrell Brothers Inc                  1,827,761       61,882           30   T
Marshall & Ilsley                     2,015,510       67,265           30   T
Cell Com Puerto Rico                  1,329,456       47,296           28   T
Fortune Bancorp                       1,069,281       38,140           28   T
Rally's Hamburger                     3,023,939      112,402           27   T
50-Off Stores Inc                     1,948,170       75,730           26   T
Amer Pacific Cp                         756,530       29,971           25   T
Food Lion Inc cl A                    6,931,632      275,481           25   T
Greenwich Pharm Inc                   3,544,725      141,216           25   T
Roosevelt Finl Group                    844,733       34,342           25   T
Schuler Homes Inc                     1,685,123       66,353           25   T
United Gaming Inc                     1,463,698       59,565           25   T
Medicine Shoppe Intl                  1,387,537       58,749           24   T
Quality Food Centers                  1,097,207       46,519           24   T
Smithfield Foods Inc                  1,601,749       67,220           24   T
Compression Lab Inc                   1,953,380       89,641           22   T
Circon Cp                             1,281,103       60,476           21   T
Copytele Inc                          1,918,702       93,230           21   T
Transamerican Waste                     641,807       30,517           21   T
UST Cp                                1,007,341       47,591           21   T
Urethane Techs Inc                      685,100       34,315           20



National Market

Security Name                            04/15/94       03/15/94

#3D Systems Cp                             93,906         12,275
3Com Cp                                 1,113,256        875,594
4tH Dimen Sftwar Ltd                       48,684        181,120
50-Off Stores Inc                       1,948,170      1,966,427
ACS Enterprises                           147,850        538,553
ADAC Labs                                 253,311        344,740
Advanta cl-A                              619,010        710,488
Advanta cl-B                              303,707        385,262
AES Cp (The)                              288,658        329,775
ASK Group (The)                           358,568        349,061
AST Research Inc                        2,604,122      2,564,351
#Abaxis Inc                               204,731         99,524
Abbey Healthcare Gp                     1,002,592      1,184,915
#Access Hlth Mktg Inc                     200,632        104,824
Acclaim Entertainmnt                    3,113,219      3,376,404
#ACE Cash Express Inc                       2,611        148,988
Adaptec Inc                               767,262      1,047,248
Adelphia Commun Cp A                      274,350        274,722
#Adobe Systems Inc                      2,765,199      1,404,531
Adv Tech Labs                             803,208        700,058
#Advanced Logic Res                       244,942        105,239
Advanced Polymer Sys                      143,434        297,090
Advanced Promotions                     1,578,350      1,322,612
Agnico Eagle Mines                        926,978        760,834
Agouron Pharm Inc                         198,704        121,623
Air Express Intl Cp                       121,850           N.L.
Air Methods Cp                            812,103      1,068,089
Airsensors Inc                             60,027        168,162
+Aldila Inc                             2,426,052      2,421,404
#Aldus Cp                                  76,101        678,784
#Alexander Engy Cp                        150,594         10,248
Alliance Pharm Cp                         783,155        849,679
#Allstate Finl Cp                         128,299          9,000
Alpha 1 Biomedicals                       629,309      1,019,655
Alpha-Beta Tech Inc                       453,910        393,029
Altera Cp                                 401,967        369,747
Amer Biogenetic cl A                      291,107        288,578
#Amer Intl Petro Inc                       22,974        708,168
#Amer Mobile Satel Cp                      70,120         10,830
Amer Pacific Cp                           756,530        751,267
Amer Power Convers                      6,312,311      8,344,214
Amer Software Inc A                       218,764        284,487
America Online Inc                        740,601        702,026
#American Telecasting                     152,892         38,413
#Amerifed Finl Cp                               0         98,767
Amgen                                   1,474,087      1,261,272
Amtech Cp                               1,672,640      2,259,687
Antec Corporation                         220,001        151,322
Apple Computer Inc                      7,138,044      5,912,048
#Apple South Inc                          255,950        109,367
Applebee's Intl                         1,395,951      1,475,322
Applied Materials                         696,289        728,942
#Arbor Natl Hldgs Inc                     114,058         58,633
#Arch Commun Gp                           314,770        156,464
Arctco Inc                                397,882        393,181
Argosy Gaming Co                        1,763,030      1,922,491
Arkansas Best Cp                          444,407        377,906
Artisoft Inc                            1,411,732        982,684
Asante Tech Inc                           712,109        531,049
Ashworth Inc                               48,718        118,693
Aspect Telecomm Cp                        851,542        780,661
#Atlantic SE Airlines                     184,000        103,850
+Atmel Cp                                 555,552        663,822
Au Bon Pain Cl A                        1,629,675      1,485,898
Aura Systems Inc                        5,583,214      4,416,023
Autodesk Inc                            1,088,694      1,240,072
Autotote Corp cl A                      3,485,674      2,094,934
Avid Tech Inc                           1,202,311      1,131,993
BMC Software Inc                          655,262        660,737
BPI Packaging Tech                        379,290        322,967
#Babbage's Inc                            401,634        209,465
Bally Gaming Intl                         664,264        786,889
Banco de Galicia Ads                      438,138        266,481
#Bank South Cp                            321,840        108,353
Banyan Systems Inc                        349,090        366,418
#Barefoot Inc                             206,966         49,821
Bassett Furniture                         257,496        204,167
Bay Ridge Bncp Inc                         62,777           N.L.
Baybanks Inc                              171,912        128,525
BE Aerospace Inc                          271,775        256,720
Bed Bath & Beyond                         782,816        642,054
Bell Sports Cp                          2,112,308      1,956,479
Ben Franklin Retail                       252,910        310,669
Berkley W R Cp                            177,961        129,065
Bertucci's Inc                             60,816        172,353
Big B Inc                                 628,995        832,960
Bindley Wstn Ind                          595,998        567,082
Bio Tech Gen Cp                           423,572        401,726
Biochem Pharm Inc                         366,879        456,111
#Biocryst Pharm Inc                        31,990        156,056
Biogen Inc                              2,029,625      2,106,788
#Bioject Medical Tech                      81,842          4,330
Biomedical Waste Sys                      397,810        477,075
Biomet Inc                                524,815        617,113
Blyth Holdings Inc                        171,004        283,537
Boatmen's Bancshares                    1,336,440        953,824
#Bob Evans Farms Inc                      285,441        158,182
Boomtown Inc                            1,344,745      1,364,954
Borland Intl Inc                        3,774,846      4,460,662
Boston Chicken Inc                      1,038,932        919,679
Boston Tech Inc                           858,322        853,709
Box Energy cl B NV                        738,123        780,706
#Breakwater Res Ltd                         1,400        189,392
#British Bio-Tech ADR                      77,366            675
Broadband Techs Inc                       939,210      1,413,950
Broderbund Software                       281,383        752,142
Brooktree Cp                              116,425        207,264
Buffets Inc                             2,600,863      2,600,935
CIS Tech Inc                              567,913        582,798
Cabot Medical Cp                          489,814        514,879
Caere Cp                                  213,803        140,595
Cal Micro Devices                         243,572        404,896
Cal Microwave Inc                         609,669        619,568
Calgene Inc                               359,860        216,414
#Canandaigua Wine A                       326,099        166,429
Canterbury Cp Svcs                         33,249        110,128
Canyon Resources Cp                       785,107        608,239
Cardinal Health Inc                       187,361        144,182
#Care Gp Inc                               36,779        218,525
#Carenetwork Inc                           62,691          3,485
#Casey's Gen Stores                         8,868      1,116,664
Casino America Inc                      1,168,852      1,310,996
#Casino Data Systems                      257,475        133,522
Casino Magic Cp                         5,425,593      5,461,123
Castle Energy Cp                          374,847        438,140
#Catalyst Semicond                        100,883         29,050
Cell Com Puerto Rico                    1,329,456      1,319,235
Cellpro Inc                               330,854        458,921
Cellular Comm cl A                        527,656        527,359
Cellular Tech Svcs                        790,271        764,724
Cencall Commun Cp                         461,546        428,704
Centocor Inc                            1,507,506      4,532,386
Centocor Inc Wts 94                       126,200        187,812
Cerplex Group Inc                         352,650           N.L.
Charming Shoppes Inc                      552,837        565,671
Checkers Drive-In                       5,285,448      5,175,526
+Cheesecake Factory                       512,141        402,717
Chemtrak Inc                              282,311        264,371
Chico's F A S Inc                       1,519,758      1,339,332
Chipcom Cp                                286,563        628,942
Chips & Tech Inc                          395,253        296,038
Chiron Cp                               1,303,522      1,356,021
Cholestech Cp                             380,620        412,712
Chronimed Inc                             411,091        486,684
#Cidco Inc                                 81,439         14,959
Cincinnati Financial                      387,940        383,906
Circon Cp                               1,281,103      1,554,898
#Cirrus Logic Inc                       1,688,818        890,905
+Cisco Sys Inc                          4,429,758      5,565,290
Clearly Canadian Bev                      311,120        348,869
Coastal Healthcare                        332,793        272,763
Cobra Golf Inc                            618,532        618,978
Coda Energy Inc                            42,311         86,125
Cognos Inc                                 25,764         76,265
#Collaborative Res                        249,542         26,342
Collagen Cp                               456,205        460,294
#Comair Hldgs Inc                         228,325         76,150
ComcAst Cp A                              977,394      1,021,959
ComcAst Cp Cl A Spcl                    7,406,701      7,757,131
#Command Security Cp                       89,266         40,345
Commun Entertainment                      130,896         79,129
Compression Lab Inc                     1,953,380      1,913,613
#Compuware Corp                           292,098        127,281
Comverse Tech Inc                       1,003,478        796,754
Concord Camera Cp                         498,310        503,185
Cooker Restaurant Cp                      421,616        420,895
Coors Adolph Co B                         370,024        287,795
Copley Pharm Inc                        1,165,818        905,847
Copytele Inc                            1,918,702      1,992,585
#Cordis Cp                                442,975        222,599
Corel Cp                                  422,822        426,264
Cott Cp                                 6,730,932      5,833,379
Coventry Cp                               504,057        406,332
Cracker Barrel Old                      1,429,186      1,227,166
Cray Comp Cp                              688,737        688,451
Creative Tech Ord                       1,788,513      1,469,945
Crosscomm Cp                              559,991        390,533
Crown Resources Cp                        491,861        374,004
Cryomedical Sci                           999,177        984,169
Culp Inc                                  109,834        155,843
Curaflex Hlth Svcs                        169,919        272,596
Cyrix Cp                                  592,972        520,606
Cyrk Inc                                  600,248        422,625
Cytogen Cp                              1,022,699      1,082,970
DAKA Intl                                 464,482        339,959
DNA Plant Tech Cp                         402,318      1,007,421
DSC Commun Cp                           3,402,820      2,559,694
#Damark Intl Inc Cl-A                     126,520         48,126
Data Race Inc                             233,100        292,497
Davidson & Associate                      382,766        360,857
Dell Computer Cp                        7,810,022      8,374,125
#Delphi Finl Gp cl A                       85,623         16,751
Dentsply Intl Inc                         257,146        270,784
Dibrell Brothers Inc                    1,827,761      2,109,867
Digital Biometrics                        238,575        152,836
Digital Microwave Cp                      446,414        529,079
Digital Prods Cp                          177,467        258,391
Discovery Zone Inc                      1,158,353        979,936
Dollar General Cp                         425,851        516,047
#Duracraft Corp                           203,321         75,236
ECI Telecom Ltd                           195,256        146,842
Ezcorp cl-A                               872,842        693,431
Eagle Hardware & Gdn                    2,132,712      1,904,021
#Easel Cp                                     830         53,615
Education Alternativ                    1,182,969      1,075,692
Egghead Inc                               435,069        856,750
Elec Imaging Inc                          576,185        776,489
Electric Gas Tech                          25,213         70,563
Electroglas Inc                            23,298         66,980
#Electromedics Inc                         64,126          5,100
Electronic Arts Inc                     8,567,841      7,556,866
Emisphere Tech Inc                        546,875        560,182
#Emmis Broadcasting A                       2,184         91,000
Empi Inc                                  791,392      1,338,890
Engle Homes Inc                           661,557        668,937
#Envirotest Sys A Inc                     113,080         20,283
Envoy Cp                                  444,066        421,690
Enzon Inc                                 100,812        144,074
Exabyte Cp                                152,368        281,914
#Excel Tech Inc                           229,936        129,151
Executive Telecard                        281,085        247,128
#FHP Intl Cp                            2,404,508      1,167,234
Fiserv Inc                                 16,764         64,197
#FTP Software Inc                         122,567         24,453
Farm & Home Fin Cp                        681,142        605,138
Fastcomm Comm Cp                        1,388,415      1,316,993
Fastenal Co                             1,520,356      1,598,811
#Fidelity N.Y. FSB                        303,136         43,243
Fifth Third Bncp                          948,312        807,104
#Figgie Intl Cmn cl A                     423,501        170,877
First Alabama Bcshs                       325,872        246,336
First Commerce Cp La                      838,033        841,954
#First Fin Carib Cp                       110,719         60,463
First Hawaiian Inc                        109,945        198,255
First Pacific Ntwks                       849,277        871,392
Flagstar Cos                              565,502        571,141
Food Lion Inc cl A                      6,931,632      7,127,105
Food Lion Inc cl B                         97,918        308,989
Foremost Cp of Amer                        60,959        117,218
Forest Oil Cp                           2,109,855      2,170,461
Fortune Bancorp                         1,069,281        979,027
#Fossil Inc                                66,155          6,850
Fourth Financial Cp                       467,262        437,545
#Frame Tech Cp                             71,863         16,088
Fresh Choice Inc                          514,713        549,632
Funco Inc                                 575,454        504,925
#Future Healthcare                        249,573         43,227
GP Financial Cp                           705,183        457,764
Gateway 2000 Inc                        1,946,845      1,697,569
#Gen Binding Cp                           175,818         27,884
Gen Nutrition Cos                         992,791        753,570
Genetic Therapy Inc                       140,107        189,605
Genetics Inst Dep Sh                      380,311        367,628
Genetics Instit Wts                        15,375         60,558
Gensia Inc                              2,091,600      2,312,248
Gentex Cp                                 570,292        329,658
Genzyme Cp                              1,450,431      1,549,320
Giddings Lewis Inc                        597,059        491,071
Glenayre Techs Inc                        324,410        663,641
Good Guys Inc The                       1,047,066        602,198
#Grant Geophysical                          1,090         44,230
#Great Amer Rec Inc                       205,965      4,305,410
Great Financial Cp                        162,441           N.L.
#Greenfield Inds                           24,705        118,219
Greenwich Pharm Inc                     3,544,725      3,874,177
Grow Biz Intl                             302,527        243,068
#Gupta Corp                               918,193        467,860
Gymboree Cp (The)                         809,161        885,877
+HBO Co                                   594,642        414,138
#Hamilton Bancorp Inc                     188,794         17,363
Harry's Farmers A                         253,838        280,953
Healthcare Compare                        356,011        334,307
Healthcare Svcs Gp                        152,909        308,130
Healthinfusion Inc                        501,235        713,291
Heart Tech Inc                          2,038,505      1,725,063
#Hechinger Co cl A                        656,586        158,606
Herbalife Intl Inc                        446,476        389,818
Hollinger Inc                           3,544,907      2,884,300
#Hollywood Entmt Cp                       199,803         24,282
Hollywood Park Inc                        802,956        592,511
Home State Hldgs Inc                       64,616        164,629
Homecare Mgmt Inc                       1,267,202      1,350,971
#Hometown Buffet Inc                      450,604         51,181
Hornbeck Offshore                         303,203        187,412
Human Genome Sci Inc                      229,516        146,249
#Huntington Bcshs                         211,494         77,176
Hutchinson Tech Inc                       352,578        320,242
ICOS Cp                                   459,411        457,228
IDB Commun Gp Inc                       3,767,380      3,965,344
Idexx Labs Inc                            614,061        494,702
IHOP Cp                                   920,552        824,236
I-Stat Cp                               1,250,922        858,483
Image Entertainment                       436,765        270,015
Imageamerica Inc                           35,744        139,550
#Imatron Inc                              179,360         84,976
Imclone Systems Inc                       346,412        325,273
Immune Response Cp                      1,348,504      1,454,143
Immunex Corp                              790,059      1,282,976
Immunomedics Inc                          261,216        380,529
Imperial Bancorp                          121,477        210,533
#Independence Bncp Pa                     183,395         61,630
Infinity Broadcast A                      361,702        356,867
Informix Cp                             1,058,931      1,365,263
Ins Auto Auctions                       1,010,820        978,331
Insituform Techs A                        481,690        618,833
Integrated Devic Tec                      789,865        726,235
Intel Cp                                5,327,598      6,250,653
Intel Cp Wts                              578,302        642,787
Intelligent Elec                          278,847        195,905
Interactive Network                     1,364,136      1,449,460
Interface Inc A                           899,844        917,264
Intergraph Cp                             345,699        389,541
Intermet Cp                                41,601         90,224
Interneuron Pharm                         345,832        782,623
Intl Cabeltel Inc                         497,011        542,206
Intl Cablecasting                         259,723        241,073
Isis Pharm Inc                            129,242        175,693
Iwerks Entertain Inc                      692,295        688,543
JB Hunt Trans Svcs                        743,633        775,496
J Baker Inc                             1,962,965      1,903,999
#JMAR Inds Inc                             14,317         79,394
#Jameson Inns Inc                           2,595        175,214
Jennifer Convertible                      154,230        220,981
Jones Intrcable A                         577,711        576,945
KLA Instruments                           289,812        397,491
Kaydon Cp                                  47,077         97,520
Kelley Oil Cp                           2,044,140      1,994,891
Kendall Square Res                        970,396      1,263,330
#Kinetic Concepts Inc                       9,769         70,036
#Kinross Gold Corp                        182,646          7,450
Knowledgeware Inc                         359,266        342,992
#Koll Real Est Cl A                       131,956         72,880
Komag Inc                                 581,950      1,530,652
Kopin Cp                                  646,952        543,051
Kulicke & Soffa                           387,172        336,472
Kurzweil App Intel                        173,537        104,589
LDDS Commun Inc                         4,956,447      4,529,455
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                       858,538        784,881
LTX Cp                                    284,053        299,299
Lady Luck Gaming Cp                       807,613        667,990
LAM Research Cp                         1,285,661      1,383,147
Landrys Seafood Rest                      266,754        164,266
#Lasermaster Tech Inc                     377,291        171,983
#Lattice Semiconduct                      256,987        129,356
Learning Co (The)                         294,864        501,358
#Leasing Solutions                          2,892        256,961
Lechters Inc                              573,100        440,829
#Legent Cp                              1,176,066        493,831
Lidak Pharm cl A                          394,630        419,784
#Life U S A Hldg Inc                       30,488        125,589
LIN Broadcasting Cp                       112,673         68,920
Linear Technology Cp                      160,205        212,096
Liposome Co                               558,594        602,707
Liposome Tech Inc                         748,849        723,487
Littelfuse Inc                            996,671        947,539
Lo Jack Cp                                221,457        146,907
Lodgenet Entertain                        516,753        493,816
Lone Star Steakhouse                    3,510,014      3,243,850
#Longhorn Steaks Inc                      518,010        171,970
Lotus Development Cp                    1,871,092      3,597,667
#Loyola Capital Cp                         50,899          4,373
Long Island Bancorp                        50,000           N.L.
MCI Comm Cp                             3,480,244      3,428,347
MFS Comm Co                               172,509        119,134
MTC Elec Tech Ltd                         448,580        384,608
MTI Tech Corp                              92,100           N.L.
#Madge N.V.                               545,762        112,345
Magma Power Co                            254,650        310,451
Mail Boxes Etc                             20,784         77,709
Marcam Cp                                 409,081        258,514
#Marine Drilling Co                        21,597        168,607
Marshall & Ilsley                       2,015,510      2,128,844
Mastec Inc                                459,627        466,273
Maxicare Hlth New                       1,318,775      1,299,708
#Maxim Group Inc                          100,423         57,328
Maxtor Cp                                 613,988        594,771
McAfee Associates                         315,477        330,906
McCaw Cellular A                          412,738        394,694
McCormick Co NV                           313,341        264,256
Medaphis Cp                               746,346        616,764
Media Vision Tech                       1,920,705      2,340,868
Medicine Shoppe Intl                    1,387,537      1,089,400
Medicis Pharm cl A                        593,444        671,075
Medimmune Inc                             562,620        675,921
#Megafoods Stores Inc                      89,994         37,613
Megahertz Corp                          1,228,582        933,646
Mentor Graphics Cp                        487,369        463,476
#Mercer Intl Inc SBI                    1,411,637        394,656
#Meridian Bncp Inc                        494,261         26,151
#Meris Labs Inc                           157,856          7,165
Merisel Inc                                91,183        246,772
#Merrill Cp                               391,122        176,840
Mesa Airlines Inc                       1,110,278      1,117,589
#Metricom Inc                             336,785        177,112
Michael Foods Inc                         122,905        238,145
Michaels Stores Inc                     1,624,952      1,879,238
Michigan Natl Cp                          343,573        372,098
#Micro Warehouse Inc                      171,384         46,797
+Microchip Tech Inc                       311,823        413,180
#Microcom Inc                              27,062        146,221
#Micropolis Cp                            224,963        110,247
Microsoft Cp                            2,694,097      2,005,833
Mid Atlantic Medical                      502,479        424,089
Mid Ocean Ltd Ord                         677,465        670,247
Midlantic Cp                              588,663        528,313
#Millicom Intl Cell                       133,711        669,524
Mitek Surgical Prods                      400,083        439,809
Mobile Telecomm Tech                    8,669,200      8,676,250
#Molex Inc cl A                            79,086          9,594
Molten Metal Tech                       1,802,250      1,531,755
#Mountain Parks Fin                        20,469        107,417
#Multicare Co                               1,418         63,557
NAC Re Cp                                 258,969        291,610
Nextel Commun A                         3,402,490      3,997,490
NS Bancorp Inc                            394,443        358,559
Nam Tai Electronics                       252,998        246,619
#Nash Finch Co                             12,318        110,152
Natl Gypsum Co                          1,313,722      1,195,861
#Natl Techteam Inc                        130,298         10,645
Natl Vision Assoc                         767,730        691,850
Nature's Bounty Inc                       370,364        322,025
Nature's Sunshine                         429,587        289,897
Neoprobe Corp                             140,010        220,697
NET F R A M E System                    1,321,493      1,235,814
Network General Cp                        124,737        168,969
Network Systems Cp                        361,947        377,908
Networth Inc                              115,800        197,552
Neutrogena Cp                             547,388        455,644
New Image Inds                            958,450        994,766
#Newbridge Netwks Cp                      952,676        520,048
Noble Drilling Cp                       6,665,530      6,691,465
Noise Cancellation                        880,067        914,745
#Norand Cp                                 16,820        206,941
Nordstrom Inc                             897,165      1,054,013
Northern Tr Cp                            480,346        364,733
Northwest Airln cl A                       50,061           N.L.
#Northwest Steel Wire                     173,360          5,581
Novell Inc                              1,603,491      3,277,239
Novellus Systems Inc                       99,012        202,193
#Noven Pharmaceutical                      64,351          3,550
Octel Commun Cp                           634,697      1,383,662
Ohio Casualty Cp                          142,022        184,747
Old Natl Bncp                             314,793        291,614
Olicom A/S    E                           280,138        301,890
Olympic Finl Ltd                          352,373        360,229
Omega Environment                       3,401,968      2,931,509
On Assignment Inc                          26,145         72,992
Onbancorp Inc                             321,624        304,197
Oncor Inc                                 323,010        274,344
Oracle Systems Cp                       3,019,949      2,872,116
Orbital Sciences Cp                     2,344,386      1,602,287
Ornda Healthcrp                         2,597,881      2,272,600
Outback Steakhouse                      4,023,738      4,565,063
Oxford Health Plans                     1,817,103      1,657,343
#PDK Labs Inc                              37,657        302,612
PET Smart Inc                             972,806        806,656
#Platinum Tech                            267,802        115,577
Pace American Group                       206,273        124,045
Pacific Dunlop ADR                        313,653        359,028
Pacific Physician                         346,009        354,614
Pacificare Hlth Cl B                      422,849        510,614
Paging Network Inc                        861,420        671,648
Pairgain Tech                           1,151,147      1,174,411
Papa John's Intl                          274,094        231,370
Parallan Computer                         137,526         87,727
Parametric Tech Cp                      1,686,816      1,600,601
Park Commun Inc                           279,221        276,412
Partnerre Hlds Ltd                        583,898        536,404
Paul Harris Store                          34,175         77,885
Penwest Ltd                               279,460        264,997
Peoples Bk (Ct)                           780,434        718,745
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                       367,811        347,724
Peoples Telephone                         420,180        425,239
Peoplesoft Inc                            730,713      1,184,148
Perrigo Company                           480,596        459,969
#Perseptive Biosys                        219,530        121,110
+Petroleum Geo Sv Ads                     274,730        295,530
Pharmaceutical Mktg                       332,186        286,814
Phoenix Re Cp                           1,174,977      1,181,914
Phycor Inc                              1,286,174      1,171,502
Picturetel Cp                           3,130,142      3,551,246
Pioneer Gp Inc The                        253,555        155,810
Pittencrieff Commun                       749,110        800,724
Platinum Software Cp                      285,000        344,164
Players Intl                            2,725,618      2,998,869
Pollo Tropical Inc                        388,022        302,213
#Ponce Fed Bk F S B                        48,674          4,914
#Positron Cp                              149,400         69,900
#Poughkeepsie Sav Fsb                      97,986         23,519
Powersoft Corp                            985,459        664,424
Preferred Entertain                       271,185        211,161
Pres Riverboat Casin                    1,738,377      3,109,651
Presidential Life Cp                      411,839        434,886
Presstek Inc                              788,977        616,625
Price/Costco Inc                        3,917,473      4,833,653
Primadonna Resorts                        495,502        442,432
#Primedex Health Sys                      427,841        151,412
#Procyte Cp                               394,970        171,012
Production Oper                           137,561        182,624
Proffitt's Inc                            187,146        336,794
#Progress Software Cp                     125,544        503,504
#Protein Design Labs                      330,646        123,118
Proteon Inc                               375,563        256,408
Purepac Inc                               700,586        713,712
Puritan Bennett Cp                        725,001        909,196
Pyramid Technology                        315,937        439,539
Pyxis Cp                                4,512,132      4,851,431
Qualcomm Inc                            2,302,173      1,509,313
QVC Network Inc                           782,276        586,533
Quadrex Cp                                307,098        178,207
Quality Food Centers                    1,097,207      1,125,057
Quantum Cp                              5,033,577      5,126,677
Quantum Hlth Res Inc                    1,234,909      1,070,412
#Quickturn Design Sys                     100,913         41,663
RPM Inc                                 1,028,077        984,517
Racotek Inc                               232,495        179,594
Rainbow Tech Inc                          442,309        311,111
Rally's Hamburger                       3,023,939      2,982,252
Rasterops                                 155,743        258,919
+Raymond Corp                             330,985        279,263
Re Capital Cp                             497,638        475,019
Read-Rite Cp                              854,043      1,806,864
Redfed Bncp Inc                           146,763           N.L.
Regeneron Pharmaceut                       43,174        162,559
#Renaissance Commun                        64,745          4,850
#Renal Treatment Ctr                        8,495         68,937
Resound Corp                            1,767,817      1,564,831
Reuters Hldg Plc ADR                    1,023,238      1,222,951
#Rexall Sundown Inc                       325,267        156,103
Riggs Natl Cp The                         542,689        446,769
Roadway Services Inc                      646,318        542,411
Roberts Pharm Cp                          369,591        298,250
Rochester Comm Sav                      1,305,278      1,222,660
Roosevelt Finl Group                      844,733        761,007
#Roper Inds Inc                           855,451        479,222
Rose's Stores Inc                         261,229        314,039
Ross Stores Inc                           130,127        173,289
Rouse Co                                1,149,732        897,654
#Safeco Cp                                422,250        238,215
SCI Systems Inc                           730,518        947,567
Seacor Hldgs                              334,990        350,481
SGI International                         922,412        799,683
#SLM Intl Inc                             901,170        479,185
Steri's Cp                              1,092,466      1,375,511
S3 Inc                                    433,199        268,290
Sage Tech Inc                           1,015,489      1,134,795
Salick Health Care                        405,398        352,444
Sanmina Cp                              1,057,000        778,750
Sapiens Intl Cp N V                       723,510        803,661
Savoy Pict Entertnmt                    1,180,946      1,144,821
#Scholastic Corp                           24,527        141,939
Schuler Homes Inc                       1,685,123      1,560,658
Sciclone Pharma Inc                       582,690        337,649
Scimed Life Sys Inc                     2,265,950      3,005,643
Scitex Cp                                 457,279        488,140
Score Board Inc The                     2,217,950      2,037,700
Seagate Tech                            5,449,053      5,723,660
Sequent Computer Sys                    1,152,298        957,531
Shuffle Master Inc                        418,593        329,503
Sierra On Line Inc                        122,295        167,634
Sigma Aldrich Cp                          167,106        249,132
#Sigmatron Intl Inc                         7,035         58,180
Silicon Valley Gp                          15,940         61,761
#Siskon Gold Cp A                         240,724        117,248
Skybox Intl                               356,112        521,918
#Skywest Inc                               83,851         37,905
Smithfield Foods Inc                    1,601,749      1,563,632
Snapple Beverage Cp                     9,297,894      9,591,123
Sodak Gaming Inc                          150,687         97,343
Software Toolwks Inc                    1,033,788      1,065,452
Somatogen Inc                           1,886,401      2,092,062
Sonic Cp                                  201,581        116,790
Sonoco Products Co                      1,331,773      1,306,049
#Southern Ergy Homes                       15,158         61,898
Southtrust Cp                             117,442         74,334
Spartan Motors Inc                        281,158        293,286
Spectrum Holobyte                         345,771        359,403
Spectrum Info Tech                      1,817,656      1,644,691
#Sportmart Inc                             34,391        182,753
Sports & Recreation                     1,891,772      1,941,108
#Sports/Leisure Inc                        11,414         76,652
St Jude Medical Inc                       565,891        558,151
Stac Electronics                        1,461,043        843,023
Standard Microsystem                      996,768        659,390
Staples Inc                             1,529,322      1,719,231
Starbucks Cp                            4,302,250      4,106,234
Starsight Telecast                        415,170        414,814
State Street Boston                       726,237        906,040
Station Casinos Inc                       249,791        363,673
Stewart Stevenson                          58,643        141,209
#Stokely U S A Inc                         31,368        126,226
Stratacom Inc                           1,150,771        883,103
Structural Dynamics                     1,293,593      1,240,223
Stryker Cp                              3,968,986      4,260,878
Sullivan Dental Prod                       70,001        119,661
Summa Four Inc                             69,438        171,551
#Summit Bncp (The) NJ                     107,676         56,608
Summit Care Cp                            467,163        466,914
Summit Tech Inc                         3,163,315      3,150,234
Sun Microsystems Inc                    3,187,185      3,810,658
#Sun Television & App                      11,598         72,501
#Sunglass Hut Intl                      1,918,302        899,626
Sunrise Tech Intl                         695,725        612,981
#Supercuts Inc                            121,231         68,387
Supermac Tech Inc                         111,542        262,472
Sybase Inc                              1,761,094      1,540,642
Symantec Cp                               611,475        534,489
#Syncor Intl Cp Del                        24,882        156,364
Synergen Inc                              257,974        244,554
Synopsys Inc                              642,869        665,439
Synoptics Commun Inc                    4,480,606      5,161,843
System Software                         1,017,821        965,974
Systemed Inc                              361,723        369,802
Systems Comp Tech Cp                    1,156,720      1,143,036
#TCA Cable TV Inc                         370,512        205,363
TJ Intl                                   605,623        633,291
TPI Enterprises                         4,475,031      4,483,770
#TR Finl Cp                                13,975         85,525
TRM Copy Ctrs Cp                          143,990        251,017
T Rowe Price Assoc                        790,889        687,618
Taco Cabana Inc cl-A                      252,615        214,318
#Takecare Inc                             207,563         48,987
Telco Systems Inc                          37,575         83,507
Tele Commun Inc A                       2,626,876      2,219,681
#Telebit Cp                               426,867        106,032
Telxon Cp                                 583,464        643,560
Teva Pharm Ind ADR                        249,080        168,815
The 3Do Co                                846,505        912,509
The Men's Wearhouse                       410,341        270,582
Thomas Nelson Inc                         503,283        514,927
Thomson C S F ADR                         116,905        163,991
Todays Man Inc                            521,189        566,086
Tokos Med Cp Del                        3,718,247      3,813,298
Topps Co                                  188,944        303,478
Transamerican Waste                       641,807        665,302
Transmedia Ntwk Inc                       206,933        284,122
Transtexas Gas Co                          76,675           N.L.
Trenwick Group Inc                        314,199        238,243
Tricord Systems Inc                     2,072,703      1,709,953
Trimble Navigation                        433,532        451,133
Trimedyne Inc                             137,314        208,246
Trinzic Cp                                 86,238        234,833
Tseng Labs Inc                          3,005,704      3,288,769
Tyson Foods Inc cl A                      268,478        264,686
UNR Inds                                  162,635        105,186
US Bancorp Oregon                         647,928        738,297
US Facilities Cp                           30,391        114,800
+US Healthcare Inc                      4,486,202      4,753,581
#U.S. Homecare Corp                         3,723         63,531
US Long Distance Cp                     1,808,058      1,733,071
#US Robotics Inc                        2,015,059        676,302
UST Cp                                  1,007,341      1,012,932
United Gaming Inc                       1,463,698      1,603,927
Universal Elect Inc                       646,750        607,051
#USA Mobile Commun Hd                     111,524         56,210
VLSI Tech Inc                             255,675        379,648
Valence Tech Inc                          639,872        488,921
Valuevision Intl A                        289,467        177,235
Vanguard Cellular A                       278,293        260,694
Varlen Cp                                 338,927        330,264
Verifone Inc                              282,329        344,755
Vertex Pharmaceutic                       116,161        170,575
#Veterinary Ctrs                          391,794        195,972
#Vicor Cp                                  60,062         15,445
#VIE de France Corp                        12,375         70,791
Viewlogic Systems                         738,958        663,907
Viking Office Prods                       202,548        117,477
Visx Inc                                  369,651        338,824
WPP Gp Plc ADR                            549,064        545,162
WRT Energy Corp                           402,283        565,718
#Walker Interactive                       258,000         74,024
#Wall Data Inc                            893,794        189,354
#Wang Labs Inc Del                        412,906      1,870,134
#Washington Fed Sv Ln                      56,787          8,359
Washington Mut Sv Bk                    1,164,696      1,098,743
Watson Pharm Inc                        2,023,711      1,718,410
#Wausau Paper Mills                        91,420          5,637
Wellfleet Commun Inc                    1,002,932      1,870,408
West One Bancorp                        1,356,985      1,403,228
Westcott Comm                           1,096,914      1,240,710
#Western Publishing                       446,818        238,256
#Western Water Co                         408,437        116,556
Whole Foods Market                      2,031,896      1,654,014
Wholesome Hearty                        1,121,082      1,322,253
Willamette Inds                           156,314        280,389
William Sonoma Inc                        858,695        780,692
XOMA Cp                                 1,267,988      1,255,171
Xilinx Inc                                247,115        296,862
Xircom Inc                                367,338        252,444
Yellow Cp                                 226,610        429,958
York Research Cp                          787,929        779,956
Zebra Tech Cp cl-A                        156,839        223,735
Zenith Labs Inc                         2,991,125      2,777,937
Zeos Intl Ltd                             693,302        768,578
Zoll Medical Cp                         1,244,273      1,497,429
Zoom Telephonics Inc                      294,940        284,154
Zycad Cp                                  964,310        920,846
Other Nasdaq
#ATC Environmental                         89,127          6,488
ADV Mammography Sys                       221,375        127,199
#Advanced Enviro A                         75,325          7,015
Airship Intl Ltd                           58,371        129,266
Alanco Envirnmtl Res                      253,889        301,942
Alcide Cp Ser 1 Pfd                        50,432              0
Amer West Airline                       2,690,680      2,418,822
#American Complex                          56,234        427,682
Aphton Corp                               283,995        350,267
Applied Laser Sys                         375,642        355,536
#Armanino Foods                           172,479         81,835
#Aspen Marne Gp New                        71,062         12,742
#Automobile Protec                        115,010         17,657
Biocontrol Tech Inc                     1,504,363      1,421,015
Biomechanics Cp Amer                      307,855        281,620
Biomune Systems Inc                        54,922           N.L.
#Boardwalk Casino Inc                      79,151          9,775
#Boston Pac Med Inc                             0         68,534
Bradley Pharma A                          701,546        455,879
Bradley Pharma Wts B                      243,253        162,303
#CB Bancorp Inc                             3,012         63,446
CBL Medical Inc                            94,211        164,825
#CNS Inc                                  512,069        194,098
Capital Gaming Intl                       332,804        675,246
Centurion Mines Cp                         20,841         81,556
#Chefs Intl                                27,450        121,065
China Ind Group Inc                        20,700         69,315
#Clucker's Wood Roast                      48,386          3,500
#Comp Concepts Cp New                      91,965        455,902
#Comp Mktplace Inc                        106,193        497,920
#Cons Tech Grp Ltd                        144,781          4,058
Cortex Pharm Inc                          239,399        166,375
Diamond Entertain                         327,926        328,757
Digital Solutions                          52,151        154,743
#Diplomat Cp                               65,693          6,000
Dresdner AG Sp ADR                      1,165,340      1,240,978
#Driefontein Cons ADR                      68,635         18,968
#Drug Screening Sys                        19,171         77,727
#Employee Solution                         13,400         78,850
F&E Resource Sys                           27,956         94,447
Florida West Air Inc                      387,024        276,838
#Fountain Pharm                            68,821          7,253
#Franklin Cons Mining                         700         58,337
Free St Cons Gld ADR                      191,328        112,322
#Frontier Nat Gas Cp                       95,131          8,200
#Future Med Prods                          65,305         11,245
GB Foods Cp                               377,390        390,228
#Galaxy Foods Co                          126,977         30,846
Gaming Cp of Amer                         304,085        289,807
Gentner Commun Cp                         114,886        176,089
#Globalink Inc                            187,641         85,161
#Great Cntr Spon ADR                      205,209          7,054
#Hariston Corporation                      98,957         51,906
Home Theater Prod                         138,576        191,506
ICC Techs Inc                             166,791        210,380
#Identix Inc Wts 98                        54,225          2,925
#Individual Inv Gp                        113,763         49,293
#Info Mgmt Techs cl A                     129,330         22,800
#Infonow Corp                             142,342         52,050
Insta Cool Inc                             74,338        155,912
Interline Res Cp                           69,176        129,835
#Internatural Waters                       91,261          1,500
#Interscience Comp Cp                      13,786         57,499
Intl Gaming Mgmt Inc                      286,181        407,595
#Intl Retail Sys Inc                        2,830        128,841
#Intl Std Group Ltd                       711,569         11,000
Invitro Intl                              384,026        450,679
Irvine Sensors Cp                         765,245        676,904
#Juniper Features Ltd                     149,858         13,735
#Kineret Acq Cp Uts                           385         79,434
#LM Ericsson Tel Add                    1,773,355        439,282
Las Vegas Major Leag                       48,445           N.L.
Laser Video Ntwk                          113,034        161,609
Lasersight Inc                            147,798        198,390
Leak-X Environmental                      134,105         85,530
Licon Intl                                143,834        203,599
#Linium Tech Inc                              872        174,766
#Lone Star Casino                         285,345        108,618
#Malvy Tech Inc                            59,239          7,809
Master Glaziers Kar                        64,362        125,950
Master Glazr Wts A                         89,045              0
Master Glazr Wts B                        157,330              0
#Medi Mail Inc                             53,949          3,125
Medical Dynamics Inc                      310,068        299,626
#Metalclad Cp                             123,555         70,500
#Metallurgical Inds A                       5,437        100,684
Microterra Inc                            270,000        274,400
#NDC Autom Inc                             82,505         10,451
N-Viro Recovery Inc                       363,276        382,800
Natl Registry Inc                         275,013        214,745
#Natures Elements Wts                       5,238         59,860
Neolens Inc                               191,987        323,422
#Network Long Dist                         11,793         55,431
#New Day Beverage Inc                      25,321        102,828
#News Commun Inc                          107,146          2,479
Non Invasive Mon Sys                      127,265         75,200
#Octagon Inc                                7,200        153,370
#Octagon Inc Wts                           30,735        192,320
Oryx Tech Cp                               61,300           N.L.
Pantheon Inds                             765,036        906,424
Pearce Sys Intl                            77,900              0
#Princeton Dental                          14,809         93,800
Projectavision Inc                        744,467        779,198
#Ramtron Intl Cp                           83,519         37,000
#SA Hldgs Inc                             178,233            500
#Saliva Diagnostic                         96,996         12,400
Senetek Plc ADR                           339,565        345,555
#Silicon Ltd Wts A                              0         75,000
Site Holdings Inc                       4,026,541      3,650,963
Skolniks Inc                              471,285        319,883
Solv Ex Corp                              348,829        342,809
#Soricon Cp                               223,023         72,104
Southland Cp                            5,927,232      7,125,114
#Steven Maddens Uts                        55,075          1,525
#Steven Mdns Wts A                              0         91,795
Telefonos de Mexico                       258,317        175,558
#Teletek Inc                              119,563          2,604
Touchstone App Sci                        297,364        275,329
#Transworld Home Hlth                      84,831         20,700
Trinity Biotech ADR                        44,198              0
US Trans Inc New                           79,457        141,695
#United Heritage Cp                        35,181        170,496
#United States Explor                      15,265         74,770
Urethane Techs Inc                        685,100        688,199
#VSI Enterprises                           83,084        748,900
#Vector Aeromot Wt 96                      99,600         20,120
#Vector Aeromotive Corp                    74,270         25,300
#Village Green Bookst                      47,000          1,800
#Vimrx Pharm Inc                          199,815         14,311
#Wtd Inds                                  20,770        189,319
Wesco Auto Parts Cp                       196,203        144,121
#Winstar Commun Inc                       432,045        189,833
Wisconsin Pharmacal                       419,909        426,796
Work Recovery Inc                         505,807        551,656
#Xerographic Laser                         51,238        299,950


Short Sales Tables Explained

    These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month
of at least 250,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at
least 42,693 shares.

    Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

    T -- National Market System.

    N.L. -- Not listed.

    + -- Stock split.

    * May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations.

    Short interest may also be affected by options positions.

    # indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1994


                             795 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    April 21, 1994, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 21C

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: Rockville biotech firm GenVec to acquire Theragen

BYLINE: Joel Obermayer, SUN STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Rockville-based biotechnology firm GenVec announced yesterday its
 acquisition of a New Jersey company that would bolster its position in
 developing gene therapies to treat disease.

   GenVec Inc. said it plans to buy biotechnology research and development
 firm Theragen Inc. of Prince- ton, N.J., for an undisclosed sum.

   Both companies are working on ways to engineer viruses so they can deliver
 doses of medication or new genetic instructions to diseased cells.

   Thomas D'Alonzo, chief executive of GenVec, said the two companies use
 different techniques in their gene therapy products.

   "We believe no one technique will dominate, we're going to need several
 for different applications," he said.

   Mr. D'Alonzo said the purchase would be in the form of a stock swap
 between the privately held companies. GenVec will then look to put together
 an initial public offering of stock at "the earliest opportunity," he said.

   Theragen's operations will be moved to GenVec's headquarters in Rockville.
 Mr. D'Alonzo said that with its acquisition and resulting growth, he
 expected company employment in Maryland to grow to 50 people, from 22 now,
 over the next two years.

   Company executives said GenVec will continue developing gene therapies to
 fight cancer as well as diseases of the heart and lungs.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             796 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     April 21, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 614 words

HEADLINE: ROSWELL PARK GIVEN $ 1 MILLION DONATION MAN WHO LOST 6 RELATIVES TO
CANCER;
 OFFERS FUNDS FOR GENETIC RESEARCH

BYLINE: By HENRY L. DAVIS, News Medical Reporter

BODY:

    An Orchard Park man who lost six family members to cancer has given $ 1
million to Roswell Park Cancer Institute for a laboratory dedicated to the
growing field of genetic research.

   "I wanted to make a lasting memorial to my family and help other people, too.
What good is the money unless you can get some benefit from it?" Charles J.
Palisano said Wednesday of the largest philanthropic gift in the institute's
history.

   Palisano, 80, is the retired president of Boss-Linco Lines Inc., a motor
freight carrier that grew from a delivery business begun with a horse and cart
by an older brother in 1914. He joined the now-defunct company in 1936 and
watched it grow to become one of the state's largest trucking businesses in the
1960s and 1970s.

   Roswell Park officials early this summer plan to name the laboratory after
Palisano's parents, John and Santa, who died of lung cancer at age 58.

   "The family was really hit hard by cancer. Some of
 the illnesses were very tragic. Long and lingering, the disease ate them away,"
Palisano said.

   Four of the couple's 10 children succumbed to other types of cancer:
Virginia, Victor, Samuel and Vincent, the son who started the delivery business
when he was 13 years old. A niece, Diane, died of breast cancer.

   Palisano is not a newcomer to philanthropy.

   Each year the Vincent and Harriet Palisano Foundation, which he helps
oversee, gives 100 scholarships worth $ 500 each to area Catholic colleges and
high schools, as well as to the Nichols School.

   The foundation, which over the years has donated more than $ 2.5 million to
the schools, contributed about one-third of the $ 1 million gift to Roswell
Park. The rest came from Palisano and his wife, Charlotte.

   He described it as a start for the cancer center, saying he may give more in
the future.

   "This very generous gift from the Palisano family will allow Roswell Park to
endow its new program in cancer genetics and to use the interest the funds
generate to support research activities of its laboratory," said Dr. Thomas B.
Tomasi, president and chief executive officer of Roswell Park.

   The laboratory will be part of the institute's new cancer genetics and gene
therapy program, established to capitalize on the explosive growth in knowledge
and technology related to the genetic links to cancer.

   In the last three years, genetic research has produced significant medical
advances by locating gene mutations responsible for hereditary colon cancer and
breast cancer. Researchers also are using genes in the treatment of cancer and
other disorders.

   Roswell Park currently houses several hereditary cancer registries, including
the Gilda Radner Familial Ovarian Cancer Registry, named after the late
television comedian. Such registries help identify people whose family medical
history suggests a predisposition to cancer.

GRAPHIC: Charles J. Palisano

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1994


                             797 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    April 20, 1994, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE C3

LENGTH: 337 words

HEADLINE: GenVec to Acquire N.J. Company ;
Rockville-Based Biotech Firm to Get Theragen in Stock Swap

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   GenVec Inc. of Rockville, which specializes in the burgeoning scientific
study of drugs that alter defective genes, announced it will acquire a
Princeton, N.J., biotech company involved in similar research and development.

   GenVec, a biotechnology company in the first stage of human tests for a cure
for cystic fibrosis, will absorb Theragen Inc. within six weeks upon the
completion of a stock swap between the two privately held companies. The value
of the transaction was not disclosed.

   The merger will give GenVec important research in the hottest new area of
biotech science, one in which major drug companies and investors are pouring
millions of dollars: gene therapy, the attempt to correct gene defects.

   Gene therapies under study work two ways. One takes cells out of the body,
inserts a healthy gene in them and then reinserts them into the patient. The
other alters a virus or other substance, turning it into a microscopic delivery
system that, when ingested by the patient, finds its way to a diseased area -- a
brain tumor, a defective lung -- and inserts a corrective gene in the cells in
the area.

   The combined company will have assets of $ 20 million and will focus on
diseases of the lung and heart, and on a variety of cancers, including those of
the neck and brain.

   GenVec chief executive Thomas D'Alonzo will be CEO of the merged companies,
and Theragen CEO Martin D. Cleary also will have an executive position, the two
said in a conference call from New York City where they made the announcement.

   The two companies are funded by private investments and by corporate
sponsors.

   GenVec has raised $ 9 million in private stock placements. It also has an
agreement with a biotech industry leader, Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco,
Calif., to receive $ 17 million over five years in exchange for the marketing
rights to cystic fibrosis gene-therapy drugs.

   Theragen has an agreement worth $ 3 million with Parke-Davis Co., a division
of Morris Plains, N.J.-based Warner-Lambert Co.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1994


                             798 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 18, 1994, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F40; THE POST 200

LENGTH: 312 words

HEADLINE: 98. HUMAN GENOME SCIENCES INC.

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   98. HUMAN GENOME SCIENCES INC.


   9620 Medical Center Dr.

   Rockville, Md. 20850

   301-309-8504


   FOUNDED: 1992

   FISCAL YEAR: Dec. 31

   REVENUE: $ 22 million

   PROFIT: $ 1.8 million

   EARNINGS PER SHARE: 15 cents

   DIVIDEND: None

   STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY: $ 75.9 million

   RETURN ON EQUITY: NA

   STOCK: HGSI (NMS)

   ASSETS: $ 82.5 million

   CHAIRMAN: William A. Haseltine (CEO)

   EMPLOYEES: 110


   DESCRIPTION: Human Genome Sciences, a two-year-old company, discovers and
catalogues human genes using a technique that is much faster than the one
scientists have been using to map the human genetic code. It plans to
collaborate with other companies to produce products based on its research.


   DEVELOPMENTS: For such a young company, Human Genome Sciences had a big year.
In May, the giant pharmaceutical company SmithKline Beecham Corp. purchased a 7
percent stake in the firm for $ 37 million. In December Human Genome went
public, raising $ 31 million after expenses. On the first day of trading, its
stock jumped 69 percent, closing at $ 20.25 from an opening price of $ 12.
Earlier this month, its stock was trading at about $ 17 a share.

   Human Genome said this year that several genes it catalogued that have been
linked with colon cancer will be investigated by medical researchers at Johns
Hopkins University.

   Human Genome was launched in the summer of 1992 by Healthcare Investment
Corp., a New Jersey venture capitalist firm that also launched MedImmune Inc.
and Genetic Therapy Inc., two Gaithersburg biotechnology companies. Genetic
Engineering News recently put Human Genome founder Craig Venter and Vice
President Craig Rosen on its list of Top 100 "Molecular Millionaires."

   All of Human Genome's revenue last year consisted of payments from
SmithKline. Early this month, the firm announced that it would receive an
additional $ 12.5 million from SmithKline.


LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1994


                             799 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     APRIL 15, 1994, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: Glaxo, Megabios Join Forces on Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Alex Barnum, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    British drug giant Glaxo Holdings Plc yesterday announced a collaboration
with Megabios Corp., a privately held biotechnology company based in Burlingame,
to develop gene therapy treatments for cystic fibrosis.

   In doing so, the London-based Glaxo enters a crowded field of biotechnology
companies, including Genentech Inc. and Genzyme Corp., that are developing
similar treatments for cystic fibrosis, a hereditary lung disease that afflicts
about 50,000 people worldwide.

   Gene therapy attempts to treat the underlying causes of a disease by
replacing defective or missing genes. In the case of cystic fibrosis, most
biotech companies are using inactivated cold viruses to carry corrective genes
into the defective cells lining the lungs.

   However, Megabios, using technology first invented at the University of
California at San Francisco, is using fat molecules to transport the corrective
genes. It believes such a delivery method will make the drug easier to
manufacture and administer to patients and is less likely to prompt an immune
reaction among patients.

   Megabios, founded two years ago and funded by Mayfield Fund and Institutional
Venture Partners, said it has begun testing its approach in animals. Glaxo, a
leader in drugs for respiratory diseases, will conduct the human clinical trials
and market the treatment.

   Glaxo will have exclusive rights to any treatments that result from the
five-year collaboration. In exchange, Megabios will receive several undisclosed
payments from Glaxo and royalties on product sales.


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1994


                             800 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 14, 1994 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: GRAPHICS; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 111 words

HEADLINE: KEY FINDINGS

BODY:

   Thursday, April 14, 1994 KEY FINDINGS

   GENE'S ROLE:  The p16 gene, also called MTS1, is a tumor suppressor  that
appears to directly control production of an enzyme that stops  out-of-control
cell division.

   WITHOUT IT:  Significant amounts of damaged or deleted p16 were found in
patients with a broad range of cancers, including breast, liver, bladder and a
type of brain cancer.   FUTURE THERAPY:  P16 is a small, simple gene, making it
a likely candidate  for use in gene therapy if further research confirms its
role. Development of  a laboratory test for mutated p16, which would reveal a
tendency toward cancer or recurrences of the disease, could begin in a year.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006
