
                              1 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            December 24, 2010 Friday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 262 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy hope for damaged hearts

BYLINE: Richard Alleyne

BODY:

   GENE therapy could be used to repair damaged hearts and replicate the effects
of exercise, research suggests.

   Researchers have discovered that tweaking DNA can counteract heart injury and
mimic the effects of two weeks of endurance training. The initial experiment was
carried out in mice but the researchers hope that it could pave the way for
repairing injured hearts through muscle regeneration in humans.

   Dr Bruce Spiegelman, Professor of Cell Biology at Harvard Medical School's
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, said: "If we learned to manipulate this pathway
with specific exercise regimens or with drugs, we might be able to achieve some
of the benefits produced by exercise-related heart enlargement."

   The genetic manipulation of the gene C/EPB-beta spurred the animals' heart
muscle cells - called cardiomyocytes - to proliferate and grow larger by an
amount comparable to normal mice that swam for up to three hours a day.

   The mildly enlarged hearts of the mice proved resistant to cardiac stress
that mimicked valvular heart disease or the effects of high blood pressure.

   Scientists discovered only recently that adult cardiomyocytes retained the
potential to begin dividing and spawning new muscle cells.

   ÞPatients with advanced kidney cancer were offered hope by the approval of a
new drug that can extend their lives by eight months.

   The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence approved the use of
Votrient after agreeing a 12.5 per cent discount on the price with manufacturer
GlaxoSmithKline. It was thought that about 3,000 patients a year would benefit.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2010


                              2 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           December 23, 2010 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: ARM gives helping hand to Santa rally;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Rachel Cooper

BODY:

   DESPITE - or perhaps because of - thin volumes, the blue-chips climbed to
within a whisker of the 6,000 level yesterday.

   The FTSE 100 rose 31.69 points to 5983.49, while the FTSE 250 put on 43.51
points to 11550.16. Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads, said the
index "has never looked more likely to break through 6,000".

   Leading the charge was the designer of microchips, ARM Holdings, which surged
to a nine-year high.

   The climb came as reports suggested that Microsoft was working on a new
version of its Windows operating system for devices such as tablets, which would
run on ARM's processors. ARM, which makes chips for devices such as the Apple
iPhone, already provides the architecture for a number of Microsoft products,
including Windows Phone.

   Didier Scemama, an analyst at RBS, said such an alliance could be "a
potential game changer for ARM". However, JP Morgan analysts were not so sure.
They said the move would be unlikely to have any impact on ARM revenue for two
years unless Microsoft made headway against Google and Apple in the smartphone
and tablet markets. Nonetheless, the gossip helped ARM jump 36.8 to 440.3p to
claim pole position, while its mid-cap peer, CSR, put on 27.6 to 347.2p to take
the mid-cap crown.

   Joining ARM among the blue-chip winners was BSkyB. Investors piled into the
pay-TV operator on hopes that News International's bid to buy out the 61pc of
BSkyB it does not already own will get the green light. Their optimism came as
Vince Cable, Business Secretary, was stripped of responsibility for media
regulation after he was recorded saying he had "declared war" on Rupert Murdoch,
News Corp chief executive.

   Steve Liechti, an analyst at Investec, said he believed the probability of a
takeover had moved to 90pc from 66pc. "Given EC competition go-ahead and Vince
Cable's disastrous and very public implosion yesterday, we move our Sky
recommendation to 'buy'," he added. "We believe the proposed takeover is now a
lot more likely and move our probability adjusted share price target to 793p [it
was 700p]." BSkyB rose 14½ to 743p.

   On the second tier, Sports Direct International was in demand, gaining 8.4 to
162p, as Citigroup raised its target price to 200p from 165p. The sporting goods
retailer looks set to be one of the chains to benefit from the snow. Last week,
it said the extreme weather had been a "net positive" as customers snapped up
winter products, such as sledges.

   Other retailers, however, have come under pressure as investors worry about
the cold snap hitting sales during the critical Christmas trading period. Dixons
Retail slid 0.36 to 22.93p, as Liberum Capital suggested that the biggest impact
of the snow would be on electrical retailers.

   But HMV rose 0.75 to 27.75p despite Execution Noble slashing its 2011
earnings-per-share forecast for the music and DVD retailer by 28pc. Analysts
said they thought a "plan B" was required, with a focus on reducing the number
of stores, possibly consolidating more stores with Waterstones. "Could someone
bid for HMV?" they added. "We think yes, but the shares could halve again before
that happens."

   Back among the midcaps, Stagecoach motored up 5½ to 215.3p as Morgan Stanley
raised its target price on the bus and train operator to 232p from 205p. The
broker also raised its price target on Go-Ahead to £12.45 from £12.00, but kept
its "underweight" rating, sending the shares down 31p to £13.05.

   Missing out on the rally was Micro Focus. The IT company slid 12.6 to 393.5p
after news came late on Tuesday that the chairman and his wife had sold 200,000
shares. However, Panmure Gordon analysts were unconcerned, pointing out the sale
followed buying a house.

   Oxford Biomedica put on 0.3 to 5.7p on news it was to progress the trial of
its experimental gene therapy treatment for Parkinson's disease.

   Winners and losers (pc) Information Technology 3.00 Automobiles & Parts
1.80Electricity 1.59 Travel & Leisure 1.13 General Financial 1.10 Construction
0.97 Mining 0.96 Healthcare 0.87 Tobaccos 0.86 Media 0.69 Banks 0.65 Americans
0.64 Gas & Water 0.63 Beverages 0.60 Europeans 0.47 Support Services 0.42 -0.48
Aerospace & Defence

   Results round-up Company Turnover (£) Pre-Tax (£) EPS (p) Div (p) Pay Day xd
Artemis Alpha Tr Int - (-) 398k (727k) 1.3 (2.2) 1.200 (1.200) Feb 04 Nov 24
British Portfolio Tr Fin - (-) 1.5m (1.6m) 4.6 (4.4) 3.300 (3.300) Mar 01 Jan 26
JPMorgan Indian InveTr Fin - (-) -1.5m (-808k) -1.5 (-0.8) 0.000 (0.000) --Midas
Income & Growth Tr Int - (-) 902k (806k) 2.3 (2.1) 1.600 (1.600) Dec 15 Nov 24
Ransom (William) & Son Int 13.1m (16m) 362k (-2.8m) 0.4 (-3.3) 0.000 (0.000) --

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2010


                              3 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           December 4, 2010 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH MAGAZINE;FEATURES; Pg. 44,45

LENGTH: 4074 words

HEADLINE: A programme of clinical trials is bringing experimental treatments to
seriously ill cancer patients years ahead of schedule and giving them a second
chance for life.;
Victoria Lambert talks to three people who have taken part in the trials, set up
by Cancer Research UK, one of the charities supported by this year's Telegraph
Christmas Appeal.

BYLINE: Victoria Lambert

BODY:

   'Death is a huge, vicious dog. We are trapped together in an alleyway, and
every day I must stare him in the face, and challenge him. I must attack him
first, with all my strength, and every weapon at my disposal. I have to - if I
turned for one moment, if I lost my courage, if I tried to run away instead, he
would chase me and he would leap on me, he would savage me and he would kill
me.' Julie-Ann Gallagher is 45 years old; she has spent the past 14 years in a
near daily battle with cancer. Her fragile beauty masks an internal con-flict
between her body - where tumours ravage her lungs, breast, throat (one wraps
around her windpipe), and clog her bones - and her mind, which is still sharp,
decisive and brave.

   She has fought on many fronts: not only has she been determined to stay
alive, but she has also found the strength to survive the loss of her husband,
Alan, an infantry soldier, who committed suicide six weeks before her first
cancer appeared, and to bring up two children. Somewhere along the way she found
a deep faith in God; she also found an equally profound trust in medicine. So
much so that she has now been given a desperate last chance, taking part in a
clinical trial of an experimental treatment that may grant her more time - but
equally might not help her and might have side effects. The trial results,
however, will contribute to the development of better treatments for the cancer
patients who will come after her.

   Gallagher is a vital human element in a clinical trial programme, the
Experimental Cancer Medicine Centres (ECMCs), created in April 2007 by Cancer
Research UK. Together with the departments of health of England, Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland, the charity is jointly funding a network of 19 centres of
excellence across Britain, at a cost of £35 million over five years until 2011.

   The centres run clinical trials to bridge the gap between treatments that
look promising in the lab and therapy that can be given to patients. They speed
up what can often be a slow and expensive process. Before human trials, drugs
are tested in the lab to obtain preliminary information on effi-cacy, toxicity
and pharmacokinetics (what happens to a drug when it is applied to a living
organism). Then they pass through three stages of trials in patients: phase I,
assessment for safety and sideeffects; phase II, testing for efficacy and safety
on a larger scale; and phase III - a definitive assessment of how effective the
drug is, in comparison with current 'gold standard' treatment in a large
population group. No wonder that with new cancer treatments the average
development time is about 10 years from bench to bedside.

   The work of the ECMCs covers all types of cancer, from breast, colon and
prostate to the 10,000 Britons whose primary tumour location is impossible to
find; and all manner of therapies from those homegrown in the Cancer Research UK
labs, such as Parp (Poly ADP ribose polymerase) inhibitors, which cleverly
target natural faults in certain cancer cells and exploit them, increasing the
chance of cell suicide, to those created by the huge pharmaceutical companies
such as GlaxoSmithKline.

   Cancer patients taking part in phase I trials have already received all
standard treatments, such as conventional radiotherapy and chemotherapy,
available to them. As a result they have limited treatment options, and only
months or weeks to live. Other trials are carried out to test medicines already
licensed by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (Nice) for a specific
purpose - but combining them with other drugs or radiotherapy, or simply to
assess them in other cancers. For example, Avastin is licensed by the NHS for
advanced bowel cancer that has spread; scientists have been looking at ways it
could help treat bowel cancer at an earlier stage or even different types of
cancer. Until those treatments have also been approved by Nice, however, the
drug remains available only in trials or at an oncologist's discretion (the
practice of giving a patient a licensed medicine for a condition other than that
approved by Nice is known as prescribing off-licence).

   In either case the common thread of ethics remains - if there is an
established treatment for their condition already in existence, patients must
try that first. Experimental treatments still come second.

   Dr Sally Burtles, the director of cancer centres at Cancer Research UK and
who oversees the ECMC programme, explains that the impetus to set up the scheme
came from a recognition that Julie-Ann Gallagher, 45, who has lived with cancer
for the past 14 years, with her son, Carl, 15, and daughter, Sarah, 20.
Gallagher has been involved in a clinical trial during the past year while
superb cancer centres already existed in Britain, a network was needed to draw
them together and to encourage collaboration: 'We wanted to speed up the
development of new drugs, and we knew that by providing specialist resources we
could improve the system we had.' The programme is also an excellent way to
ensure that each centre can concentrate on its own oncological specialty, while
ensuring that patients get the most appropriate new therapy for them.

   Patients can be referred between centres depending on their ability to
travel, or receive their treatment close to home. Cancer Research UK facilitates
the ECMC programme, and in 2011 its results will be peer-reviewed, the official
test of whether it has been a success. Prof Ruth Plummer, the clinical professor
of experimental cancer medicine based at Newcastle University, believes that the
network has been enormously positive - in the first year, 400 trials took place,
by year three (2008) that number had doubled, and by the end of this year it
will no doubt have expanded exponentially again.

   'It has really made the UK research situation attractive to the global
pharmaceutical companies; one recently contacted me to ask if we had the
facilities to take on a major trial. If not, they would take it to Europe. A few
emails later, I was able to inform the company that we were more than set up to
take on the work.' Plummer also points out that Britain is the only country to
have such a network, although other countries are watching closely - and a
similar EUwide scheme is in the process of being set up. Agreeing to go on to a
trial was a surprisingly easy choice for 21-year-old Calum Elliot, because it
seemed a bonus - both for him and others. 'I was more than happy,' he says,
'whatever the sideeffects or results. It was good to think that my experience
might make it easier for other young people who are diagnosed like me.' Two
years ago, Elliot, a plasterer, started having episodes when he would become
mentally 'absent' for a few moments; his family - mother, Jane, 40; stepfather,
Craig Watson, a 43-year-old driver; and his 17-year-old sister,

   Danielle, with whom he still lives in a flat close to Glasgow airport - and
his friends spotted that he simply didn't respond to anything - conversation or
action - for two to three minutes at a time. These moments might occur in the
pub or playing football, or even when watching his team, Glasgow Rangers.
Concerned, in 2008 his mother took him to the GP, who referred him to a
specialist. An MRI scan revealed a tiny abnormality on the left side of his
brain and epilepsy was diagnosed. For the next year and a half, Elliot took
anti-epileptic drugs but the drugs did not stop the seizures, which had become
weekly. For Elliot the toughest news was being told that his driving licence
would be suspended (as it is with all epilepsy sufferers on safety grounds). Not
long after, he suffered an episode at work and was 'let go' four weeks later.
Yet he still didn't feel ill and played football with an understanding team and
league mates (who took him to the side when a seizure struck and allowed him
back on to the pitch when he 'came round').

   Then, in September this year, Elliot's doctors sent him for a routine MRI
scan; he was called in for an appointment to discuss it the next day. The night
before, he suffered a terrible headache and began vomiting. His mother drove him
straight to the hospital. 'I was given a CT scan that showed there was bleeding
on the brain,' he says. 'The doctor who I had been due to see the next day
showed up to see me. He explained he was a surgeon; I guess he must have known
already he would need to operate on me.' Elliot underwent a five-hour operation:
the small spot on the original MRI scan from 2008 had grown into a 2cm tumour,
and after 90 per cent was removed, leaving a small horseshoe-shaped scar on the
left side of his head, it was proved malignant. Of the diagnosis itself, Elliot
says now, 'That's something you don't want to hear. But you have to deal with it
and be strong.' His stepfather says, 'We told everyone that first day - friends
and family and especially Calum's granny; they're very close and that was the
hardest bit, I think.' Elliot was warned that his was one of the worst cases the
surgeon had seen - a grade 4 glioblastoma (one of the most aggressive brain
tumours at its most advanced state - cancers are graded 1 to 4 in severity).

   But Elliot was immediately offered the chance to go on a trial organised by
an ECMC locally as - incredibly - a blood sample showed that his DNA matched the
exact requirements of a new drug. He would be the first person in the world to
try a vaccine created in a Glasgow lab that aims to boost the body's own
defences. Prof Jim Cassidy, who runs the ECMC at the University of Glasgow with
his fellow oncologist Prof Jeff Evans, believes that there are tremendous
benefits to the scheme. 'We have always been good at research and at clinical
care here; establishing the ECMC helps us bring the two together, so not only
does bench get close to bedside, but we can also work the other way round. We
can take samples from patients who are undergoing experimental medicine and see
what the drug is doing to the tissue or tumour; to see how it succeeds or fails.
It's not trial and error, it is trial and understanding.' Calum Elliot needs to
have 13 injections in the course of the trial and has already had nine. He is
undergoing a course of radiotherapy that will be over before Christmas, and
chemotherapy, which will last until April. 'I was warned to expect side-effects
but I'm fine,' he says.

   'The injections which go into my upper thigh sting for 10 minutes but that's
it. I haven't even lost much hair from the other treatments.' Overall he feels
fit, eats well, and has had no 'episodes' since the operation. He goes clubbing
with his friends, drinks 'in moderation' and is planning a four-day weekend in
Butlins Skegness to celebrate the end of the radiotherapy. It will be a few
months before Elliot knows whether the experimental treatment has worked - when
he is scanned a few weeks after the end of radiotherapy; it will not be until a
second MRI another six weeks later that an accurate result will emerge - but he
seems to be focused less on getting through the course and more on counting down
the days until he regains his driving licence. In the South Yorkshire town of
Penistone, 72-year-old Terry Windle is also waiting to see if his experimental
cancer treatment has worked. Slim and healthy-looking, he could easily pass for
a decade younger.

   The home he shares with his wife, Kathy, 58, a retired pharmacist, is
decorated with paintings and photographs of motorsport - he has spent his life
designing, building and racing motorbikes. Next year Windle plans to cross the
US on a Harley-Davidson ('It'll be me and a couple of other fellows: one's
70-odd and the other's 84. We can't wait'). But before he can buy the plane
ticket, he has to have a check-up with his oncologist at St James's Hospital in
Leeds, an ECMC where he received treatment for his ocular melanoma - an
incredibly rare cancer that first appeared in his eye 29 years ago. 'I should
have died then,' Windle says, enormously cheerful. 'But I didn't even know it
was cancer. I'd had problems with my sight playing squash, and I was sent to
hospital, where they found a tumour on the back of the right eyeball, which they
removed. No one said the tumour might be malignant.' Then 23 years later, in
2004, Windle started experiencing unusual stomach pains; that August he was sent
for an MRI. A specialist told him they had found a tumour on his liver, which
they intended to remove within a fortnight.

   'I wasn't that surprised. A few years before, a friend had undergone the same
eye experience - an extraordinary coincidence. He had been warned it was cancer
and that it might spread to his liver, which it duly did, and he died. So I had
begun asking questions and learnt that ocular melanoma usually kills you within
five years. By my own reckoning I should have been dead by 1986.' However, a
series of regular monthly, three-monthly, and six- monthly CT scans showed no
recurrence. 'I just got on with life,' he says. But the cancer did recur in
2006, first in his navel in the form of an inoperable tumour, and then a lump on
the back of his neck. 'They sat me down in 2007, and said, it's months, not
years now. You're 69, pack in your work and enjoy what time you have left - we
can do nothing.' But they did suggest that Windle could join the ECMC at St
James's Hospital, and in the summer of 2008 he was invited to join a Phase I
trial for gene therapy for ocular melanoma which had spread to the liver.

   The trial was of a new treatment called a PolyMEL DNA vaccine. It works by
teaching immune cells to recognise certain proteins (antigens) made by melanoma
cells. Theoretically, the immune cells will then kill the melanoma cells. 'I had
three jabs over a few weeks - that's all - just like any other vaccine in my
arm.' While he waited to see it if it would work, Windle spent the next year
building a shining Lotus racing car from a kit. The results appear to be good -
his oncologist has told him the cancer has 'stalled'. And despite his tumours,
which all appeared in the two years preceding the trial (one in the muscle of
his shoulder, one in his breast, one on his side, two in the lungs and one by
the navel) he looks fit and well, and is planning another skiing trip. 'From
what I can gather this has completely stalled them; I can't be cured, but my
condition can be managed. That will do for me. It is extraordinary.

   I'm not even considered terminally ill any more.' Julie-Ann Gallagher, who
lives in Bishops Waltham, Hampshire, cannot make the same bold statement. Like
Windle, her experience has been extraordinary, her endurance inexplicable. But
unlike Windle and Elliot, she has also undergone lengthy bouts of pain and
discomfort - and she looks as ill as she is. We talk in her sitting-room -
family photographs of her daughter, Sarah, now 20, a fitness instructor, and
son, Carl, 15, who intends to take up an apprenticeship in plumbing after
school, are proudly displayed on a table. Gallagher is wrapped in myriad layers,
furry boots and a fleecy blanket. The temperature is nearly as cold inside her
small council house as it is out. Gallagher has spent most of her adult life
fighting cancer and raising her children alone; she hasn't been able to develop
a career or save for infirmity. 'I can't afford to put the heating on yet,' she
says. 'I told Carl, we must wait until it is really necessary.

   We simply can't afford it.' She looks blue-grey with cold. Advanced cancer
patients are not allocated winter heating support as pensioners are - an issue
that the cancer support charity Macmillan is campaigning on strongly. It is the
only occasion that Gallagher shows her frustration at her lot. 'I'm never warm -
the tumours in my lungs feel like icicles, and the only time I know the
sensation of heat is when I'm in hospital undergoing an iodine transfusion.'
Gallagher first developed cancer at the age of 31, in August 1996, when six
weeks after her husband's death (he suffered, she believes, from manic
depression) she found a lump in her left breast 'the size of a piece of coal;
one day there was nothing, the next this thing. It felt like it had smaller
tumours, like grapes, hanging off it. I have no doubt it was due to the extreme
shock and stress of my situation. I was the widowed mother of six-year-old Sarah
and Carl, then aged 18 months.' Her GP took one look and sent her the same day
to a specialist. 'The breast sister appeared with dread in her eyes - I thought,
I am going to follow my husband.' That was the first and last moment of
self-pity she allowed herself.

   'I thought, I must fight this for my children - they don't deserve this.'
Moreover, she wanted them to understand that, despite their father's suicide,
life is worth choosing. She underwent a mastectomy and reconstructive breast
surgery, but the tumour, which was a grade 2/3, had already spread to her lymph
glands. She underwent six months of chemotherapy, and began taking tamoxifen to
prevent it recurring. 'I lost my hair but I didn't care; I even stopped wearing
the wig I was given, when Carl pulled it off in the supermarket. Nothing
mattered but surviving.' Her breast sister warned her, 'It will come back, you
may get 10 years if you're lucky.' Gallagher shakes her head. 'That wasn't
enough time for me, but it made me start planning. I promised my daughter I
would be at her wedding, which, last year, I was.' She began to feel well, fit
and strong, and launched a business, selling decorative gold and silver nipple
'jewellery' for mastectomy sufferers. Life was briefly good.

   'And then, in 2004, I came last in the parents' race on sports day - I had no
puff. A few days later, I raced a parking warden back to my car, and lost,
feeling breathless.' Her doctor ordered an X-ray, and Gallagher admitted that
she had felt a lump on her neck, too. A tumour had appeared, wrapping itself
around her jugular vein and the windpipe next to it. A tiny patch of cancer
cells had somehow survived, undetectably hidden behind the reconstructed breast,
and had spread - not only to her windpipe, but also pitting both lungs. The
tumour on her side was cut out, but although she was offered chemotherapy,
Gallagher was told that there was no hope of recovery. 'When I said, "Don't you
bet on it," they told me, "That's what all the patients say."' Gallagher refused
to give in. She underwent a year of very gruelling chemo. Then, in 2006, her
oncologist announced there was no more she could do for Gallagher and told her
firmly that she should not expect to collect her pension.

   'I think if you get secondary cancer you become a nuisance; they know what to
do with primary and they know how to support you, but once you get to my stage,
it's so different.' Gallagher was not prepared to give up - she moved to
Southampton University Hospital, and after demanding to try something, was given
hormone therapy, which had to be injected painfully into her stomach to slow
down her ovaries, which seemed to be fuelling the growth of the cancer. By 2008
she was becoming more breathless. 'I could smell death on myself - my lungs were
filling up with fluid and I was drowning.' An operation to drain her lungs
worked but left her ill; she lost a stone in weight. A scan revealed the cancer
was now in her spine and hips, and her body was clearly too weak for chemo to be
considered. It was time to stop the agonising injections too - Gallagher simply
couldn't stand them. 'I was so close to death last Christmas, I know that,' she
says. But then a small miracle happened. '

   I was asked to join the ECMC trial at Southampton University Hospital for a
drug called zoledronate, which is given intravenously once a month.' Her
consultant oncologist, Jennifer Marshall of Southampton University Hospital
Trust, explains this is a trial of a bisphosphonate therapy, principally used in
osteoporosis patients as it strengthens bones and helps to reduce bone pain. 'We
have learnt that it possibly also has an anticancer effect, too,' she explains,
'hence the idea for a randomised trial.' 'And in Julie-Ann's case, while we
couldn't "cure'' the bone cancer,' Marshall says, 'we could at least put her on
the trial and do something about the pain she was suffering while hopefully
protecting her from fractures.' Gallagher recalls, 'After the first infusion I
felt relief. I just felt better, somehow.'

   But after six months, her veins collapsed to the extent that injections were
no longer an option. She was taken off the trial as she could not carry on, but
prescribed off-licence another form of bisphosphonate therapy called
ibandronate, which she takes in tablet form once a day. 'Although Julie-Ann was
not on the trial for the full period of two years, it did reduce her pain and
continues to - nor has she suffered any breaks, so I think for her you could say
it has been successful,' Marshall says. Gallagher is now busy planning Christmas
and looking forward to her son's 16th birthday, and then her daughter's 21st.
Jennifer Marshall is happy to keep looking out for new trials because, she
explains, 'Julie-Ann's defied the odds; we just want to give her as good a
quality of life as possible and keep her well.' Part of the problem with any
cancer is its mutability. 'Tumours change and become resistant,' Dr Sally
Burtles explains, 'which is why single drugs, however good they may be when they
get passed by Nice, are often more effective when we start trying them in
combinations with other drugs or radiotherapy.

   Plus much of the work done in ECMCs is the search for biomarkers: these are
the factors in our DNA that mean once we understand them we can start to
anticipate who will do best from which drug before treatment even begins.'
Highly personalised treatment is the future, she confirms. 'We call it
stratification: ultimately the aim is that every individual will be treated
according to the exact genetic code of their cancer. Obviously there is still
much work to be done, but I have no doubt this will come.' As for the ECMCs, she
admits that it is too early to talk of general success rates; that will be
decided after peer review in 2011, but she anticipates that the project will be
deemed a success. Prof Ruth Plummer admits she is sometimes in awe of the
patients who join the ECMC's nationwide trials. '

   It is very humbling to meet these people who want to join our studies; they
know they are often incurable and many are running out of options. We have to be
really honest about what they are doing but they accept that this is unknown
territory. They say - I know this may not help me but maybe it will help someone
in the future. It makes our centres very positive places to be. And there is a
very low refusal or dropout rate on the trials. It is unusual for anyone to
decide not to join in if they physically can.' None of the three people
interviewed knows for certain if their treatment has been a 'magic bullet'
either, yet all would take up the offer to do another trial. Even Gallagher, for
whom the future does not look so hopeful, feels blessed.

   'I am grateful for the 14 years I have had. I am grateful I have seen my
daughter's wedding. But you have to help yourself and make your own luck. Last
Christmas I felt I didn't have long - but I am still here and I have no doubt
that getting the bisphosphonate therapy has helped. 'Without these new drugs,
cancer would have taken me, but I am not ready to go yet. I love life. And I
still hold out hope for a miracle cure.' There are three ways to make a donation
to Cancer Research UK, Zane, or Dogs for the Disabled, the three charities
supported by this year's Telegraph Christmas Charity Appeal. You can make a
credit or debit card payment by calling 0870-043 3759; online at
telegraph.co.uk/charity; or send cheques/postal orders payable to Telegraph
Christmas Charity Appeal to: Charities Trust, Suite 20-22, Century Building,
Tower Street, Liverpool L3 4BJ (please indicate whether your donation is for one
charity in particular or to be shared between all three)

   'Without these new drugs, cancer would have taken me, but I am not ready to
go yet. I love life' Julie-Ann Gallagher

   'I was warned to expect sideeffects but I'm fine. The injections sting for 10
minutes, but that's it'

   'My condition can be managed. It's extraordinary. I'm not even considered
terminally ill any more'

   'I was more than happy to join the trial. It was good to think that my
experience might make it easier for other young people'

GRAPHIC: Photographs by Ellen Nolan

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2010


                              12 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            October 29, 2010 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; OPINIONS, LEADING ARTICLES; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 144 words

HEADLINE: Lifetime. cure for Lefties;
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH Established 1855

BODY:

   Scientists have given mankind many blessings, but the discovery of the gene
for Left-wing behaviour must be foremost among them. For now there is a
diagnosis, there can be a cure. Just think of it - a quick screening of the
unborn infant, a mild course of gene therapy, and hey presto! The disease can be
eradicated within a generation.

   Perhaps we are getting a little ahead of ourselves.

   But even if science falls short of an outright cure, it should still be
possible to ameliorate the symptoms. The gene does not automatically make the
carrier a Lefty; rather, it triggers the adolescent brain's reward mechanism in
the presence of novel experiences and viewpoints. The treatment is simple: lock
teenage sufferers in a drab room, furnished with the works of Hayek and
Friedman. True, their social skills will be somewhat stunted. But the benefits
will last a lifetime.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2010


                              14 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            October 25, 2010 Monday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: Ministers veto one-week cancer test pledge

BYLINE: Rebecca Smith

BODY:

   A ONE-WEEK target to test patients for suspected cancer will not be
introduced because of the cost and concerns in the Coalition that there is not
enough clinical evidence to support it.

   The Department of Health, under the Labour government, had planned to speed
up cancer diagnosis by reducing waiting times for tests from two weeks to one.
But following the Comprehensive Spending Review last week, it has emerged that
the plan will be postponed. The two-week target from GP visit to seeing a cancer
specialist will remain.

   Gordon Brown, the then prime minister, announced in April that, under Labour,
people with suspected cancer would have tests within one week. The Tories never
signed up to the pledge. Andrew Lansley, the Health Secretary, said yesterday:
"The Coalition never committed to a oneweek target because there is not enough
clinical evidence to support it.

   "Labour never identified how this target would be paid for or provided.

   "We are fully committed to improving early diagnosis for people with cancer.
Up to 10,000 lives a year could be saved if England's survival rates were
brought up to the best levels in Europe." Delayed diagnosis is one of the key
reasons Britain lags behind European countries in cancer survival rates.

   However, experts say that the biggest delay is from patients who do not know
the signs to look for and do not seek help from their GPs early enough.

   The Coalition is also postponing one-to-one nursing for cancer patients to
support them through their treatment. A review will be conducted this winter,
officials said. Cancer charities said they were "disappointed" with the
decisions.

   Ciaran Devane, chief executive at Macmillan Cancer Support, said: "Earlier
diagnosis makes a huge difference. For example, if you diagnose bowel cancer
early, nine times out of 10, you will live at least five years. Diagnose it
late, and it is only one in 10 that live that long."

   Dara de Burca, director of services at the cancer charity Clic Sargent said:
"[We are] concerned that with the NHS under pressure to find £20billion of
savings, dropping the commitment to one-to-one nursing care for cancer patients
will put increasing pressure on voluntary-sector providers to meet this need."

   John Healey, shadow health secretary, said: "What we have from these reports
is a developing picture of how the Government is falling short with the NHS on
each of the fronts where it previously made promises: to cut waiting times,
improve cancer care and protect NHS funding."

   British scientists say they are five years away from developing the first
cancer killing pill that targets the genetic flaws of the disease.

   They have found a mutation in some cancer cells that means the cells cannot
repair their damaged genetic structure.

   Scientists believe this "Achilles' heel" can be exploited using gene therapy
drugs in the form of pills or injections that further attack the cancer's DNA.

   The discovery of some cancer's inability to repair cells is being hailed as a
breakthrough that could mean the end of painful chemotherapy.

   The findings, by a team led by Prof Ghulam Mufti, a leukaemia specialist at
Kings College London, will be shown on BBC2's Horizon tonight.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2010


                              21 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            October 9, 2010 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH MAGAZINE;FEATURES; Pg. 38,39,41

LENGTH: 2869 words

HEADLINE: Darkness descending;
One moment your child has apparently normal vision; a routine eye test later and
they have a genetic condition that will one day lead to blindness. When, and
how, should they be told? By Sally Williams. Illustrations by Brett Ryder

BYLINE: Sally Williams

BODY:

   One morning in 1987 Stephen Jones and his wife, Lesley, drove from their home
in Osterley, west London, to Moorfields Eye Hospital in the City so their son
Ben could have his eyes tested. A nurse had picked up 'some problem' during a
routine health check at Ben's primary school. She was not sure exactly what it
was, only that he needed to be seen by a specialist. Stephen and Lesley were not
overly worried because Ben's eyesight was not noticeably bad. He had had some
problems reading the blackboard, and occasionally tripped over his toys, but his
parents put that down to clumsiness. Otherwise Ben was a normal eightyear-old
boy: he loved football, watching television and hanging out with his friends.

   The consultant examined Ben's eyes, then delivered the news. He was consoling
and deliberately used careful wording so as not to sensationalise the condition,
but said that at some point in the future - maybe in two years or 20, it was
impossible to predict exactly - Ben would start to lose his sight. Ben had
retinitis pigmentosa, a group of inherited eye conditions that lead to incurable
blindness.

   'It was a severe shock because it came out of the blue,' Stephen recalls.
There was no history of blindness in their family. 'I remember the assistant
saying, with luck his eyesight will remain good throughout his education. So, in
one visit you're going from thinking, oh, he may have to wear glasses to being
told he'll probably lose his sight.' Now they faced the dilemma of what to tell
Ben.

   Although he had been sitting across the table from the consultant during the
diagnosis, what had been said barely registered with him.

   (Ben says now he has no memory of that day; he says he was probably thinking
about football - he was devoted to Everton.) Should Stephen and Lesley tell
their son what lay ahead and allow him to prepare for the future? Ben was
obsessed with sport and his dream was to play competitive rugby or football. Or
should they keep quiet about the timebomb in 'THE FACT ALWAYS MADE IT BUT TWO
DISTANT WHEN store? After all, how do you explain to a child that he has been
sentenced to inevitable darkness? The issue of disclosure, of what to reveal to
whom and when, is increasingly being discussed as advances in genetic testing
mean that people can be forewarned of their future. The success of the Human
Genome Project, which mapped man's entire genetic code, has made it possible to
detect hereditary diseases that develop later in life. Huntington's disease, for
example, which is nontreatable and fatal, and which does not typically develop
until middle age, can now be picked up in the womb and, in the case of IVF, even
before with 'pre-implantation genetic diagnosis' - embryo screening; likewise,
BRCA, the gene known to dramatically increase the risk of breast cancer.

   Dr Ruth Newbury-Ecob, a consultant in clinical genetics at University
Hospitals Bristol, points out that the dilemma facing Ben's family 'is where a
child has a diagnosis and it's a question of the age at which they're made aware
of that.' What she sees in her clinic are parents with a strong family history
of a genetic disease seeking a 'predictive' test: has their child inherited the
disease or not? The technicalities of a genetic test are fairly simple, but its
human implications are painful and complex and often lead to heart-rending
decisions. Individuals with a serious genetic disease in the family now have a
choice. Do they live in hope? Or do they take the test, and then, if it is
positive, spend the next 20 years knowing that death or incapacity approaches?

   How does knowing affect an individual's decision about a job, a partner,
having children? There is soul searching for the parents of children who test
positive, without a doubt. But what of those who do the testing? 'It can be
difficult to stand back and observe a parent withholding information from their
child, particularly in early teens when they are thinking about their future and
you are aware they don't know the full picture,' Sophie Devery, a genetic
counsellor at Moorfields, says. Most parents do tell their children, she adds,
'but obviously we can't get involved because that is the parents' decision.'
'It's very difficult for parents to balance the diffi-culty of telling their
child they have tested positive,' Dr Newbury-Ecob acknowledges, 'the distress
that may cause, the anxiety for the child, and how it affects the parent/child
relationship, against the long term, where if they choose not to discuss things
and the child finds out through a third party, that can be very damaging for the
relationship because of the breakdown of trust.'

   Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) causes the slow disintegration of retinal cells:
first the rods, which enable vision in low-light conditions (the first symptom
of RP is typically night blindness); then the cones, which detect light and
colour. As time goes on, many sufferers are left with narrow tunnel vision.
There is a lot of individual variation in the disease. Some sufferers are blind
by their early thirties; others can still have good eyesight into their forties
and fifties. About 25,000 people in the UK suffer from RP (one in 3,000), and
there is currently no cure.

   There are three main hereditary patterns: 'dominant' requires only one
abnormal gene from either parent; 'recessive' requires an abnormal gene from
both parents; and X-linked, where only males are affected after inheriting one
abnormal gene from their mother. Genetic testing for the disease was first
developed in 2003, but still only about half of all RP cases can be genetically
tested (the dominant and X-linked forms). And although it is inherited, half of
all cases come as an abrupt shock. 'Most of those are recessive but some are
X-linked, where there hasn't been a male born for some time with it,' Anthony
Moore, a professor of ophthalmology and an honorary consultant at Moorfields,
explains. The other slightly unusual aspect of RP is that it is not always
necessary to do a genetic test to get advance warning. It can be stumbled on
during routine eye examinations and confirmed by an optician looking at the back
of the eye (the tell-tale sign is changes in pigment).

   Ben Jones is now 31 and in his second year training to be a vicar at Trinity
College, Bristol. He is tall and slim with messy dark hair and an endearing
boyish buoyancy. We meet in his light-filled flat in a residential suburb of the
city, where he lives with his wife, Victoria, a stay-at-home mother, and their
children, Evie, two and a half, and Caleb, four months. His father, Stephen, is
visiting for the day (his parents now live in Newbury, where the family moved
soon after Ben was diagnosed). Both father and son exude a wry humour, which
suggests that this is their way of coping with the seriousness of the condition.

   Ben was registered blind aged 17, and has used a white stick for the past
five years. Yet he is not completely blind. He cannot see anything in his right
eye, but has narrow tunnel vision in his left, as if seeing through a straw.
Normal vision is 180 degrees; Ben's is two degrees. 'So from here, if I look at
your right eye I can't see your nose,' he tells me. 'In fact, if I look in your
eye, I can't see your eyebrow. So at any given moment I can only see a tiny
area, and I make up the picture by not just looking at one place all the time.'
In good light, he can still read, work on a computer and watch television.

   It transpires that both of his parents were carriers of the RP gene (the
recessive type), but did not know it. Consequently, Ben had a one in four chance
of getting the disease. (His sister has been examined, and has no signs of RP on
her retina, but she has a 50/50 chance of being a carrier.) Stephen and Lesley
decided to tell their son as soon as he was diagnosed. 'I'm not very keen on
secrets and holding things back from people,' Stephen explains. 'Obviously we
didn't spend our time saying to Ben, "You're going to go blind." You can protect
your child by being entirely open, but not laying it on thick, and doing it as
gently as possible. So when something arose like a forthcoming visit to
Moorfields or if Ben trod on the cat, we would talk about it with him. The thing
we did debate in the family was the extent to which we should tell his friends,
and we all agreed from the outset that we should be very upfront about it, so
when the need arose, people were aware.' Stephen spoke about RP at Ben's
secondary school.

   At first Ben's only symptom was night blindness at the age of nine - in dim
light, he struggled to find the door, for example. But by the age of 14 Ben had
lost the sight in his right eye and the sight in his left eye was slowly closing
in. At 17 he could no longer play in the school first team for rugby, basketball
and football (he was in all three), and he was also noticeably stumbling into
objects during the day. But he went on to study theology and computing at the
University of Kent in Canterbury, and then trained as an RE teacher, which he
did part time while also being a student worker at his church (where he met his
wife).

   'The fact that I've always known [about the RP] has made it easier to bear,'
Ben says. 'So at every stage I've known it's going to get worse, but two years
is the distant future when you're 10. I can still see my kids and watch football
on the telly, and at some point that is probably not going to be the case, but I
don't really think about that because I don't know when that's not going to be
the case. I suspect that everything about this was much more disturbing for Mum
and Dad than it was for me. And maybe that's partly because I am relatively
chilled out anyway, but also because I was told when I was eight and when you're
eight you just take stuff in your stride.'

   Ben's having RP also means he is a carrier and therefore has the potential,
if Victoria is a carrier too (which they don't know and don't want to know at
this stage), to have passed it on to their children. Does he want to get his
children tested? 'If one of them starts showing signs or even the vaguest
problem, then I'd want to, but I'm not in a desperate rush - not because I don't
want to, but because it seems like an enormous amount of effort to go to for an
off-chance.'

   RP meant Ben abandoned his dream of being a professional footballer, and he
regrets not being able to go to nightclubs - 'not being able to see or hear is a
very bad combination'. Walking without a white stick in an area he doesn't know
makes him feel vulnerable, but in familiar surroundings such as his home, which
is unmodified, he moves freely - he puts a glass of water directly in my hand.

   When talking of the difficulties of RP, Ben is predisposed to focus on the
comedy: bollards are, painfully, 'always at knee height'; he walked up to his
waist in a small lake at Kew Gardens; he fell down a manhole while on a school
trip to the theatre. 'I did the whole cartoon thing, legs twirling in the air,
before plummeting.'

   'Ben has taken RP in his stride all his life,' Stephen says, 'even when he
was going through his "Kevin" years' - Ben's teenage rebellion included riding
motorbikes and quad bikes around a friend's farm and subsequently doing badly in
his A-levels - 'but in terms of RP I've never heard him say, "It's not fair" or
"Why me?" or "This shouldn't have happened." He has just got on with life.'

   Ben says his decision to become a vicar wasn't dictated by his sight, but by
the fact that he had always wanted to be a vicar. 'In fact there will be issues
- I won't be able to be in a rural parish, for example, because I can't drive
and a lot of churches are quite dingy.' Likewise his decision to marry young (he
was 25 when he met Victoria) and have children was simply down to 'finding the
person I knew I wanted to spend the rest of my life with'. Has knowing the
future made Ben want to see as much as he can while he can?

   'I think so, but it's hard to say what is me and what is the eyesight
problem,' he says. 'I've always been someone who wanted to experience life.' He
aims to continue bungee jumping and white-water rafting no matter what. 'But
there has been some stuff I wanted to do before going blind. I will be forever
grateful that whatever happens, I got to see my children.'

   Not long after meeting Ben I went to see Tom Walker, a pharmacist, 39, in
Newcastle. He is married to Elizabeth, a graphic designer, and they have three
children, Charlie, 10, Hannah, eight, and Emily, four. Hannah was diagnosed with
RP when she was three and a half. Both Tom and his wife are carriers of the
recessive form of RP, and so have a one in four chance of having a child with
RP.

   'I noticed Hannah didn't see particularly well in the dark,' Tom says. When
he read her a bedtime story and the light was low, she couldn't see the pictures
on the page. If her teddy bear dropped off her bed, she couldn't find it. Their
GP referred them to a consultant at the eye hospital who diagnosed fastacting
RP, where the degeneration is rapid. 'They told us she would be severely
visually impaired by school age.' Tom and Elizabeth were devastated. Hannah had
just started nursery.

   The vexing question was what to tell Hannah. 'You carry the responsibility
for a child at that age,' Tom says. 'She wasn't old enough to understand.' So
they did not discuss it with her. And they still have not discussed it with her,
partly because Hannah's predicted deterioration has yet to happen. 'She is
long-sighted but no more or less than any other child in her school who wears
glasses,' Tom says. Hannah is the sort who loves to put on shinpads and kick
footballs. 'It's only a matter of time, we know that,' he says .

   So will they discuss it with her? 'What's the trigger?' Tom says. 'Is it four
and a half, five and a half, six? When would you consider a child to be old
enough to cope with knowing that she will go blind?' Tom's eyes fill with tears.
He is heartbroken and confused. 'It's hard for us to accept and that's why I'd
like to tell her on the day they find a cure, because that is easier to deal
with.'

   There are two treatments currently in clinical trials in Britain: gene
therapy, where good copies of the gene that is faulty are injected into the
retina; and artificial retinas or the 'bionic eye', where an electronic chip
sits on the retina stimulating light-sensitive cells. Neither offers a complete
cure and neither is imminently available on the market, but both are the focus
of widespread hope. Tom says that he and his wife rehearse telling Hannah in
their minds. But not telling her has advantages. 'The innocence of childhood,'
he says, 'Protecting your child. Would you want to know that you were about to
step out of that door and get killed by a bus? Most people wouldn't want to know
the future, you just want to live life to the full. That is what I want to do
with my daughter. I want her to live life to the full.'

   He adds that both sets of grandparents agree that not telling Hannah yet is
the right thing to do. As do friends and other members of the family. The only
person who disagrees is the consultant who diagnosed Hannah's condition. 'He's
advised what he would do in my situation - tell her - but respects my decision
not to,' Tom says. Most parents explain in a simple way once their child is at
school, Prof Moore says, but 'there is a minority who do not like to discuss it.
There are some families where even the grandparents do not want to talk about
it. They feel very guilty.'

   But not telling opens up other problems. Hannah has to be removed from the
consulting-room during discussions at her yearly check-ups and has started to
ask why 'Daddy has gone back to talk with the man'. And the fact that they have
con- fided in close family, friends and teachers (so Hannah can sit at the front
of the class to see the blackboard) means that there is the potential for
information to leak out.

   'It's a bit of a tightrope we walk because we don't want Hannah to find out
in the playground from another child whose parents have discussed it with
someone else,' Tom says. And not telling requires ingenuity. Hannah has started
to ask questions about why she cannot see as well as her friends at night. So
far her parents have answered by saying everyone is different - 'kind of
skirting around the issue'.

   'It would be very easy to bury your head completely and that would not be the
right thing,' Tom says, 'because when we do talk to Hannah about her eye
condition she is going to want to know what we did. Did we try to look for a
cure? Did we try to raise money to help with research? How far did we go on her
behalf knowing what we knew? So we do sponsored events and charity things and
I'm involved in the RP society for that reason.' Tom swallows hard. 'Just to
explain to her when she's older that we tried to do things... tried to help her,
even though she didn't know.'

   RP Fighting Blindness (the British Retinitis Pigmentosa Society): 0845-123
2354; brps.org.uk. The Walker family's names have been changed

   'THE FACT THAT I'VE ALWAYS KNOWN HAS MADE IT EASIER. BUT TWO YEARS IS THE
DISTANT FUTURE WHEN YOU'RE 10'

   'WHEN WOULD YOU CONSIDER A CHILD TO BE OLD ENOUGH TO COPE WITH KNOWING THAT
SHE WILL GO BLIND?

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2010


                              22 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             October 1, 2010 Friday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; OPINION, COLUMNS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: It's not my fault, Sir, it's in my genes...;
The latest report on ADHD will be seized on as a ready excuse for bad behaviour,
says Theodore Dalrymple

BYLINE: Theodore Dalrymple

BODY:

   It is always tempting to ascribe bad behaviour, whether our own or someone
else's, to an external factor, which reassures us that no one is really to
blame: the fault, dear Brutus, lies in our genes, not in ourselves.

   We are now being asked to believe, thanks to a study in The Lancet, that
children who are disobedient and defiant, who rush around and scream and break
things, are primarily the victims of their genetic inheritance. This holds out
the hope that a technical solution will be found to such problems as
recalcitrance in the classroom, much as hi-tech weapons hold out the mirage of
war without death.

   That some children suffer from Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder,
probably of organic and neurological origin, seems certain. But the problem with
conditions that are diagnosed purely by observation and reports of behaviour,
without any clear biological marker such as an abnormality in a blood test, is
that they tend to seep through the population like ink through blotting paper.

   We have seen this clearly with the diagnosis of depression, which was once an
uncommon but very serious condition. Now it is a diagnosis that has effectively
banished the word "unhappiness" from the English language, at least as it is
used in doctors' surgeries and in hospitals. Depression - that is to say, all
forms of human unhappiness - has become a technical problem, to be solved by
medication or by some other technique.

   The problem with this approach is that it encourages the hope of a quick and
easy solution, to be supplied by others, and averts our gaze from unpleasant
realities. This is something that we are naturally inclined towards in any case.
Neither death nor the sun can be stared at for long, said La Rochefoucauld; nor
can the behaviour of many British children, nor can the causes of that behaviour
or the society in which they operate. It is much less troubling to blame it all
on the DNA, and hope that one day genetic engineering will take care of
everything for us, either by prenatal testing, or gene therapy, or
pharmacotherapy.

   Of course, there are a restricted number of cases in which any or all of
these things might offer some hope. But it ought always to be remembered that
human behaviour is very rarely the result of genes alone, given that they ought
to have the same effect whatever the environment. When a teacher draws the
attention of a parent to the misbehaviour of his child in class, it is not his
or her genes that increasingly make the parent take the child's side against the
teacher. It has far more to do with the prevailing culture - and a very
unpleasant culture it often is.

   What seems to have happened is that parents have lost the awareness that they
had for decades - if not for centuries - that concentration and selfdiscipline
do not come naturally to children, and have to be taught (as well, sometimes, as
enforced).

   Left to themselves, children (with a few exceptions) do not learn or develop
these things. But increasingly, children are being left to themselves, de facto
if not de jure. Even without the constant stream of electronic stimulation to
which they are subjected - far more British children have a television in their
bedroom than a biological father living at home throughout their childhood - the
default setting for children, as it were, is attention deficit.

   The tragedy of yesterday's report is that the rumour of a genetic causation
of inattention will spread through the population, and let it off the hook as
far as its own responsibility is concerned. It wasn't Johnny who didn't do his
homework; it was his genes.

   Theodore Dalrymple is a former doctor, and the author of 'Spoilt Rotten: The
Toxic Cult of Sentimentality' (Gibson Square) Comment on Theodore Dalrymple's
view at telegraph.co.uk/personalview

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2010


                              23 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           September 24, 2010 Friday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 2973 words

HEADLINE: World Service and British Council face nervous wait

BYLINE: Andrew Porter

BODY:

   NINETY-FOUR quangos and other public bodies face an anxious three-week wait
to see whether they escape abolition or face severe cuts to their budgets.

   According to the list seen by The Daily Telegraph, there are several
well-known organisations whose future has yet to be finalised, including the BBC
World Service, the British Council, the Design Council, the Competition
Commission and the Student Loans Company.

   The World Service is not funded by the licence fee but comes under the remit
of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. It receives £272million each year from
the Government to fund its Englishlanguage services across the globe.

   It has already started looking at how it can save money before it is ordered
to do so by ministers. Its commitment to broadcast regular drama will suffer and
it has been reported that the World Service is likely to ditch its weekly BBC
Proms programme and the tennis highlights it runs during Wimbledon fortnight.

   A BBC spokesman said: "Like all of the public sector, BBC World Service is
having to respond to the challenges of an increasingly diffi-cult financial
climate at home and abroad. These are tough decisions, taken carefully and with
great thought.

   "We acknowledge that they will not be popular with some of our audience and
we share their disappointment."

   The abolition of the British Council would be welcomed by many. It was
created more than 70 years ago to stage lectures on Shakespeare and Jane Austen,
and to spread the use of the English language. Critics have accused it of being
hijacked and used to promote causes such as climate change. It was attacked two
years ago for spending £50,000 on changing the typeface on its literature. Lord
Kinnock, the former Labour leader, has previously been chairman of the British
Council. The Design Council is less controversial and is one of the oldest
quangos under threat, having been created in 1944. It receives £6.2million from
taxpayers.

   The future of the publicly-funded National Museums and Galleries service,
which offers the public free admission to some of the country's best-known
cultural venues, is still in doubt, the Cabinet Office document shows.

   There are 16 galleries in this category - including the Natural History
Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the Tate Galleries and the National Railway
Museum. They are all publicy funded by the Department of Culture, Media and
Sport and receive rebates of VAT in order to enable them to have free admission.

   Other bodies that are likely to survive but face significant budget cuts are
the Environment Agency, the Energy Savings Trust and the Fuel Poverty Advisory
Group.

   Also included in the list of those bodies under review is the Supreme Court,
which has been in existence for less than a year, although its inclusion is in
relation to some of the functions it performs and there is no chance of it being
abolished.

   The post of Chief Coroner - which was created to try to stop a repeat of the
Harold Shipman case - is expected to be scrapped, although officially it is
still "under review".

   The Ministry of Justice will be forced to explain to the judge who had been
provisionally given the role that he will no longer be needed.

   A review just before the election identified weaknesses in the system of
death certification. The Shipman Inquiry also highlighted six years ago that
loopholes in the system had allowed the family doctor from Hyde, near
Manchester, to cover his tracks by signing death certificates himself, avoiding
the involvement of a coroner.

   Bodies to be abolished

   (177 organisations)

   >> Administrative Justice and Tribunal Council

   >> Advisory Board on the Registration of Homeopathic Products

   >> Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens

   >> Advisory Committee on Antimicrobial Resistance and Healthcare Associated
Infections

   >> Advisory Committee on Borderline Substances

   >> Advisory Committee on Carbon Abatement Technologies

   >> Advisory Committee on Historic Wreck Sites

   >> Advisory Committee on National Historic Ships

   >> Advisory Committee on Organic Standards

   >> Advisory Committee on Packaging

   >> Advisory Committee on Pesticides

   >> Advisory Committee on the Government Art Collection

   >> Advisory Committee on the Safety of Blood, Tissues and Organs

   >> Advisory Council on Libraries

   >> Advisory Group on Hepatitis

   >> Advisory Panel on Local Innovation Awards

   >> Advisory Panel on Standards for the Planning Inspectorate

   >> Agricultural Dwelling House Committees (16 bodies)

   >> Agricultural Wages Board for England and Wales

   >> Agricultural Wages Committees (15 bodies)

   >> Air Quality Expert Group

   >> Alcohol Education and Research Council

   >> Animal Welfare Advisory Committee

   >> Appointments Commission

   >> Audit Commission

   >> British Educational Communications and Technology Agency

   >> British Nuclear Fuels

   >> British Shipbuilders

   >> British Waterways

   >> Capacity Builders

   >> Caribbean Board

   >> Churches Conservation Trust

   >> Commission for Integrated Transport

   >> Commission for Rural Communities

   >> Commissioner for the Compact

   >> Committee on Agricultural Valuation

   >> Committee on Carcogenicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the
Environment

   >> Committee on Medical Effects of Air Pollutants

   >> Committee on Medical Aspects of Radiation in the Environment

   >> Committee on Mutagenicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the
Environment

   >> Committee on the Safety of Devices

   >> Commons Commissioners

   >> Consular Stakeholder Panel

   >> Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence

   >> Courts Boards (19 bodies)

   >> Crown Court Rule Committee

   >> Cycling England

   >> Darwin Advisory Committee

   >> Disability Employment Advisory Committee

   >> Disability Living/Attendance Allowance Advisory Board

   >> Disabled Persons' Transport Advisory Committee

   >> Expert Advisory Group on HIV/Aids

   >> Expert Panel on Air Quality Standards

   >> Farm Animal Welfare Council

   >> Food from Britain

   >> Foreign Compensation Commission

   >> Gene Therapy Advisory Committee

   >> General Social Care Council

   >> General Teaching Council for England

   >> Genetics and Insurance Committee

   >> Government Hospitality Advisory Committee on the Purchase of Wine

   >> Government Strategic Marketing Advisory Board

   >> Health Protection Agency

   >> Hearing Aid Council

   >> Herbal Medicines Advisory Committee

   >> HM Inspectorate of Court Administration

   >> Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority

   >> Human Genetics Commission

   >> Human Tissue Authority

   >> Independent Advisory Group of Sexual Health and HIV

   >> Independent Advisory Group on Teenage Pregnancy

   >> Independent Living Fund

   >> Independent Review Panel for the Classification of Borderline Products

   >> Independent Review Panel on the Advertising of Medicines

   >> Infrastructure Planning Commission

   >> Inland Waterways Advisory Council

   >> Insolvency Practitioners Tribunal

   >> Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisations

   >> Legal Deposit Advisory Panel

   >> Legal Services Commission

   >> Legal Services Ombudsman

   >> London Thames Gateway Development Corporation*

   >> Main Honours Advisory Committee

   >> Magistrates' Court Rule Committee

   >> Museums, Libraries and Archives Council

   >> National Housing and Planning Advice Unit

   >> National Information Governance Board

   >> National Joint Registry Steering Committee

   >> National Policing Improvement Agency

   >> National Standing Committee for Farm Animal Genetic Resources

   >> National Tenant Voice

   >> National Endowment for Science, Technology and Arts

   >> Office for the Civil Society Advisory Bodies

   >> Olympic Park Legacy Company*

   >> Pesticide Residues Committee

   >> Public Guardian Board

   >> Qualifications and Curriculum Development Agency

   >> Railway Heritage Committee

   >> Regional Development Agencies (8 bodies)

   >> Renewables Advisory Board

   >> Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution

   >> School Food Trust

   >> School Support Staff Negotiating Body

   >> Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition

   >> Security Commission

   >> Security Industry Authority

   >> SITPRO

   >> Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory Committee

   >> Standards Board for England

   >> Strategic Advisory Board for Intellectual Property

   >> Sustainable Development Commission

   >> Teachers TV Board

   >> The Theatres Trust

   >> Thurrock Thames Gateway Development Corporation*

   >> UK Chemical Weapons Convention National Authority Advisory Committee

   >> UK Film Council

   >> Union Modernisation Advisory Fund

   >> Veterinary Residues Committee

   >> Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Advisory Board

   >> West Northamptonshire Development Corporation*

   >> Women's National Commission

   >> Zoos Forum * = Responsibility devolved to relevant local authority

   Bodies to be privatised (4)

   >> Construction and Skills Training Board

   >> Engineering Construction Industry Training Board

   >> Film Industry Training Board

   >> The Tote Board

   Bodies to be merged or consolidated

   (Maximum of 129 bodies reduced to minimum of 57)

   >> Advisory Committees on Justices of the Peace

   >> Central Arbitration Committee

   >> Certification Office

   >> Competition Appeals Tribunal

   >> Competition Service >>Copyright Tribunal

   >> Police Advisory Board

   >> Police Negotiating Board

   >> Police Arbitration Tribunal

   >> Rent Assessment Panels

   >> Residential Property Tribunal Service

   >> Valuation Tribunal for England

   >> Valuation Tribunal Service

   >> Crown Prosecution Service

   >> Revenue and Customs Prosecutions Office

   >> English Heritage

   >> National Heritage Memorial Fund

   >> National Heritage Lottery Fund

   >> Football Licensing Authority

   >> Sport England

   >> UK Sport

   >> Gambling Commission

   >> National Lottery Commission

   >> Ofcom

   >> Postcomm

   >> Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner

   >> Pensions Ombudsman

   >> Pensions Protection Fund Ombudsman

   >> Serious Organised Crime Agency

   Bodies still under review (94)

   >> Advisory Committee on Conscientious Objectors

   >> Advisory Council on Public Records

   >> Advisory Council on National Records and Archives

   >> Advisory Council on Historical Manuscripts

   >> Advisory Panel on Public Sector Information

   >> Agricultural and Horticultural Development Board

   >> Animal Procedures Committee

   >> BBC World Service

   >> British Council

   >> British Hallmarking Council

   >> Building Regulations Advisory Committee

   >> Carbon Trust

   >> Chief Coroner of England and Wales

   >> Child Maintenance and Enforcement Commission

   >> Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service

   >> Children's Workforce Development Council

   >> Civil Justice Council

   >> Coal Authority

   >> Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment

   >> Community Development Foundation

   >> Competition Commission

   >> Consumer Council for Water

   >> Consumer Focus

   >> Covent Garden Market Authority

   >> Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority

   >> Design Council

   >> Diplomatic Service Appeals Board

   >> Exports Credit Guarantee Department

   >> Energy Savings Trust

   >> Environment Agency

   >> Equality and Human Rights Commission

   >> Family Justice Council

   >> Firebuy

   >> Forestry Commission

   >> Fuel Poverty Advisory Group

   >> Historic Royal Palaces

   >> Homes and Community Agency

   >> Horserace Betting Levy Board

   >> Independent Safeguarding Authority

   >> Industrial Development Advisory Board

   >> Investigatory Powers Tribunal

   >> Joint Nature Conservation Committee

   >> Law Commission of England and Wales

   >> Leasehold Advisory Service

   >> Local Better Regulation Office

   >> National Museums and Galleries (18 bodies*)

   >> National Army Museum

   >> National College for Leadership of Schools and Children's Services

   >> National Employer Advisory Board

   >> National Forest Company

   >> National Museum of the Royal Navy

   >> Natural England

   >> Office for Fair Access

   >> Office for Fair Trading

   >> OFWAT

   >> Partnership for Schools

   >> Public Lending Right Committee

   >> Public Trustee Youth Justice Board

   >> Rail Passengers' Committee

   >> Remploy, Ltd.

   >> Renewable Fuels Agency

   >> Royal Air Force Museum

   >> Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew

   >> Royal Mint Advisory Committee on the Design of Coins, Medals, Seals and
Decorations

   >> Sea Fish Industry Authority

   >> Student Loans Company

   >> Tenant Services Authority

   >> The National Archives

   >> The Office of the Children's Commissioner

   >> The Pensions Advisory Service

   >> Training and Development Agency for Schools

   >> UK Atomic Energy Agency

   >> UK India Round Table

   >> UK Supreme Court

   >> Visit Britain

   >> Visit England

   >> Young People's Learning Agency

   * Refers to those National Museums and Galleries in England which are
publiclyfunded by DCMS and receive rebates of VAT incurred in the course of
their activities, in order them to enable free admission to the public. These
are: The British Museum; The Imperial War Museum; The National Gallery; The
National Maritime Museum; The National Museums & Galleries of Merseyside; The
Natural History Museum; The Royal Armouries; The Science Museum; The National
Museum of Photography, Film and Television; The National Railway Museum; The
National Coal Mining Museum for England; The Tate Galleries; The Wallace
Collection; The Greater Manchester Museum of Science and Industry; Sir John
Soane's Museum; The Museum of London; The Geffrye Museum; and The Horniman
Museum. Other publicly-funded museums (The British Library, The National Army
Museum, etc.) are separately referred to in this list, and museums in Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland are a devolved matter (although they also receive
rebates of VAT).

   Bodies to be retained (350)

   >> Acas

   >> Administration of Radioactive Substances Advisory Committee

   >> Advisory Committee on Business Appointments

   >> Advisory Committee on Civil Costs

   >> Advisory Committee on Clinical Excellence Awards

   >> Advisory Committee on Hazardous Substances

   >> Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment

   >> Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs

   >> Advisory Group on Military Medicine

   >> Agricultural Land Tribunal

   >> Architects Registration Board

   >> Armed Forces Pay Review Body

   >> Arts Council England

   >> BBC

   >> Big Lottery Fund

   >> British Railway Board (Residuary) Ltd

   >> British Library

   >> British Pharmocopoeia Commission

   >> British Transport Police

   >> British Wool Marketing Board

   >> Broads Authority

   >> Capital for Enterprise

   >> Care Quality Commission

   >> Central Advisory Committee on Pensions and Compensation

   >> Central Office of Information

   >> Channel 4

   >> Charity Commission for England and Wales

   >> Civil Aviation Authority

   >> Civil Nuclear Police Authority and Constabulary

   >> Civil Procedure Rule Committee

   >> Civil Service Appeals Board

   >> Commission on Human Medicines

   >> Committee on Climate Change

   >> Committee on Radioactive Waste Management

   >> Committee on Standards in Public Life

   >> Commonwealth Development Corporation

   >> Commonwealth Scholarship Commission

   >> Courts Fund Office

   >> Criminal Cases Review Commission

   >> Criminal Procedure Rule Committee

   >> Defence Nuclear Safety Committee

   >> Defence Scientific Advisory Council

   >> Equality 2025

   >> Family Procedure Rule Committee

   >> Fire Service College

   >> Food Standards Agency

   >> Forensic Science Service

   >> Gangmasters Licensing Authority

   >> Great North Eastern Railways Ltd

   >> Higher Education Funding Council for England

   >> HM Inspectorate of Prisons

   >> HM Inspectorate of Probation

   >> HM Land Registry

   >> Horserace Betting Levy Appeal Tribunal

   >> House of Lords Appointment Commission

   >> Independent Advisory Panels on Deaths in Custody

   >> Independent Agricultural Appeals Panel

   >> Independent Housing Ombudsman

   >> Independent Monitoring Board for the Military Corrective Training Centre

   >> Independent Police Complaints Commission

   >> Independent Prison Monitoring Boards (147 bodies)

   >> Independent Reconfiguration Panel

   >> Industrial Injuries Advisory Council

   >> Information Commissioner's Office

   >> Insolvency Rules Committee

   >> Judicial Appointments Commission

   >> Judicial Appointments and Conduct Ombudsman

   >> Land Registration Rule Committee

   >> Legal Services Board

   >> Local Government Ombudsman

   >> London and Continental Railways Ltd

   >> Low Pay Commission

   >> Marine Management Organisation

   >> Marshall Aid Foundation

   >> Medical Education England

   >> Migration Advisory Committee

   >> Monitor

   >> National DNA Database Ethics Group

   >> National Employment Savings Trust

   >> National Parks Authorities (9 bodies)

   >> National Savings and Investments

   >> National School of Government

   >> Navy, Army and Air Force Institutes

   >> NHS Pay Review Body

   >> Northern Lighthouse Board

   >> Nuclear Decommissioning Authority

   >> Nuclear Liabilities Board

   >> Nuclear Liability Financing Assurance Board

   >> Nuclear Research Advisory Council

   >> Office of Judicial Complaints

   >> Office for Legal Complaints

   >> Office of Manpower Economics

   >> Office of Rail Regulation

   >> Office of Surveillance Commissioners

   >> Office of the Public Guardian

   >> Official Solicitor

   >> Ofgem

   >> Ofqual

   >> Ofsted

   >> Oil and Pipelines Agency

   >> Olympic Delivery Authority

   >> Olympic Lottery Distributor

   >> Ordnance Survey

   >> Parole Board

   >> Partnerships UK

   >> Pension Protection Fund

   >> Pensions Regulator

   >> Planning Inspectorate

   >> Plant Varieties and Seeds Tribunal

   >> Police Discipline Appeals Tribunal

   >> Prison Services Pay Review Body

   >> Prisons and Probation Ombudsman

   >> Probation Trusts (35 bodies)

   >> Research Councils (7 bodies)

   >> Restraint Accreditation Board

   >> Review Board for Government Contracts

   >> Review Body on Doctors' and Dentists' Remuneration

   >> Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art

   >> Royal Mail Holdings Plc

   >> S4C

   >> School Teachers' Review Body

   >> Science Advisory Council

   >> Scientific Advisory Committee on the Medical Implications of Less-Lethal
Weapons

   >> Security Vetting Appeals Panel

   >> Senior Salaries Review Body

   >> Sentencing Council for England and Wales

   >> Social Security Advisory Committee

   >> Technical Advisory Board

   >> Technical Assessor for Compensation of Miscarriages of Justice

   >> Technology Strategy Board

   >> The Royal Mint

   >> The Westminster Foundation for Democracy

   >> Traffic Commissioners and Deputies

   >> Treasure Valuation Committee

   >> Tribunals Procedure Rule Committee

   >> Tribunals Service

   >> Trinity House Lighthouse Service

   >> UK Anti Doping

   >> UK Commission for Employment and Skills

   >> UK Trade and Investment

   >> Veterans Advisory and Pensions Committees (13 bodies)

   >> Veterinary Products Committee

   >> Victims' Commissioner

   >> Victims' Advisory Panel

   £272m The annual funding received by the World Service from the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office

GRAPHIC: A British Council office in Gaza is attacked by Palestinian militants
and (inset) musicians in Pakistan listen to World Service cricket commentary
SUHAIB SALEM/REUTERS; FAROOQ NAEEM/AFP/GETTY

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2010


                              24 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           September 21, 2010 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: My daughter and genome research grew up side by side;
The big idea The unveiling of the first draft of our genetic code in 2000 was a
milestone - but has medicine changed as I predicted it would?

BYLINE: Roger Highfield

BODY:

   I'm not sure my daughter will ever forgive me for the full-length, nearly
nude photograph of her that appeared on this page, but in my defence, it was all
in the name of popularising science.

   At the time, Holly was a blue-eyed baby, who could fit neatly between my
elbow and fingertip. Now she is a brown-eyed, netball-mad, Jason Derulo-loving
pre-teen who today celebrates her 11th birthday. After she was born, I thought
it would be interesting to round up the ways in which the latest medical
research might affect her life by the grand old age of 60. But just like her
life, the trajectory of the science has already taken some unexpected twists and
turns.

   My article came out only a few months before scientists unveiled the draft of
the human genetic code, and I made much of how the DNA sequence of our estimated
100,000 genes would provide all kinds of insights into how we age, become obese
and more.

   In fact, the number of genes turned out to be far fewer than we thought -
more like 25,000. Today, we have realised that it is not the number of genes
that makes us amazingly complicated chemical machines, but the way our bodies
read, shuffle and use them.

   As if to mirror how the code works in a more complicated way than we first
realised, the impact of this knowledge has thus far been relatively modest.
Doctors can figure out risk factors for some important diseases, such as macular
degeneration; the understanding has led to new drugs for some cancers; and
genetic tests that can predict whether people with breast cancer need
chemotherapy. While I predicted that Holly would eventually be able to take
advantage of medicine that was customised to her genetic code, it's taking a bit
longer than I thought.

   I made only one fleeting reference to a technique known as gene therapy:
using viruses to implant genes, in that case to help deal with the frailty of
old age. We all inherit flaws in our DNA from our parents, or suffer mutations
in it. These can enable cancer cells to multiply out of control, or increase our
risk of being obese, or of developing diabetes or heart disease.

   Scientists initially had high hopes that gene therapy would be revolutionary
- but by the time Holly was born, most (including me) were disillusioned with
the idea. It had failed to live up to the hype, as trial after trial seemed
ineffective. And that was with disorders involving a single gene, let alone
multiple-gene illnesses such as breast cancer and diabetes. A few days before
Holly came into the world, an American teenager, Jesse Gelsinger, had actually
died of a severe inflammatory reaction during a clinical trial for gene therapy,
So, when I gazed into my crystal ball on Holly's behalf, I expected that
treatments based on growing her own stem cells would be a better bet to repair
failing eyes and grow replacement organs. Yet, since Holly was born, gene
therapy has notched up notable successes, not least in the UK, where Professor
Adrian Thrasher and his colleagues at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London
have successfully treated 20 patients, mostly with immune disorders.

   The revolution began with the treatment of "bubble children", born with a
severe immune deficiency that leaves them fatally vulnerable to disease. Then it
was used by teams in Philadelphia and London to treat a form of blindness. In
the past few days, Prof Philippe Leboulch of the University of Paris and Harvard
Medical School in Boston has reported the successful treatment of a 21-year-old
with a genetic disorder called betathalassaemia, which affects haemoglobin, the
protein that enables red blood cells to cart oxygen around the body.

   Like any treatment, the risks - such as the implanted genes disrupting the
existing genetic code, and causing cancer - have to be weighed against the
benefits. Given the progress to date, Prof Thrasher is confident that it
shouldn't be too long before other blood disorders, such as sickle cell disease,
can be reliably and safely treated in this way.

   So, with the wisdom of hindsight, I should have made more of gene therapy.
But in another respect, I feel my vision of the future has been vindicated. I
thought that by 2060, alternative medicines would have been subjected to
rigorous scientific examination, and the majority rejected as quackery. As one
sign of this trend, there's growing recognition - despite the best efforts of
the Prince of Wales - that homoeopathy is no more effective than a placebo.

   The only problem is that, despite my confidence about what the future will
bring for Holly, one aspect of medicine will remain unchanged: I doubt that in
half a century's time, the average patient will be any more rational than they
are today.

   Roger Highfield is the editor of 'New Scientist'

GRAPHIC: Holly was born just months before the draft human genome was unveiled

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2010


                              25 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                          September 16, 2010 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 984 words

HEADLINE: Analysts tip HSBC to double its dividend;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Ben Harrington

BODY:

   HSBC was in focus as City analysts suggested the banking behemoth could
double the size of its dividend from its 2009 low.

   "We think the rebound in profitability and confirmation of Basel capital
requirements will allow the bank to step up its dividend materially," said
Michael Helsby, an analyst at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

   Mr Helsby argued that even after factoring in a higher dividend, HSBC would
have around $15bn (£9.6bn) of surplus capital by 2012.

   "Investor perception of HSBC is dominated by the outlook for interest rates.
Consensus suggests that HSBC cannot turn around its operating performance
without an [interest] rates increase. We are more bullish," said Mr Helsby, as
he raised his target price on the stock to 905p and reiterated his "buy" rating.

   He concluded: "The bank's risk appetite has recovered and, in our view, top
line growth will respond."

   HSBC shares edged up 0.4 to 676.6p.

   Once again, the FTSE 100 struggled for direction, eventually closing down
11.85 points at 5555.56. The FTSE 250, however, rallied 21.83 points to
10494.27.

   Some gold mining shares were hit by profit taking following strong gains
earlier in the week. African Barrick Gold slid 21 to 598p.

   Base metal mining stocks were also under pressure as Citigroup turned
"neutral" on the sector. The broker advised clients to shift away from "high
beta" names and into strong momentum stocks. Rio Tinto lost 49½p to £35.72.

   Elsewhere, Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation dipped 18½ to 866p after
First Quantum Minerals started legal action against the Kazakh mining giant over
a disputed copper project in the Congo.

   Inter-dealer broker ICAP slipped 3.3 to 454¾p as UBS downgraded the stock to
"neutral". Arnaud Giblat, an analyst at UBS, said: "We believe that the market
has priced in the fact that ICAP is a net beneficiary from electronification and
from the development of post-trade services."

   In the oil sector, Petrofac fell 25p to £13.85 as Natixis cut the stock from
"buy" to "neutral".

   BP drifted 11.1 to 404.1p as Tony Hayward, outgoing chief executive, defended
the oil giant's safety culture in front of a parliamentary committee.

   On a more positive tack, retailers were in demand following strong half-year
results from Next, which said there would be no double-dip recession. Next
climbed 136p to £21.76, Marks & Spencer moved 12.6 higher to 379.6p and
Kingfisher put on 7.2 to 218p ahead of its interim results today.

   WPP rose 9 to 712½p thanks to a bullish review of European media agencies
from Goldman Sachs. Analysts at the broker said: "We believe the structural
outlook for the agencies is improving, driven by emerging markets and digital
growth, which are both around 20pc of revenues." They added: "Stocks remain
sensitive to macro sentiment, but we believe the marketing outlook is still
fairly robust in spite of macro concerns as emerging markets should remain
strong."

   Shire, meanwhile, perked up 13p to £15.21 as Barclays Capital took up
coverage of the stock with an "overweight" rating and a £17 target price. Brian
Bourdot, an analyst at Barclays Capital, said: "Shire's strong position in human
genetic therapies is a platform for further growth."

   Among the second liners, Drax was hit by a JP Morgan Cazenove downgrade to
"underweight". Edmund Reid, an analyst at JP Morgan Cazenove, said the risk to
UK gas prices is skewed to the downside.

   The broker put that view down to a number of factors - UK gas inventories
have rebounded from their March lows and are now close to their three-year
average level; UK liquified natural gas imports in August rose 55pc from July
and 12-month forward UK gas prices are now trading at a 60pc premium to US
prices, the highest level since mid-2008. Drax fell 15.7 to 398.2p.

   JD Wetherspoon was another poor performer on the mid-cap index as JP Morgan
Cazenove downgraded the stock to "underweight". Tim Barrett, an analyst at the
broker, blamed JD Wetherspoon's poor like-for-like sales growth on the price
sensitivity of its customer base.

   "Efforts to drive like-for-like food growth through earlier opening times for
breakfast have had a mixed result and adjusting for this we estimate that food
sales at other times of the day fell marginally," said Mr Barrett. The pub
company gave up 16.6 to 421¾p. Small cap Fortune Oil gained 0.2 to 7.8p amid
vague bid rumours.

   Results round-up Company Turnover (£) Pre-Tax (£) EPS (p) Div (p) Pay Day xd
Brooks Macdonald Group Fin 35.1m (21.8m) 5.7m (3.2m) 38.1 (22.6) 6.000 (5.500)
Oct 25 Sep 22 Fairpoint Group Int 13.9m (13.8m) 2.4m (2.2m) 3.9 (3.6) 1.500
(0.000) Oct 26 Oct 06 French Connection Group Int 103.2m (100.2m) -1.3m (-7.7m)
-13.0 (-11.5) 0.500 (0.000) Oct 19 Sep 22 Galliford Try Fin 1.2bn (1.5bn) 19.2m
(-26.9m) 14.7 (-249.0) 9.200 (1.100) Nov 12 Oct 06 Ideal Shopping Direct Int
56.6m (47.4m) 2.9m (-1.2m) 6.3 (-4.1) 1.500 (0.000) Oct 29 Sep 22 InterQuest
Group Int 55.3m (49.2m) 1.1m (913k) 2.5 (2.2) 0.500 (0.000) Oct 28 Sep 29
Kiotech International Int 11.1m (3.5m) 777k (302k) 0.2 (0.1) 0.000 (0.000)
--Mobile Streams Int 4.3m (3.6m) -13k (-578k) 0.1 (-1.4) 0.000 (0.000) --Murray
Income Trust Fin - (-) 16.4m (18.1m) 25.4 (28.1) 11.500 (11.300) Oct 27 Sep 22
Next Int 1.6bn (1.5bn) 213.3m (185.5m) 84.5 (68.2) 25.000 (19.000) Jan 04 Nov 24
Ransom (William) & Son Fin 30.2m (32.5m) -12.6m (-2.3m) -14.5 (-2.5) 0.000
(0.000) --Real Estate Investors Int 1.7m (1.7m) -1.6m (1.3m) -0.3 (0.3) 0.000
(0.000) --Regenersis Fin 116.4m (98.3m) 3.6m (3.4m) 6.9 (9.5) 0.000 (0.000)
--Town Centre Securities Fin 23m (27.3m) 39.3m (-112.6m) 74.6 (-210.3) 7.3 (5.4)
Jan 05 Dec 08

   Winners and losers (pc) Beverages 1.25 Household Goods 0.79
Telecommunications 0.64 Aerospace & Defence 0.61 Insurance 0.58 Construction
0.56 General Financial 0.51 Retailers 0.48 Chemicals 0.43 -0.4 Banks -0.62 Gas &
Water -0.64 Europeans -0.9 Mining -0.93 Americans -0.94 Electricity -0.96 Oil &
Gas -1 Travel & Leisure

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2010


                              29 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             June 17, 2010 Thursday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 986 words

HEADLINE: FTSE on longest winning streak since September;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Ben Harrington

BODY:

   NORTHUMBRIAN Water was in demand as the blue-chip registered its sixth
consecutive gain - its longest winning streak since September 2009.

   The water company rose to a 52-week high amid renewed speculation that
Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan has finally made a £1.7bn takeover approach.

   Traders claimed Ontario Teachers is working with another infrastructure fund
on the transaction. A recommended offer from Ontario Teachers, a Canadian
pension fund that is Northumbrian Water's largest shareholder, could be
announced in the next two weeks they said.

   Rumours of a bid from Ontario Teachers first emerged in late January. The
gossip back then was that the fund had begun sounding out banks to put together
a debt package for the deal.

   However, Ontario Teachers later denied it planned to bid, saying "it does not
intend to make an offer to acquire the entire issued share capital of
Northumbrian Water".

   Although Northumbrian Water declined to comment yesterday, people familiar
with the matter attempted to pour cold water on the latest bid tale.

   Northumbrian Water perked up 10.3 to 308p on strong trading.

   The rest of the water sector peppered the loserboard. Severn Trent lost 54p
to £12.49 and United Utilities fell 21 to 538½p as both companies traded
ex-dividend.

   Overall, the FTSE 100 gained 20.10 points to 5237.92 but the FTSE 250 lost
20.30 points to 9859.95.

   Shire shot to the top of the leaderboard thanks to an upbeat Deutsche Bank
note, which took up coverage with a "buy" rating. Mark Clark, an analyst at
Deutsche Bank, said: "Having navigated the loss of exclusivity on its
best-selling drug, Adderall XR, Shire can look forward to a period of strong
revenue and earnings growth, based on a rebound in its Attention-Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder franchise and on rapid growth from its biologics-based
human genetic therapies business." The shares moved 35p higher to £14.62.

   Royal Bank of Scotland was close behind, following news it has managed to
dispose of its Pakistan division to local lender Faysal Bank for $50.37m (£34m)
and has also sold its UAE retail arm for around $100m to Abu Dhabi Commercial
Bank.

   Legal & General (L&G) and Aviva were both boosted by a bullish note from
Nomura. Nick Holmes, an analyst at Nomura, said: "Conventional wisdom sees Asia
as offering more growth than the UK. Although we agree with this in the longer
term, we think the market underestimates the UK's medium-term prospects, which
are likely to see cash earnings materially boosted by lower new business
strain... and the potential release of annuity credit provisions."

   L&G, up 0.3 to 83.65p, and Aviva, which gained 3.9 to 345.3p, are more
positively exposed to these trends than Prudential, argued Mr Holmes. He
reiterated his "buy" stance on L&G and Aviva, and took up coverage of
Prudential, up 10 to 570p, with a "neutral" rating.

   Oil producers fared well as the price of crude rose to $78 a barrel during
intra-day trading. Royal Dutch Shell climbed 36½p to £15.57 and BG Group ticked
up 23p to £11.36.

   Elsewhere, a Citigroup upgrade to "hold" from "sell" helped Drax Group rise
9.4 to 393.9p.

   Positive broker notes also lifted Aggreko. Analysts have just returned from
visiting several of the power provider's operations in Africa. Alex Hugh, an
analyst at UBS, said: "We retain our high conviction that the power shortages in
Africa will get worse, not better, and that the structural opportunity is much
larger than the current supply of temporary power." Citigroup upgraded the stock
to "buy" from "hold". The shares put on 25p to £14.70.

   On a less positive tack, Schroders shed 45p to £13.20 as Citigroup downgraded
the stock to "sell" from "buy". Analysts at the broker are concerned that retail
investor demand will slow this year. Elsewhere in the sector, Man Group lost 6.3
to 239.2p after it reported a 3.1pc decline in the net asset value of its
flagship Man AHL Diversified Futures fund over the past week.

   However, Jupiter Asset Management bucked the sector trend. On its first day
of dealing on the London Stock Exchange, the shares closed at 190p - 15pc higher
than the 165p IPO price.

   Results round-up Company Turnover(£) Pre-Tax(£) EPS(p) Div(p) PayDay xd
Aberdeen All Asia Investment Trust Fin -(-) 404k (614k) 2.2 (3.5) 1.500 (2.400)
Jul 30 Jun 30 Bango Fin 26.1m (17.6m) -250k (-646k) 0.0 (-1.7) 0.000 (0.000)
--Biotech Growth Trust (The) Fin -(-) -355k (-376k) -0.6 (-0.7) 0.000 (0.000)
--British Portfolio Trust Int -(-) 845k (913k) 2.5 (2.4) 1.800 (1.800) Sep 02
Jul 28 City of London Group Fin 175k (189k) 244k (118k) 1.4 (1.6) 0.500 (0.000)
--GTL Resources $ Fin 216.6m (145.5m) 14.5m (-18.4m) 0.4 (-0.5) 0.000 (0.000)
--JPMorgan Fleming Jap Sm Cos Inv Tr Fin -(-) -499k (-300k) -1.4 (-1.0) 0.000
(0.000) --Jelf Group Int 34.9m (35m) -1.2m (-1.4m) -1.1 (-1.8) 0.000 (0.000)
--Liontrust Asset Management Fin 13.2m (36m) -1m (12.3m) 3.6 (28.3) 0.000
(5.000) --RIT Capital Partners Fin -(-) 80.5m (7.2m) 43.3 (3.6) 4.000 (7.500)
Apr 01 Mar 10 RPC Group Fin 719.9m (769.1m) 19.2m (-4.5m) 13.5 (-7.8) 7.400
(6.400) Sep 03 Aug 04 Safestore Holdings Int 42.4m (41.3m) 6.7m (-11.7m) 2.6
(-3.6) 1.700 (1.700) Aug 11 Jul 07 Servoca Int 25.6m (30.1m) 706k (856k) 0.6
(1.8) 0.000 (0.000) --Stewart & Wight Fin 1.1m (1.1m) 1m (-762k) 45.6 (-43.6)
2.000 (21.000) Oct 15 Sep 22 Triad Group Fin 27.2m (32.8m) -613k (-40k) -4.0
(-0.3) 0.000 (0.000) --Trifast Fin 85.9m (104.9m) -2.8m (-11m) -2.6 (-18.0)
0.000 (0.000) --Worthington Group Fin 147k (142k) -316k (-487k) -2.7 (-4.1)
0.000 (0.000) --Wynnstay Group Int 120.3m (117.7m) 3.5m (3.2m) 17.7 (16.3) 2.400
(2.200) Oct 29 Sep 29

   Winners and losers (pc) Healthcare 2.02 Insurance 1.29 Chemicals 1.21
Electricity 1.15 Pharmaceuticals 1.04 Beverages 0.96 Tobaccos 0.92 Oil & Gas
0.84 Americans 0.64 -0.36 Information Technology -0.55 AIM -0.61 General
Financial -0.68 Telecommunications -0.71 Property -1.19 Construction -1.37
Transport -1.41 Automobiles & Parts

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2010


                              38 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             April 12, 2010 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1319 words

HEADLINE: 'It's not Parkinson's disease - it's mine';
At 34, Becky Hurd has slurred speech and impaired mobility. But she's focusing
all her strength on finding a cure. Cassandra Jardine reports

BYLINE: Cassandra Jardine

BODY:

   Becky Hurd - mother, marketing manager, degree student, poet and charity
fund-raiser - is clearly no slouch, but that's not obvious at first because she
moves unusually slowly. It takes her an age to get out of the car, unlock the
door of her Worcester home, put on the kettle, and make a cup of tea. As she
does so, she talks in an expressionless, slightly slurred manner that belies the
speed and creativity of her brain. "Often, people think I'm drunk," she says,
"which has knocked my confidence."

   Until recently, Shakybec, as she calls herself on Twitter, hid the true
nature of her problem - it is not the bottle - because, as an ambitious, young
woman of 34, she didn't want to be written off as an invalid. Two years ago,
when interviewed for her current job at Jaguar Land Rover, she let her
prospective employers believe that the stiffness she exhibited was due to a bad
back. "I didn't want to tell anyone," she explains, "because there's a taboo
about having Parkinson's disease so young. It's an illness associated with old
people in nursing homes."

   She was in the denial stage then. Now, she has accepted it, although she
still says: "It's not a disease, as it is not contagious, and it's not
Parkinson's, because it is mine." But, unlike many older people who learn that
they have this degenerative neurological disorder - which impairs motor skill,
speech and other functions, and often causes tremors and involuntary shaking -
she isn't content to let doctors use drugs merely to alleviate her rigidity. "I
want a cure," she says, with as much feeling as her nervous system allows her to
muster. "If we start believing in a cure, and talking about it, perceptions will
change."

   One in 500 people in this country suffers from Parkinson's, of whom only one
in 20 is diagnosed under the age of 40. Devastating though it is for them
individually, these younger sufferers bring the disorder to the attention of
scientists and pharmaceutical companies. In the US, Back to the Future actor
Michael J Fox, 48, who was 30 when he was diagnosed with the disease, has set up
a foundation for Parkinson's research. Here, the Cure Parkinson's Trust (CPT)
was founded by a group of young sufferers four years ago, roughly when Hurd's
diagnosis was confirmed at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham. The Trust
has raised more than £3million; this Saturday, Hurd hopes to raise further funds
- and the profile of the illness - at a black-tie ball in Birmingham.

   Dressed in a silver, fishtailed dress to reflect the theme of "illuminating"
the disease, Hurd will tell her story - a tale of determination which led her to
postpone medication in order to have her now two-year-old daughter, Mollie. Tom
Isaacs, one of the founders of the CPT, will then describe "the horror and the
hope" he feels in relation to the disease. Horror, because at present nothing
can be done to stop the loss of movement which affects the body and often the
mind, too; hope, because research is on the brink of breakthroughs which could
help the 120,000 people in the UK with the illness, but also the 100,000 who are
in the 10- to 15-year period before symptoms are obvious and who are as yet
undiagnosed.

   Parkinson's is caused by the loss of nerve cells which produce the
neurotransmitter dopamine. "A majority of cases are genetic or environmental in
origin, or a result of interactions between genes and the environment," says
Richard Wyse, director of research at the CPT. "Six or seven of the genes
causing Parkinson's have already been identified. We know that trauma can also
cause it (as with Muhammad Ali), as can environmental exposure to some
herbicides and pesticides, including Paraquat. Recent evidence also suggests
there may be gastrointestinal, hormonal and immunological links involved in
disease progression. The search is also on for biomarkers to diagnose
Parkinson's long before the symptoms are showing, so we can aim to intervene to
delay onset of the condition."

   Unusually, Hurd can date the onset of the disease very precisely. Aged 21,
she was about to start her fourth year at Lancaster university, reading Spanish,
music and marketing, when she dislocated her ankle, put out her hand to save
herself and broke her wrist. "I believe that sent a shock through my body which
affected my brain."

   It was her mother who first noticed something was wrong when Becky, who had
been a concert pianist as well as a county tennis player, stopped playing the
piano. She said her hand wasn't working properly. "To have had something and
lost it," she says sadly, "is harder than never having been able to do it in the
first place." X-rays and scans revealed nothing; finally, a neurologist
diagnosed Parkinson's in August 2005, just before her 30th birthday.

   By then she was married to John, a master mechanic at BMW Rolls- Royce, and
longing for a baby. Rather than take medication to relieve the stiffness (a
universal symptom, whereas shaking afflicts half of sufferers), she waited two
years until she had given birth to Mollie, an experience that made her aware of
just how disabled she had become.

   "The epidural made my symptoms worse: I couldn't even breastfeed without
someone holding her," she recalls. Two weeks later, she began taking Mirapexin,
a dopamine agonist, to encourage the release of dopamine in her brain. Once that
drug stops working, she will have to take synthetic dopamine which, according to
Wyse, generally works well for about 10 years.

   Presently, she is able to work, drive a car and study interior design - her
backup career for when she can no longer work in an office. She still cooks,
though chopping is hard. By avoiding tights, and asking John to do up her bra,
she can dress herself. Taking her mother with her, she can buy clothes. But
there are many things she cannot do, including, most distressingly, caring for
her daughter.

   "My husband is a saint. He does the washing, ironing and cleaning - and he
looks after Mollie. I couldn't change nappies, and I daren't go out with her
alone unless she runs away. When we go on holiday, my best friend comes, too, to
give John a break. I get jealous of John's relationship with Mollie but, as she
gets older, she is beginning to understand what Mummy can and can't do. She has
started bringing books for me to read. Tactfully, John then leaves the room."

   At work, until recently, she kept her illness secret, although her typing is
now very slow. How does she manage when, as employee incentive manager, she
takes a group to watch a football match? "I hold on to the tickets so they can't
rush ahead." So good is her cover-up that, when she told colleagues about the
Illuminate Parkinson's ball, many were amazed. But Hurd doesn't want admiration,
she wants a cure. None of the drugs currently prescribed for Parkinson's halt,
let alone reverse, the disease. However, medications, developed for other
conditions, may offer hope.

   Exendin, which controls Type 2 diabetes, protects brain cells very
effectively. Isradipine, a calcium channel blocker given to people with
hypertension, seems to delay onset of Parkinson's in 30 per cent of cases.
Cogane, an oral Chinese remedy used to improve memory, potentially releases
relevant nerve growth factors. "All three radical new approaches are being
clinically tested this year in people with Parkinson's," says Wyse. "Long-term,
new surgical approaches using growth factors, gene therapy and stem cell
research also offer considerable promise."

   One way or another, Becky Hurd has reason to hope that she will one day
become the more active mother that she longs to be. Tickets, costing £110 are
still available for Illuminate, the ball in aid of the Cure Parkinson's Trust on
Saturday April 17 at the International Conference Centre, Birmingham.
www.illuminateparkinsons.org.uk The Cure Parkinson's Trust. Tel: 01923 264976;
www.cureparkinsons.org.uk

   "There's a taboo about having Parkinson's so young "

GRAPHIC: Waiting game: Becky Hurd put off taking medication to relieve
increasing rigidity due to Parkinson's until after the birth of her daughter,
Mollie
CROWLEY ANDREW

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2010


                              40 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             March 9, 2010 Tuesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: Gene that may make us feel more pain

BYLINE: Richard Alleyne

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS believe they may have found the reason why some people feel pain
more than others.

   Doctors have struggled to explain why some people are more sensitive to pain
but researchers have discovered that a gene may be responsible, which suggests
that gene therapy might become a treatment alternative for patients with chronic
pain.

   Dr Geoffrey Woods, of Cambridge University, said finding a gene responsible
for pain could greatly increase the ability to conquer and control it.

   "The search for effective analgesics with acceptable side effects has long
been the goal of doctors and biomedical researchers," he said.

   "Because current therapies have limited efficacy, with up to 50 per cent of
treated subjects receiving inadequate pain relief, there exists a significant
need to develop better therapies."

   A vast number of people worldwide suffer with chronic pain, as a result of
injury or arthritis, which affects every aspect of their lives, and often
results in depression.

   Scientists discovered the gene in a study of 578 people with osteoarthritis
and found the same one in patients with sciatica, phantom pain, back problems
and pancreatitis.

   A subsequent analysis of 186 healthy women suggested that those with the gene
had enhanced pain sensations, according to the findings published in Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. The researchers found that a mutated
version of the gene known as SCN9A led to the release of more of a protein that
appeared to increase the activation of nerves and produce sensations of dull,
aching pain.

   Drugs designed to modify the protein's activity could make effective
painkillers and the study could also help explain some of the genetic reasons
behind why patients responded differently to different classes of painkillers.
Dr Woods, a medical geneticist, said: "As a sense, pain serves as an adaptive
mechanism that protects us from tissue damage by alerting us to events that are
capable of producing injury and evokes behaviours that promote tissue healing.

   "However, the development of maladaptive persistent pain states in response
to tissue injury is common, with one in six adults suffering from a chronic pain
condition." The researchers said drugs that modified the function of SCN9A would
be "potentially useful" in treating conditions such as osteoarthritis and back
pain.

   "As individuals appear to have differing genetic susceptibilities to pain,
future studies should be directed toward understanding whether responsiveness to
different classes of analgesics is also genetically determined," they added. The
findings mirrored those from Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York in 2008
that found that gene transplants could greatly reduce pain in a similar way to
opiates but without the side effects.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2010


                              41 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           February 11, 2010 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 248 words

HEADLINE: ReNeuron stem cell trial gets green light

BYLINE: Rachel Cooper

BODY:

   RENEURON, the Aim-listed biotech company, has been given the go-ahead to
start a ground-breaking clinical trial to assess whether stem cell therapy can
help patients disabled by stroke.

   The Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC) - the ethics body for stem cell
clinical trials - yesterday gave the research the green light following months
of delay.

   Following the approval, ReNeuron will start the world's first trial of
injecting stem cells into patients' brains in the hope they will repair areas
damaged by a stroke and improve both mental and physical function.

   The technology is controversial, in part because some stem cell lines are
derived from embryos or foetuses, and the path to regulatory approval has been
rocky. ReNeuron was first granted permission to conduct the trial by the
Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory Agency last January, but needed a
recommendation from the GTAC before it could start the Phase 1 clinical trial.

   A year later, the company has been given the go-ahead and the first of 12
stroke patients is expected to receive treatment in Scotland later this year.
Michael Hunt, ReNeuron chief executive, said the approval represented "the
culmination of many months of work".

   In anticipation of the announcement, analysts at Matrix last week upgraded
their target price to 26p from 14½p, saying that ReNeuron has "made its mark in
history within the global stem cell field" and that the trial marked a
"game-changing event".

   Shares in the company rose 0.3pc to 7.05p

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2010


                              42 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           February 11, 2010 Thursday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 248 words

HEADLINE: ReNeuron stem cell trail gets green light

BYLINE: Rachel Cooper

BODY:

   RENEURON, the Aim-listed biotech company, has been given the go-ahead to
start a groundbreaking clinical trial to assess whether stem cell therapy can
help patients disabled by stroke.

   The Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC) - the ethics body for stem cell
clinical trials - yesterday gave the research the green light following months
of delay.

   Following the approval, ReNeuron will start the world's first trial of
injecting stem cells into patients' brains in the hope they will repair areas
damaged by a stroke and improve both mental and physical function.

   The technology is controversial, in part because some stem cell lines are
derived from embryos or foetuses, and the path to regulatory approval has been
rocky. ReNeuron was first granted permission to conduct the trial by the
Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory Agency last January, but needed a
recommendation from the GTAC before it could start the Phase 1 clinical trial.

   A year later, the company has been given the go-ahead and the first of 12
stroke patients is expected to receive treatment in Scotland later this year.
Michael Hunt, ReNeuron chief executive, said the approval represented "the
culmination of many months of work".

   In anticipation of the announcement, analysts at Matrix last week upgraded
their target price to 26p from 14½p, saying that ReNeuron has "made its mark in
history within the global stem cell field" and that the trial marked a
"game-changing event".

   Shares in the company rose 0.3pc to 7.05p

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2010


                              45 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            January 2, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES; Comment; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1583  words

HEADLINE: 2020 Vision Twenty predictions for the end of the decade

BODY:

   Gene therapy

   Ten years ago, I would have said that by 2010 gene therapy would be a
standard medical treatment - and I would have been wrong. Two years ago, my
prediction was that there would be no real impact for at least a decade; but I
was probably wrong there, too. My guess is that, for some people, and depending
on how it is defined, gene therapy will be an important part of hi-tech medicine
by about 2018. But for the health of most people, it will remain irrelevant.

   Prof Steve Jones, Professor of

   Genetics at University College London

   General medicine

   We will understand better some of the world's biggest killers, notably cancer
and HIV/Aids. Despite advances in understanding the genetic basis of
Alzheimer's, it probably won't result in a cure this decade. In surgery, big
advances will include the increasing involvement of robotics in the operating
theatre. Surgeons will use "non-invasive'' techniques, entering through the
body's orifices rather than using scalpels.

   Dr Max Pemberton, author and doctor

   Science

   2010 is likely to see the final flights of NASA's workhorse, the space
shuttle. The forthcoming space race will be among private enterprises. We will
also see the creation of "synthetic life''. Since 2007, American Craig Venter
has been on the verge of unveiling a living bacterium carrying a DNA code made
from scratch in the lab. Others are working on an entirely synthetic cell. We
may even see the launch of a planetary fix, a Manhattan-scale global project
that uses geoengineering to curb harmful climate change.

   Dr Roger Highfield, editor, New Scientist

   Consumer technology

   Technology will infiltrate every aspect of our lives. The mobile phone will
be a gateway to global communications, and link seamlessly to the web and every
screen in homes and offices. Supermarkets will automatically restock your
internet-connected fridge. Expect to feel watched - not by government, but by
big corporations.

   Matt Warman, DT consumer

   technology editor

   Internet

   There are now three times more mobile phone subscribers than internet users.
In the decade ahead, mobile and web will collide to fulfil the promise of
technology: helping people help themselves. The open exchange of information
will lead to a more informed, engaged, and more empathetic global citizenry.

   Biz Stone, founder, Twitter

   Transport

   High-speed rail will transform travel in the UK. I am excited about the
possibilities it holds in terms of shorter journeys, environmental benefits,
encouraging investment and boosting business and jobs.

   Andrew Adonis, Secretary of

   State for Transport

   Environment

   It will be the hottest decade ever as global warming continues, though
individual years will vary. Renewables will boom, especially solar power, as new
technologies and falling prices kick in. Nuclear power will make no real
contribution; any new reactors will not come on stream before the end of the
decade. Evidence that mobile phones endanger health will increase. Continued
shrinkage of the Arctic ice-cap could provide the first climate "tipping
point''.

   Geoffrey Lean, DT columnist

   Religion

   I'm tempted to say that, in 2020, the Anglican Communion will be poised on
the edge of schism, as its 107th openly homosexual bishop is consecrated. Plus
ça change ... Anglicanism will have fragmented into national and denominational
shards. Women bishops will no longer frighten the horses. Pope Benedict XVI may
be succeeded by a less ambitiously orthodox pontiff. As for Islam, things will
get worse before they get better, through no fault of the vast majority of
peace-loving Muslims.

   George Pitcher, DT religion editor

   Sport

   A brace of US Open titles for Andy Murray but alas no Wimbledon crown; a
stunning London Olympics; Argentina to win football and rugby World Cups; a mind
boggling sub-42 seconds 400m world record from Usain Bolt; England to take their
first cricket World Cup; Rory McIlroy to challenge Nick Faldo's British record
of six golf Majors; Tiger Woods to "redeem'' himself with an Olympic golf gold
medal (2016); and Ben Ainslie to win the America's Cup for Britain. Finally, a
Briton to win the Tour de France.

   Brendan Gallagher, DT sports writer

   Literature

   Written literature will divide. Disposable celebrity memoirs will be
delivered electronically, in tiny bursts. Published works will be delivered with
alterations commissioned by the end-user. Pride and Prejudice with more sex and
violence? Yours, for  pounds 3.99. The audience for serious works will survive.
Books may have to prove themselves with an audience before a publisher will
print copies. A talent to watch? The novelist Evie Wyld.

   Philip Hensher, author

   Music

   We'll see fewer global stars, more localisation and a dissemination of
cross-pollinating musical styles created by bedroom studio wizards. Guitar-based
rock will become the preserve of old-school arenas. The decline of the reality
TV talent show model will leave a hole, to be filled by fictionalised
TV-internet stars. The LP will leap onto a multimedia web-based sound and vision
remixing platform - and fail. The fortunes of the music business will decline
further; music itself will thrive as a more hands-on activity.

   Neil McCormick, DT music critic

   Architecture

   Britain will finally address both its catastrophic undersupply of new housing
and the low quality of what it is building. Britain's architects are having to
adjust to the fact that there is less work around and tighter budgets. Add the
growing challenge of environmental sustainability, and the next decade will be a
highly testing one for the profession.

   Ellis Woodman, architecture critic

   Design

   We'll see a rediscovery of morals in matters of production and consumption.
Making things will become more important, both economically and culturally. True
value will be separated from mere cost. We will want better, not merely more,
and with that will come more dignified consumer behaviour: gross indulgence will
soon acquire the stigma currently attached to drink-driving.

   Stephen Bayley, design critic

   Theatre

   We will enter a golden age in British theatre. There is enough money, thanks
to sustained subsidies and commercial success. Our major theatres are run by the
best. Our acting talent is the envy of the world. There are budding playwrights
on every street corner. The country is experiencing profound change, which can
only energise new writing further. Digital technology will help export this
theatre boom on a scale comparable to the pop music revolution of the Fifties
and Sixties.

   Dominic Cavendish, DT theatre critic

   Film

   Following James Cameron's Avatar, we can expect an explosion in 3D
blockbusters. New ways to see and distribute films will lead to a far broader
idea of cinema than Hollywood would like to admit. Already the success of the
South African sci-fi thriller District 9 bodes well for the health of
large-scale, independent productions from around the world. It will be exciting
to see which other countries throw their hats into the ring.

   Tim Robey, DT film critic

   Television

   More viewing will take place online and on demand but live TV events such as
The X Factor will continue to glue viewers to their sofas. Global marketing will
collide with soaring production costs to create truly international dramas,
co-produced by many national broadcasters including the BBC, which no government
will be foolish enough to abolish. The big winners will be those with the
ambition to conquer the world: brace yourselves for the ongoing rise of Simon
Cowell.

   Neil Midgley, DT media editor

   Gardening

   The UK will be like Havana, with almost all of us growing some of our food.
Gardening will be less ornamental and more productive. Expect destructive winds
and tropical rain - which will take lots of precious topsoil with it - and very
definite winters. We'll have to bring more in under cover or start with new
plants each spring.

   Sarah Raven, gardening expert

   Food

   Supermarkets will sell more British food. A packaging revolution will see
more compostable bags and fresh foods with longer shelf lives. Labelling will
clearly state country of origin. Nutritionally enhanced foods will flourish and
obesity decline, but GM foods will get a stronger foothold in Europe. Organic
and molecular cuisine will give way to bistro cooking and local food. M&S will
lead on ethical sourcing. We'll eat more quince, tonka beans, emmer (a grain),
British olives and spider crab.

   Rose Prince, food writer

   Fashion

   The combination of being the most knowing generation ever and one that has to
find its place in a wrecked economy should fire up entrepreneurial innovation in
the young. Fewer jobs and pricey further education will see sixth formers
marketing their own products and leading the generation's tastes for extreme
hair styles, make-up, jewellery, sunglasses and bedroom accessories. The high
street will still sell clothes, but the fashion electricity will come from a
different direction.

   Sarah Mower, fashion critic

   Shopping

   The Noughties were defined by fast-fashion for those prepared to buy, wear
and bin. The next decade will see well-made, British-made, higher-priced items
come to the fore as people cherish, customise and take an interest in how and
who made their garments. Disposable fashion will go the way of the battery
chicken. Many will order their underwear on their iPhone and delivery vans will
clog up the traffic. But the high street will never die, with the best
shopkeepers offering tailored and personalised shopping to beat the internet.

   Harry Wallop, DT consumer

   affairs correspondent

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2010


                              55 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 154  words

HEADLINE: Scientists offer hope to colour blind

BYLINE: Kate Devlin Medical Correspondent

BODY:

   A CURE for colour blindness in monkeys could help millions of human sufferers
and have implications for other inherited genetic eye defects.

   Researchers proved that the brain can "rewire'' itself to see things it has
never been able to see before. Colour blindness affects more than one million
men and more than 100,000 women in Britain.

   Scientists used gene therapy to cure the monkeys of colour blindness. A
harmless virus that delivers corrective genes to the retina was injected into
the eyes of two squirrel monkeys, who had been colour blind since birth.

   Within weeks a protein produced by the corrective genes allowed both monkeys
to make out reds and greens. The researchers, from the universities of
Washington and Florida, called the results "startling''. Because human DNA was
used in the injections, very little would have to be changed before clinical
trials could begin, they said in the study published in Nature.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009


                              60 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            September 7, 2009 Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Health on Monday; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1200  words

HEADLINE: Singing from his own hymn sheet;
Cystic fibrosis sufferer Alex Stobbs tells Victoria Lambert how his passion for
music helps him cope

BYLINE: Victoria Lambert

BODY:

   When 19-year-old Cambridge undergraduate Alex Stobbs wakes up, like many of
his peers, he often struggles to get out of bed. But for Alex, that lack of
morning bounce has nothing to do with being a typical student - it is the
consequence of the 2,000-calorie night feed he will have ingested via a tube
inserted into his stomach. "I wake up feeling full,'' he explains, "so I don't
want to get up.''

   This night-time feeding is part of a daily ritual, which includes 50-60
tablets, oxygen, and intense physiotherapy, that is keeping Alex alive.

   He has cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common life-threatening inherited
condition in the UK. Some 2.3 million Britons carry the gene and its sufferers
include Gordon Brown's young son Fraser. The disease affects the pancreas and
lungs by clogging them with thick mucus. The treatment also takes its toll.
Nineteen years of steroid treatment have left Alex with osteoporosis, he has
early signs of liver disease, and lung infections have resulted in more than 60
hospital admissions. But he refuses to let his condition get in the way of
pursuing his dreams.

   As a member of King's College Choir, Alex sings at seven church services a
week, all of which require an hour's practice beforehand. He is also part of a
choral group called Collegium Regale, which performs all over the country. Last
spring, he conducted Bach's St Matthew Passion at the Cadogan Hall in London -
and of course there is his degree in music which he says is "hard work''.

   Alex, you see, is a brilliant musician who first came to public attention as
the subject of a Bafta-winning Channel 4 documentary, A Boy Called Alex, which
told the story of his battle to conduct Bach's Magnificat. He has now somehow
found the time to write a book, A Passion for Living, based on a year in his
life, in the hope of generating awareness of and research into CF.

   "Like a lot of people who live with ill-health, I'm quite driven, determined,
and - dare I say it - very stubborn at times,'' he says. "I have always seen
difficult things as a challenge rather than an obstacle, and I just have to
prove myself. Nothing gives me more satisfaction than being able to say 'I did
it' and prove the doubters wrong. I'm not the kind of person to be cautious or
give in; I want to show others that having CF doesn't mean sitting around
feeling sorry for yourself. I get very tired but I prefer to be doing too much
than too little.''

   Alex's illness was diagnosed at seven weeks. His mother Suzanne, a
51-year-old piano teacher, says it came as little surprise to any of the family;
she and husband Timothy, 55, a reinsurance technician, had realised that their
fourth child was sickly, distressed and slow to gain weight.

   Doctors explained that due to a genetic fault, and for reasons not yet fully
understood, his body producing too much mucus, and could not clear it. It was
vital to keep Alex's lungs clear by physiotherapy, while the administration of
steroids would strengthen them. Too much mucus causes chest infections which
permanently damage the lungs - the biggest threat to a sufferer's health.
Infections must also be dealt with quickly, with intravenous antibiotics
administered in hospital.

   Alex is remarkably matter of fact about his illness. There is never a time
when it wasn't a part of his life. "I don't recall thinking 'bloody hell, I've
got this' - it has all been normal to me. I remember going to hospital a lot
when I was quite young - they are fond memories,'' he says with a laugh. "I was
always treated to a bar of chocolate from the hospital shop so that I would feel
better about having needles stuck in me.''

   But it was singing from the age of seven that proved not only to be a passion
for Alex, but also beneficial to his condition. "Singing opens up the airwaves;
it is like a form of physiotherapy as it works the muscles of the chest,'' he
says.

   His family, who come from Kent, are all musical. Alex, his sister Miranda,
now 23, and brothers Christian, 22, and Patrick, 21, all won music scholarships
to prep school and then public school. Patrick and Alex were choristers at
King's College Cambridge, and went on to be music scholars at Eton. Miranda won
a scholarship to Benenden.

   "When I went to prep school, I was very annoyed that I couldn't play rugby or
go on cross-country runs, but I could do cricket'' says Alex. CF sufferers
typically don't have much stamina and avoid contact sports for risk of
infection, He played for the under-10s at county level.

   At Eton, Alex had a nurse assigned to him part-time, after he underwent a
gastrostomy, to insert a tube into his stomach to take overnight foods. He also
has a Port-A-Cath in his chest, a permanent opening for the delivery of
antibiotic drugs to treat infections, so that he can remain an outpatient
whenever possible.

   But he didn't find fitting in at Eton to be a problem. He decided not to make
his condition public among his peers. Many thought he suffered from asthma. He
was house captain of cricket and played the organ, piano and harpsichord.

   His routine has not got easier as he has got older. He must fit in three
15-20 minute sessions of physiotherapy a day, remember to take up to 60 tablets,
inhale a mixture of enzymes, antibiotics, steroids and vitamins, and get plenty
of rest to reduce chances of a serious chest infection.

   "Now I sing seven services a week it really makes a huge amount of difference
to how I feel. My voice does get hoarse but I love it too much to stop,'' he
says. Because of his condition Alex follows a different breathing pattern to the
rest of the singers. "I need more breaths than my colleagues, but I've worked
out a system that doesn't affect the sound and I am getting better at it.''

   There is no cure for CF, and Alex's best hope will lie in a heart and lung
transplant when his lungs become too scarred to work properly (the heart is
incidental; it is transplanted simply because the lungs cannot be moved safely
from one patient to another without it). A consortium of British scientists
brought together by the CF Trust, however, is working on a gene therapy and
research is advanced and encouraging. The first clinical trial in adults began
in February this year and is due to end this month.

   Alex refuses to slow down. He is helped enormously by King's, which has
settled him into an adapted flat in the same block as his elder brother Patrick,
who still helps with his physiotherapy. To help him get around he rides an
electric scooter. His mother comes up twice a week to deliver home-cooked food.

   "I know all I need to about CF and I do listen to the doctors but I am very
happy with the knowledge I have. I don't want to hear the negatives. I'm not
interested in seeing the latest scan of my lungs - I know how bad it will be.''
And then he is off to his whirl of music and college life. "Time is so
precious,'' he says. And he, more than anyone, knows the truth of that.

   *'A Passion For Living' by Alex Stobbs will be published by Hodder and
Stoughton on September 17; all royalties will go to the Cystic Fibrosis Trust.
It is available from Telegraph Books at the discounted price of  pounds 14.99 +
pounds 1.25 p&p. Call 0844 871 1515 or visit books.telegraph.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2009


                              63 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            August 13, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 183  words

HEADLINE: Gene injection offers hope to the blind

BYLINE: Kate Devlin Medical Correspondent

BODY:

   A GROUNDBREAKING therapy to treat blindness by injecting healthy genes into
the eye improved patients' sight a thousand fold a year after the initial
treatment.

   Researchers said that the therapy appeared to cause "stable'' improvement and
triggered adaptations in the brain. The treatment was tested on three patients
with a rare, incurable form of blindness called Leber's congenital amaurosis.

   "These results are very significant because they represent one of the first
steps toward the clinical use of gene therapy for an inherited form of
blindness,'' said Dr Paul Sieving, the director of the National Eye Institute in
Washington, which was involved in the trial.

   "I anticipate that it is only a matter of time before similar techniques will
be applied to other genetic diseases affecting vision.'' Although the treatment
did not improve the patients' ability to read letters on an eye chart, all three
can now detect very dim lights that they were previously unable to see.

   The findings were reported online in the journal Human Gene Therapy and in a
letter in The New England Journal of Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2009


                              75 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                               May 1, 2009 Friday

SECTION: CITY; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 320  words

HEADLINE: Shire sales up ahead of demise of key drug

BYLINE: Graham Ruddick

BODY:

   SALES at Shire, the specialist biopharmaceutical group, rose 17pc in the
first quarter as new attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) drugs and
human genetic therapies put it in strong shape ahead of the expected demise of
its key product, Adderall XR.

   Patent protection for ADHD drug Adderall - Shire's top-selling product with
revenues of $295.8m ( pounds 200m) in the three months to March 31 - ended at
the beginning of this month. It is now vulnerable to generic competition.

   Angus Russell, the chief executive, forecast that sales of Adderall will
broadly halve this year but warned that the deterioration had been faster than
expected in the first two weeks of April.

   Overall sales at Shire $818were m, with new ADHD drug Vyvanse up 114pc at
$116.6m and Elaprase, which is used in the treatment for Hunter syndrome, a
genetic disorder, up 16pc at $82.8m.

   Pre-tax profits rose 55pc to $265.7m as Shire cut costs in preparation for
Adderall's fall in sales.

   The company will close a US plant in Maryland over the next three years with
the loss of up to 180 jobs.

   Mr Russell said: "This has been a solid first-quarter with the delivery of
strong earnings growth, reflecting the continuing development of our business
and effective cost control.

   "We have built strong, competitive products that provide cutting-edge
therapies for our patients, which together with our late-stage pipeline, will
act as the principal drivers of Shire's future growth.''

   So far this year, Shire has signed a deal with larger UK rival
GlaxoSmithKline to market its ADHD treatments in the US. The company has also
acquired the rights to another ADHD drug, Equasym, for $55m. The drug will
initially target the European market. Mr Russell said further bolt-on deals are
a possibility.

   Analysts praised the performance as "pleasing''. However, Savvas Neophytou at
Panmure Gordon warned that the rest of the year "remains on a knife-edge''.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2009


                              76 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             April 20, 2009 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 450  words

HEADLINE: Stem cell breakthrough to treat blindness

BYLINE: Alastair Jamieson

BODY:

   THE world's first stem cell treatment for the most common cause of blindness
has been developed by British scientists.

   Surgeons believe a one-hour procedure to tackle age-related macular
degeneration (AMD) could be available within seven years.

   Up to half a million Britons and 30 million people worldwide are affected by
AMD, in which the part of the retina responsible for central vision gradually
thins, leaving one in 10 sufferers totally blind.

   One in four over-60s in Britain suffers from the condition and it is
predicted that it will worsen with the ageing population.

   The new treatment, pioneered by scientists at the Institute of Ophthalmology
at University College London and Moorfields Eye Hospital, involves replacing a
layer of degenerated cells with new ones created from embryonic stem cells.

   It is thought the therapy could help those with both the "dry'' form of the
condition, which is currently untreatable, and the "wet'' form, which can be
mitigated with injections.

   The charity RNIB welcomed the announcement, which a spokesman said would
"give hope to tens of thousands across Britain'' with the dry form of the
condition. Tom Bremridge, the chief executive of the Macular Disease Society,
said: "This is a huge step forward for patients.

   "We are extremely pleased that the big guns have become involved because,
once this treatment is validated, it will be made available to a huge volume of
patients.''

   Pfizer, the pharmaceutical research company, is expected to announce
financial backing for the therapy this week. Under the treatment, embryonic stem
cells are transformed into replicas of the cells in the thinning part of the
retina and inserted into the affected area.

   The use of embryonic stem cells is controversial because it involves the
destruction of human embryos.

   Researchers are seeking permission for clinical trials from the Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, the Human

   Tissue Authority and the

   Gene Therapy Advisory

   Committee.

   If approved, the trials would be the second in the world to use embryonic
stem cells on humans.

   The first, carried out on patients with spinal cord injuries, will start this
year in the United States.

   Prof Peng Khaw, the director of the Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields
and the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, added: "This shows that stem cell
therapy is coming of age. It offers great hope for many sufferers around the
world who cannot be treated conventionally.

   "All my patients say to me is, 'When will this stem cell treatment be ready?
I want it now.' ''

   Risk factors that can lead to developing the blindness condition include
genetics, farsightedness and a diet low in vitamins, minerals and antioxidants.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2009


                              80 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           February 17, 2009 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 274  words

HEADLINE: 'Super' virus offers possible cure for cystic fibrosis sufferers

BYLINE: Kate Devlin Medical Correspondent

BODY:

   CYSTIC fibrosis sufferers have been offered hope of an effective treatment
that would use a "super'' virus to swap defective genes for healthy ones.

   Scientists found that a laboratory-created virus could be used to deliver a
healthy version of a gene into cells affected by cystic fibrosis, ridding them
of the disease.

   The discovery is the latest boost for a technique called gene therapy, which
scientists hope can attack diseases at their root.

   Previous studies have shown that scientists can "turn off'' the faulty gene
which causes cystic fibrosis by replacing it with a healthy copy. Now they have
created a strong virus, with no side effects, capable of resisting the body's
defences.

   Tests on human lung cells with cystic fibrosis showed that they were free
from the disease after being treated with the virus. More than 8,000 people in
Britain suffer from cystic fibrosis, including Gordon Brown's son, Fraser.

   The disease, which affects the lungs and causes breathing difficulties, has
few known treatments.

   Joseph Zabner, from the University of Iowa, claimed that if further tests
proved successful the therapy could be a cure for the condition.

   He said: "If we are able to show that efficient gene transfer can result in
gene therapy, if we can cure the lung disease of pigs that have been genetically
engineered to have cystic fibrosis lung disease, we should have a real chance of
curing cystic fibrosis in humans.''

   A spokesman for the UK Cystic Fibrosis Gene Therapy Consortium said: "The
techniques used in this research are innovative, but more work is needed before
this could be translated into clinical benefit for people with CF.''

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2009


                              93 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           November 13, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 366  words

HEADLINE: Doctor 'cures HIV' with bone marrow transplant

BYLINE: David Wroe and Kate Devlin

BODY:

   A GERMAN doctor claims to have "cured'' HIV in a patient by giving him a bone
marrow transplant.

   The man, a 42-year-old American living in Berlin, has shown no trace of the
virus in the nearly two years since Dr Gero Hütter, a haematologist, carried out
the operation - a standard treatment for leukaemia, from which the patient was
also suffering. The breakthrough gives hope that gene therapies could tackle the
virus, which caused two million deaths last year and infected another 2.7
million.

   Working on a hunch, Dr Hütter selected a bone marrow donor who had a genetic
resistance to most strains of HIV in the hope that the transplanted marrow would
produce HIV-resistant cells in his patient. Yesterday Dr Hütter declared his
patient "functionally cured''. The patient had taken no antiretroviral drugs,
the standard treatment for Aids, since the transplant.

   "HIV has an Achilles' heel,'' Dr Hütter told a press conference in Berlin.
That "Achilles' heel'' is a molecule that sits on the outside of a human cell
and acts as a doorway to let HIV invade the body.

   People with the genetic resistance have a mutation that blocks the production
of the molecule, giving carriers resistance to most strains of HIV. About one
per cent of Europeans have the mutation, but people of African, Asian and South
American descent almost never carry it.

   Though bone marrow transplants are not an effective therapy, since they are
expensive and kill up to 30 per cent of recipients, it offers hope that Aids
patients' cells could be re-engineered using gene therapy.

   David Baltimore, who won a Nobel prize for his research on cancer viruses,
described the breakthrough as "a very good sign'', while cautioning the case
could be a fluke.

   Though the case had provoked great excitement, most experts were likely to
remain wary until it was published in a peer-reviewed journal.

   Will Nutland, from the Terrence Higgins Trust, said: "This gives researchers
a new avenue to explore but it should be remembered that we do not know what
will happen to this patient in the long term and that this has only been tried
in one person.

   "Also, if it is a breakthrough it will be a breakthrough in decades rather
than years.''

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2008


                              95 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            October 24, 2008 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 208  words

HEADLINE: Lighting the way Glow-in-the-dark cat could lead to medical
breakthroughs

BYLINE: Richard Alleyne

BODY:

   BY DAY he is just a normal tabby but when the lights go out, this
six-month-old ginger cat glows in the dark.

   Scientists have genetically modified the cat as part of an experiment that
could lead to treatments for conditions such as cystic fibrosis.

   Named Mr Green Genes, its eyes, gums and tongue glow a vivid lime green under
ultraviolet light, the result of an experiment at the Audubon Center for
Research of Endangered Species in New Orleans.

   Mr Green Genes was the first fluorescent cat in the world, said Betsy
Dresser, the centre's director.

   The researchers made it so they could learn whether a gene could be
introduced harmlessly into the genetic sequence to create what is formally known
as a transgenic cat. If so, it would be the first step in a process that could
lead to the development of ways to fight diseases via gene therapy.

   The gene had no effect on its health, Ms Dresser said.

   To show that the gene went where it was supposed to go, the researchers
settled on one that would glow. The gene will go alongside the cystic-fibrosis
gene and make it easy to spot. The long-term goal of this process, for which
there is no timetable, is the production of what Dr Martha Gómez, a scientist at
the centre, calls a "knockout gene''.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2008


                              97 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           September 23, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 430  words

HEADLINE: Doctors give hope of restoring sight

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   THOUSANDS of people with failing vision could benefit from a pioneering
technique to treat blindness by injecting healthy genes into the eye, it was
announced last night.

   Doctors have managed to improve significantly the eyesight of three patients
in their early twenties with the severe inherited blindness Leber's congenital
amaurosis.

   Although not perfect, the therapy offers a dramatic improvement in night and
day vision.

   A gene that is lacking in the patients, called RPE65, is inserted into the
eye to restore a cycle of enzymes that regenerates vitamin A molecules,
essential for converting light into nerve signals in the retina at the back of
the eye.

   Dr Artur Cideciyan, Prof Samuel Jacobson and colleagues at the Scheie Eye
Institute, University of Pennsylvania, treated one eye of three adults with the
condition.

   After 30 days, all three patients showed significant improvement in the
sensitivity of the retina, the light-sensing layer, in their treated eye.

   The researchers, who report their results in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, suggest that gene therapy could increase sensitivity in
daylight up to 50-fold, and in dim light by up to 63,000 times.

   "Earlier reports from the trials showed safety of the intervention and modest
improvement of vision,'' said Dr Cideciyan. "The current report from our trial
shows dramatic improvement of both day and night vision corresponding to the
area that was treated in all three participants.''

   There are two components to vision loss in Leber's congenital amaurosis.
Although the degeneration of cells in the retina remained the same after the
gene therapy, the scientists found it "could completely reverse the component
caused by the missing RPE65 enzyme''.

   Prof Robin Ali, at University College of London Institute of Ophthalmology
and Moorfields Eye Hospital, believes the method could be ready for use within
two years to treat people suffering from some inherited diseases of the retina,
which affect 20,000 people in Britain. The therapy could also potentially help
people who suffer age-related macular degeneration [AMD], a common condition
that affects 500,000 people in Britain. "I think there will be a trial for AMD
perhaps within three years,'' he said.

   Prof Ali said the study "gives us a much better indication of optimal dose
and provides huge encouragement for the whole field''. He added: "We can now
begin to find out how much useful vision is restored by improving retinal
sensitivity and whether the results are better in young children when we treat
the whole retina using a high dose.''

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2008


                              98 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           September 23, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Science; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 709  words

HEADLINE: The marvel of DNA surgery;
New research at last gives gene therapy the chance to fulfil its potential, says
Roger Highfield

BYLINE: Roger Highfield

BODY:

   At the heart of most diseases lies a fault in our genes. We will inherit
flaws in our DNA from our parents, or suffer mutations that enable cancer cells
to multiply out of control, or increase our risk of being obese, of developing
diabetes or heart disease. Find a way to rewrite this faulty code, and you have
a powerful weapon against almost every major killer.

   Since the first serious attempt at gene therapy began in 1990, the technique
has notched up some notable successes in treating immune disorders, cancer and
blindness - but it has also caused leukaemia and even death. Now, however, a new
treatment involving the body's own machinery for editing genes could fulfil the
idea's extraordinary promise.

   Old-fashioned gene therapy is relatively inefficient - it relies on wrapping
up a new gene in a virus or fat particle and parachuting it into the DNA,
compensating for a genetic fault but not correcting it. But the new treatment,
which is showing promise in diabetic patients and is being readied for use in
treating Aids, offers a way to edit the genetic code with surgical precision.

   To understand how it works, think of your DNA as a message three billion
letters long, which spells out 25,000 genes and countless other instructions to
run the body. To read these commands, the body needs the help of fistfuls of
zinc finger proteins, or "zinc fingers''. These were discovered in 1985 by Sir
Aaron Klug, a Nobel laureate working at the Medical Research Council's
Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, and are so named because they
contain a zinc atom and are shaped like an index finger.

   There are around 700 different kinds of zinc fingers, each of which bind
themselves to your DNA and, like the editor of a book, control how the code -
and the genes it contains - is read, for instance to make a liver cell different
from a brain cell. Each zinc finger matches up with a three-letter sequence of
DNA; with just six fingers, you can hold on to any particular gene.

   Sir Aaron and his colleagues realised that by using the design of the 700
different zinc fingers, it would be possible to create new proteins to turn on
or off any genes in any cell. The zinc finger acts as a homing mechanism,
targeting the desired stretch of DNA before a protein tethered to it carries out
the surgery.

   The first demonstration came in 1994, when Sir Aaron's team showed in a paper
in Nature that it was possible to repress a gene that causes cancer. Since then,
other companies and techniques have sprung up. The Californian company Sangamo
BioSciences, which owns much of the intellectual property in the field,
including Sir Aaron's, is testing a zinc-finger-based drug on young diabetic
patients with nerve damage. A few days ago, in Belgium, it presented data on 45
diabetics that showed encouraging results after the zinc finger carried a
protein-transcription factor designed to increase the use of a gene that
prevents such nerve damage.

   This year, Sangamo and a team at the University of Pennsylvania led by Dr
Carl June also showed that you can use the fingers to knock out a gene called
CCR5, the docking point used by HIV to invade certain white blood cells. They
expect to test the resulting non-infectable cells in patients this year.

   Britain's leading gene therapist, Prof Adrian Thrasher of Great Ormond Street
Hospital in London, is also interested in using such ideas to treat children who
have a hereditary fault that strips them of the ability to fight infections.

   There are limits, however. Zinc fingers currently only treat diseases caused
by a single malfunctioning gene, whereas heart disease, cancer and other
illnesses rely on the interplay of several. Since human trials have been
small-scale, there is also much to learn about side effects. But they do look
promising - and have applications beyond human medicine, as the fingers can
fiddle with genes inside any cell in any organism.

   One particularly promising use, being pioneered by Dr Daniel Voytas of the
University of Minnesota, is in plants, increasing their vitamin content,
resistance to drought, salt, or herbicides, and making them better at harnessing
sunlight or more useful as biofuels. If the proteins can do all that, it really
will be some fancy fingerwork.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2008


                              99 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                           September 16, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 383  words

HEADLINE: Bone marrow cells could alleviate stroke symptoms

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   STROKE patients could be treated with bone marrow in an attempt to reduce
brain damage.

   Injecting stem cells derived from bone marrow directly into the brain can
alleviate the damage caused by a stroke, when the brain is starved of blood by a
blockage or bleeding, according to a study of mice.

   The findings suggest that the treatment protects existing brain cells and
reduces inflammation but do not support the idea that new brain cells arise from
the stem cells.

   Researchers have started preparing a facility to isolate cells in the marrow
for use to treat patients and the first trials are expected in about a year.

   Every year, an estimated 150,000 people in Britain have a stroke. Most of
those affected are over 65 but anyone can have a stroke, including children and
even babies.

   A stroke is the third most common cause of death in Britain and is also the
leading cause of severe disability, with more than 250,000 people living with
disabilities caused by stroke.

   In a study that shows for the first time how the treatment works, a team led
by Prof Darwin Prockop of the Centre for Gene Therapy in New Orleans discovered
that injected stem cells exerted their healing effect by triggering the
production of biochemicals that reduce inflammation.

   "Our paper provides for the first time a molecular explanation of how adult
stem/progenitor cells can ameliorate ischaemic [reduced blood flow] damage to
the brain,'' he reports in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The researchers also investigated how the use of genes in the brain changed
in mice that were briefly deprived of blood flow to the brain.

   They found that 586 genes worked at higher levels after the flow was halted.
But if stem cells were injected into the brain, 10 per cent fewer genes were
activated, suggesting that those genes were likely to be involved in
inflammatory and immune responses.

   "We are planning clinical trials of the cells we used in patients with
stroke,'' said Prof Prockop, adding that the team was building a facility of
sufficient standard to produce the stem cells for use in patients. "In the
meantime we are planning further experiments in mice and a larger animal,
probably pigs, on efficacy and toxicity.''

   Various companies are preparing cells for brain repair, notably ReNeuron in
Britain.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2008


                             102 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            September 1, 2008 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Health on Monday; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 889  words

HEADLINE: Cure me of deafness? No thanks;
New scientific techniques may restore the hearing of millions of deaf people,
but Jessica Fellowes doesn't want it

BYLINE: Jessica Fellowes

BODY:

   The news that deaf people can hope to have their hearing restored thanks to a
groundbreaking gene therapy will have up to one in five of us breaking out the
champagne. As someone who has worn hearing aids since the age of two, you would
think I'd be one of them but strangely, I'm not. An integral part of me, I can
no more contemplate the loss of my deafness than that of my right leg. Over the
years I have learnt to love my feeble ears and, more particularly, the blissful
silence that is mine at the simple flick of a switch.

   However, I am prepared to accept that I may be alone in this. The most recent
statistics suggest that nine million people in Great Britain are classified as
being deaf or hard of hearing, a disability most pronounced among the elderly.
Growing deafer with age is often cited as a cause for frustration - not only for
the sufferer but for those around them. Many of us have shouted a phrase
repeatedly at our grandparent only to give up and mutter: "It wasn't anything
anyway.''

   But as I see it, I'm one of the lucky ones - I got the frustrations out of
the way early, having had moderate congenital deafness since birth. This means I
have a hearing loss of approximately 40-80 per cent: without my hearing aids I
cannot hear conversational speech (unless I'm right up close and in a very quiet
room) or background noises. The neighbour's party, cars zooming outside or even
howling storms in the middle of the night are silent to me.

   For the first two years, no one realised I was deaf: in those days (I was
born in 1974) even the most basic tests weren't carried out, as they are now. It
was only diagnosed when my mother noticed I was becoming increasingly naughty:
turning up the television too loud and not answering her calls to come back to
her in the park. But once they knew, my parents bravely decided that it was "not
a problem''.

   They spent the first year talking carefully to me in a quite demented
fashion: v-e-r-y-s-l-o-w-l-y, so that I would hear and repeat every syllable in
every word and my actress mother made me repeat elocution exercises for hours on
end. The result is that I do sound like a hearing person and not someone who has
had four Bloody Marys for breakfast (most deaf people have slurred speech).

   With normal speech and long hair to cover my hearing aids, most people I meet
don't know I'm deaf. Which is good. The only drawback is that if I miss what
someone has said to me, they think I am either rude or stupid. Still, the best
bit about someone saying, "You deaf or something?'' is replying, "Yes,
actually''.

   As a schoolgirl, when one might expect problems with bullies, classmates were
more fascinated by my mother's television fame (she starred in Metal Mickey in
the early 1980s) than any peculiar gadgets in my ears. It never seemed to put
off boys either. The only boy I didn't tell was the first one I kissed and when
my hearing aid squeaked I said there must be a mouse in the room. In fact, if
anything, I think it helped me: I definitely seduced one when my battery ran out
and he had to nuzzle right up close to talk to me.

   Until five years ago, I wore analogue hearing aids which were pretty basic as
sound technology goes and I relied heavily on lip-reading. So there were
frustrations, not the least of which was applying to university. At the only
interview I was granted, there was no mention of my intended degree, just the
question of what I would do if the fire alarm went off in the night. I said that
I would hope I wouldn't be so unpopular that no one would wake me. (I reapplied
the following year with no mention of my deafness on the UCAS forms to much
greater success, eventually completing a philosophy degree at Edinburgh.)

   Hence, various attempts to cure my ears have been tried: grommets,
acupuncture and even a long, oily massage in Sri Lanka. But the only thing to
make a real difference was five years ago when I at last acquired a pair of
digital aids. When I first wore them, I admit, I sobbed as someone reborn. The
world simply came alive: the words on the radio, the birds on the trees, even
the click-click of the car indicator. But at the same time as revelling in this
new wall of sound was a worry: would I now be a normal person?

   You see, I was brought up to feel special for having special needs. Without
them I worry I would be just another ordinary person doing ordinary things. I
love it when people exclaim that they hadn't realised and they look at me anew -
as someone who has overcome great problems and managed to function successfully
in the world.

   Nor do I understand how everyone else copes with noise 24/7. My happiest
moments are spent pottering around my flat in total silence, the outside world
unable to encroach on my peace. I am able to get completely lost in a book and
never have an interrupted night's sleep. But most of all, I am proud of my
parents and friends for the way they handle it, never allowing my deafness to
let me feel less than entirely good about myself. It has undoubtedly made me a
nicer and more sympathetic person.

   So well done to those scientists who have found they can trigger the growth
of new hair cells in the inner ears of mice - a discovery that could eventually
restore hearing in human beings. But I'm fine, thanks, and if you'll excuse me,
I'm going to switch you all off now.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2008


                             105 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                            August 28, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 263  words

HEADLINE: Gene discovery brings hope;
to millions of deaf people

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   DEAF people could one day have their hearing restored through a
ground-breaking gene therapy technique, scientists reported yesterday.

   They showed that they can trigger the growth of new hair cells in the inner
ear that are crucial to hearing as they pick up sound vibrations.

   In tests on mice they showed that stimulating these usually irreplaceable
cells to grow resulted in new cells that helped detect noise.

   Researchers believe the approach could eventually be used to improve or
restore hearing to the nine million people in Britain classified as deaf or hard
of hearing

   Dr Mark Downs, of the Royal National Institute for Deaf People, said: "This
is an exciting development which completes another important piece of the jigsaw
in understanding how we might use gene therapy to eventually restore hearing
loss.

   "It is no longer a pipedream to talk about cell and drug-based solutions.
There is a long way to go, but the journey towards new treatments is certainly
under way.''

   Humans are born with about 12,000 hair cells in each ear and they form a
ribbon of sensors along the length of the cochlea, the organ of the inner ear
that detects sound.

   The death of the cells over the years accounts for most types of acquired
hearing loss. People, like all mammals, are unable to regenerate damaged or lost
hair cells.

   But a team led by Dr John Brigande, of the Oregon Hearing Research Centre,
Portland, reported in Nature magazine that implanting a gene that regulates hair
cell growth into a mouse's inner ear while it was still in the womb, led to new
cells that detected sound.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2008


                             115 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             July 31, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: CITY; The Market; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 211  words

HEADLINE: SMALL CAP FOCUS

BYLINE: Ben Bland

BODY:

   * Ark Therapeutics, which is developing gene-based medicines, surged 32¾ to
80¼p after a phase III trial of its Cerepro treatment for malignant brain
tumours showed positive results.

   The company said that its latest clinical trial had "met its primary
endpoint'', pointing to "significant improvements in median survival''.

   Chief executive Dr Nigel Parker said: "This is the first gene therapy product
successfully to reach its primary endpoint in a major Phase III trial. With a
number of patients in the trial still to report an event, there is a substantial
amount of further information to come and we will update the analysis after the
turn of the year in parallel with our regulatory activities.'' However,
Elizabeth Klein, an analyst at Landsbanki, urged caution,

   noting that the study "did not

   show a significant positive impact'' when Cerepro was used alone, without the
assistance of any other drugs.

   * Optare, the bus-building group backed by Tanfield founder Roy Stanley,
jumped 4½ to 29¼p as it secured its largest order to date. Bus operator Go-Ahead
Group is buying 94 buses from Optare at a cost of  pounds 14.25m.

   * Acertec, which makes engineered steel for use in cars, tumbled 6½ to 8p
after warning of a profits slump and likely one-off provisions.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2008


                             130 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             June 24, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: CITY; THE MARKET; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1133 words

HEADLINE: Property stocks buffeted by HSBC warning on sector

BYLINE: Ben Bland

BODY:

   THE out-of-favour property sector was hit by a big downgrade from HSBC, which
advised investors to "stay in the trenches'' as some share prices could yet
tumble by another 30pc or more.

   Analyst John Fraser-Andrews warned that rent for prime properties is likely
to fall by between 15pc and 35pc over the next 12 months as the economic
downturn squeezes demand. "Development oversupply in most sub-sectors
exacerbates the downside,'' he added. "Peril awaits intrepid investors.''

   He cut Land Securities to underweight from neutral and reiterated his
underweight ratings on the rest of the UK property sector, forecasting that
Brixton and Liberty International would be forced to cut their dividends.

   Land Securities was the biggest blue-chip faller, sliding 64p to pounds
12.75. Liberty International dipped 23½ to 881p, Brixton slipped 10¼ to 250p,
British Land weakened 21 to 745p and Quintain Estates fell 22¾ to 227¼p.

   The FTSE 100 closed up 46.4 at 5667.2, buoyed by a strong showing from the
oil and mining companies yet again. The FTSE 250, which is more closely
correlated to the UK economy, retreated 40.5 to 9320.6.

   As the London market closed, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down 19 at
11823.7. It closed down -0.33 at 11842.36.

   Former stock market darling Invensys enjoyed a happy return to the FTSE 100,
up 17 to 298¼p, as the changes from the latest quarterly index review took
effect. The engineering and technology group rose to the top of the FTSE 100
leaderboard on its first day back in the benchmark index since falling out in
2003.

   Ukrainian miner Ferrexpo, oil services group Petrofac and Drax, which
operates Europe's largest coal-fired power station, all joined Invensys in the
FTSE 100.

   Mortgage lender Alliance & Leicester, housebuilder Persimmon and
Homebase-owner Home Retail Group - all victims of the credit crunch - were
relegated from the FTSE 100 to the FTSE 250, alongside Tate & Lyle.

   Shire, which is Britain's third largest pharmaceutical group, rose 45½ to
842½p thanks to an upgrade from Goldman Sachs. The broker lifted its
recommendation from neutral to buy, arguing that the market has been distracted
by disappointing sales from Vyvanse, its drug treatment for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. "The focus on Vyvanse has obscured the sizeable and
growing contribution of Human Genetic Therapies which will contribute more than
40pc of group earnings by 2012,'' said analyst Dani Saurymper.

   The mortgage banks and housebuilders were weak once more as Rightmove served
up more negative news on the housing market. HBOS, which is Britain's largest
lender, fell beneath its 275p rights issue price, again raising the prospect of
underwriters Morgan Stanley and Dresdner Kleinwort being forced to take most of
the stock and dump it on the open market. The shares ended down 12 at 270¼p.

   Alliance & Leicester fell 11½ to 294½p, while struggling buy-to-let lender
Bradford & Bingley lost 2½ to 66p. However, B&B shares are likely to bounce
today as entrepreneur Clive Cowdery's new Resolution vehicle revealed after the
market closed that it was plotting a bailout to rival the agreed cash injection
from private equity firm TPG.

   Lloyds TSB fell 8¾ to 318¾p, with investors broadly unimpressed by the
possibility that it may bid for Germany's Dresdner bank. Sandy Chen, an analyst
at Panmure Gordon, said there would be "few prospects for synergies'' if Lloyds
bought a German bank.

   In the home construction sector, Taylor Wimpey dropped 5 to 64¾p, Bellway
fell 32 to 492p and Barratt Developments lost 4 to 83¾p.

   Sugar and sweeteners group Tate & Lyle firmed 18¼ to 392½p after US peer Corn
Products agreed to be bought for $4.4bn ( pounds 2.2bn). Traders noted the
multiple this deal was struck at implied a much higher valuation for Tate &
Lyle.

   Aggreko, which provides temporary power supplies, leapt 64½ to 709p after
revealing that profits will be ahead of expectations thanks to strong demand
from the Middle East, Asia, Australia and Central and South America.

   Investors continued to pull out of the pub groups amid concerns about high
levels of debt and slowing consumer spending. "It wouldn't surprise me if we
have a few profit warnings coming from the pub companies'' said one senior
trader. Punch Taverns dived 25¼ to 338p, Marston's shed 8½ to 175p and JD
Wetherspoon lost 9¼ to 202¾p.

   SMALL CAP FOCUS

   * Coffeeheaven International, the Eastern European cafe chain, remained in
focus as rumours of bid interest from Whitbread refused to die down. The latest
dealing room chatter suggested that Whitbread, which owns Costa cafes, was
mulling a possible offer in the region of 55p-60p a share.

   Starbucks, the US coffeeshop giant, is also rumoured to be interested in
Coffeeheaven. However, sources close to Coffeeheaven insisted that the company
had not been approached by anyone at this stage. Coffeeheaven shares, which have
more than doubled in value since February, closed down 1¾ at 41¼p.

   * Tanfield, the embattled vehicle manufacturer, slipped 3 to 68p after The
Sunday Telegraph revealed that the company is seeking to bring in a heavyweight
non-executive and appoint a "tier one'' broker.

   As Tanfield strives to improve its investors relations, market sources also
suggested that the company was considering replacing its PR advisers Fishburn
Hedges with a more well-established financial PR firm such as Brunswick,
Financial Dynamics or Finsbury.

   * Stockbroker Blue Oar tumbled 2 to a four-year low at 11½p after chief
executive Andrew Monk warned that it would make a pounds 1.1m half-year loss
because of the decline in its corporate finance business.

   BIT OF A SPURT

   Oil services group Hunting jumped 49 to 850½p on the back of a strong push
from house broker ABN Amro.

   While the oil services sector has been boosted by persistent takeover
interest from private equity, Hunting has underperformed its peers by 15pc over
the past month.

   ABN Amro believes this lag is completely unjustified and views Hunting as
"the strongest buy in the sector''.

   Analyst Phil Lindsay explained that he thinks Hunting is also "the most
obvious M&A candidate in our oil services coverage''.

   With oil prices soaring, there has been a flurry of oil services buyouts in
the past year. In September, General Electric bought Sondex for pounds 290m,
while in December US private equity firm First Reserve agreed to buy Abbot for
just over pounds 900m. Expro has agreed to a pounds 1.8bn takeover by private
equity house Candover.

   ABN Amro also believes that Hunting's underlying business is performing well
with a number of significant yet unannounced contract wins in recent months.

   "These are new contracts which add to the order book, increase visibility,
provide significant earnings upside potential in 2008-2010 and could lead to
further international contracts,'' Mr Lindsay added

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2008


                             143 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 603 words

HEADLINE: Hope of genetic cure for failing eyesight

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   HUNDREDS of thousands of people with failing eyesight have been given fresh
hope of a cure after gene therapy techniques were used to treat a teenager.

   The treatment transformed the life of a severely visually impaired
18-year-old man. Healthy genes were injected into one eye, leading to a
significant improvement.

   The technique could be ready for use within two years to treat people
suffering from some inherited diseases of the retina, which affect 20,000 people
in Britain.

   Within five years it could be ready for testing on people who suffer age
related macular degeneration, a condition that affects 500,000 Britons.

   In the trial carried out by a team at the University College of London
Institute of Ophthalmology and Moorfields Eye Hospital, the world's first gene
transplant for blindness produced an unprecedented improvement in Steven
Howarth's sight.

   The student suffered from a genetic mutation, called Leber's congenital
amaurosis (LCA), which usually begins affecting the sight of sufferers in early
childhood and eventually causes total blindness during a patient's twenties or
thirties.

   Currently, there is no treatment for the condition.

   Born with no peripheral or night vision, he noticed a marked improvement
after the two-hour operation.

   "Now, my sight when it's getting dark or it's badly lit is definitely
better,'' he says. "It's a small change - but it makes a big difference.''

   Prof Robin Ali, the head of the team, said the evidence of his improvement
was "compelling''.

   The doctors injected genes only into Mr Howarth's worst affected eye and used
the lowest dose in what was strictly a safety trial.

   "It is more than we could have expected at this stage,'' said Prof Ali, who
has been racing to perform the transplants against a rival team at the
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, where three young adults have also been
successfully treated.

   The treatment, described in the New England Journal of Medicine, should be
available for other patients with this rare condition in two years.

   But Prof Ali believes that this is a proof of principle for treating a vast
range of blinding conditions, from 100 other inherited kinds to the most common
of all, age-related macular degeneration.

   "It is a major boost for the whole field,'' he said.

   The first trials to use gene therapy to treat macular degeneration could
start in three to five years, said Prof Ali.

   The blindness trial was partly funded by pounds 1 million from the Department
of Health.

   The public health minister, Dawn Primarolo, said: "This is a major
achievement for British science and the

   NHS.''

   However, a leading British gene therapist said the level of Government
support was inadequate.

   "This is good stuff and we have the potential to broaden these technologies
to many other areas,'' he told The Daily Telegraph.

   "But this needs major investment from the Department of Health.''

   Success with three more patients was reported in the same journal by a second
team - The University of Pennsylvania, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
the Second University of Naples and the Telethon Institute of Genetics and
Medicine, both in Italy.

   Dr Albert Maguire led the study with his wife, Prof Jean Bennett, and the
gene therapist Prof Katherine High.

   Speaking to The Daily Telegraph, Profs High and Bennett conceded that Prof
Ali was the first to perform the treatment.

   "Our own study was facilitated by the safety data that he generated when his
first subject was injected.''

   More than a third of a million people in the UK are registered blind or
partially sighted and, overall, the RNIB estimates two million people have
significant sight loss.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             144 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy is a light in the dark for blind student

BYLINE: Nigel Bunyan and Roger Highfield

BODY:

   STEVEN HOWARTH used to dread the onset of nightfall when he would have to
sprint home from college because he feared his eyesight would let him down.

   With no night vision or peripheral vision, the 18-year-old aspiring guitarist
would forgo playing in his band and staying out with friends.

   But his life has been transformed after pioneering gene treatment.

   "Before the operation I used to rush home from college when it started to get
dark because I was worried about getting around,'' he said.

   "Now I can take my time and stay later at college if I need to, for band
rehearsals and things like that.''

   His father, Tommy, said the change was "incredible''.

   "He's doing things now that he just couldn't do before,'' he said. "It's
completely transformed the life he leads.''

   The teenager, of Westhoughton, near Bolton, said his eyes felt like sandpaper
after the operation and he could not see anything.

   "But it got much better after a week,'' he said. "Now my sight is definitely
better when it's getting dark. It's a small change, but it makes a big
difference to me.''

   Mr Howarth suffers from a genetic disease called Leber's congenital amaurosis
(LCA), which can lead to complete blindness in a patient in their 20s or 30s and
affects one in 100,000 babies.

   It is caused by abnormalities in a gene (RPE65) which prevents the normal
function of the retina, the layer of cells at the back of the eyes that detect
light.

   A virus carrying healthy copies of the gene was injected into the cells of
the retina to help it function properly. Surgeons detached Mr Howarth's retina
and injected the virus, which is manufactured by the American company Targeted
Genetics, Seattle.

   Side effects include retinal tears, retinal detachment and inflammation.

   But of the three adults who have taken part in the British trial, which began
in February last year, all made a full recovery after surgery with no serious
side effects emerging.

   However, Mr Howarth's treatment appears to be the most successful so far.

   British researchers believe that the operation has been so helpful to the
young student because his disease had not progressed to the same extent as the
others.

   Animal studies suggest that the younger the patient and less degenerated the
retina, the better the outcome.

   The other two patients may also still benefit from the new treatment in the
future, but it will be some time before this becomes apparent. One patient for
whom the treatment did not work is Robert Johnson, a civil servant. Despite
this, the 23-year-old is enthusiastic about the treatment's potential for
others.

   "For the team, I am thrilled that their hard work and dedication has paid
off, with promising results in one patient allowing them to continue with this
important trial,'' he said.

   "To think that this first step could lead to treatments for other eye
conditions, with the potential to help many thousands of people, is quite
humbling.

   "Aside from any effect on me personally, I am pleased that my operation
proved the safety of this technique and has enabled the team to move forward to
give others that priceless chance of stabilised, or even improved, sight.''

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             152 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            April 24, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: APPOINTMENTS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1022 words

HEADLINE: PROFILE The academic who learned to become a political animal For Prof
David Latchman, business skills are essential when it comes to obtaining
funding, reports Martin Baker

BYLINE: Martin Baker

BODY:

   ACADEMIA is a dangerous and difficult game. The rivalries, the jealousies and
the terrible pay are legendary. But swinging by the neck from the highest tree
is not a risk that usually gets factored into the equation.

   Prof David Latchman, master of Birkbeck College, London, however, is not the
kind of fellow to leave anything to chance. Latchman is one of those academics
who dares to engage with the world outside the groves of academe. He has a range
of demanding business and political roles outside his academic career.

   As such, he is acutely conscious that having a practical bent of mind might
be construed as apostasy by some members of his academic home base. "In some
quarters, I'd get lynched for saying this, but universities are businesses. They
don't exist to make money for their shareholders, but they do exist to make
sufficient money so that they can re-invest and so continue doing what they
do.''

   Latchman's comment reflects the drive and confidence of a pluralist.

   His academic career initially followed a traditional, linear path. After
graduating from Cambridge laden with prizes and distinctions, Latchman did a
PhD, followed by post-doctoral research. He was then successful in obtaining a
lectureship at University College London (UCL), in molecular genetics. Shortly
after that, he became the director of a medical molecular biology unit, took a
professorship and later became head of the Institute of Child Health (ICH), an
organisation closely linked to both UCL and Great Ormond Street Children's
Hospital.

   The pattern of taking on progressively larger administrative roles will be
familiar to many academics. "I went from running a unit with a particular
interest, to running a department with broader interests, to running an
institute in a large building with an array of research.''

   Latchman is adamant that he is still very much an academic, but has a
pragmatic streak that has seen him develop administrative and man-management
skills.

   "This was true throughout my career,'' he says. "For example, I was running a
clinical department in molecular pathology and an institute of child health
without being medically qualified. I had to demonstrate something that showed
these people why they are being managed by a non-clinical person or, in the case
of the ICH, someone who wasn't a paediatrician.

   "You have to show that you're going to help the people you manage to do what
they want to do. It's the same problem, whether you are leading a department, an
institute of child health or Birkbeck.''

   He became master of Birkbeck in 2003. He believes that teaching at
undergraduate level is an important part of being an academic, but concedes that
the demands of the job can make such activities difficult.

   "I fight not to make the choice between being an academic and an academic
manager. But when the choice comes, it's to be an academic manager. It's about
facilitating things and bringing people together. You can do much more in most
cases than as a single academic.''

   Latchman's desire to get things done was the driving force behind his venture
into business. He had developed a gene therapy that needed funds for
development.

   "It became clear to me that it wasn't easy in a university environment to get
sufficient funding from government, medical charities, whatever, because of the
huge costs of clinical trials,'' he says.

   "There were only two alternatives. One was to sell to a big company. We had
some interest but they didn't seem that interested. The other route was to get
capital from a venture capitalist. It didn't arise from the need to be an
entrepreneur. It was practical - a way to take things forward.''

   When he assumed his role at Birkbeck, which only accepts part-time students,
he realised that he had to engage with a wider world to argue his college's case
in an environment where competition for funding is intense. "You have to argue
your corner. You have to become a political advocate for your cause. It's an
obvious thing to me that we have to be an advocate of the idea of working more
with employers, who want certain skills for their employees, and for those to be
delivered while they are still working for the employers.''

   Latchman's ambassadorial role is now wide-ranging. Apart from a plethora of
roles on academic committees, he is an observer on the board of the London
Development Agency, a board member of London First, a lobby group for the
capital city, and a member of the CBI council.

   So does Latchman see any similarities in the manner of getting things done in
the worlds of business, academia and quango land?

   "There's one thing that cuts across everything. The crucial thing is the
relationship between the chief executive and the chairman. If that relationship
is dysfunctional, the management and the board meetings will be dysfunctional.''

   Latchman's chairman is Lord Marshall, formerly of BA, whose business acumen
and private sector know-how he clearly admires.

   Perhaps the biggest management talent that Latchman possesses is a deadpan
sense of humour. The man who wants to get things done knows he has to approach
his objectives very carefully. "As a colleague once said, 'Being the head of an
academic institution is like being the superintendent of a graveyard. There are
lots of people under you, but no one is listening.' ''

   David Latchman

   1956 Born

   1967-74 Haberdasher's School, London

   1975-78 Queens' College, Cambridge; natural sciences, BA

   1978-81 Department of genetics, Cambridge; PhD

   1981-84 Imperial College, London; post-doctoral research

   1984-88 Lecturer, molecular genetics; University College London 1988-91
Director, Medical Molecular Biology Unit and Reader in molecular biology; UCL
and Middlesex School of Medicine

   1991-99 Prof of molecular pathology; head of department of Molecular
Pathology, UCL Medical School

   1999-2002 Prof of human genetics; Dean, Inst of Child Health, UCL

   2003- Master of Birkbeck; professor of genetics, Birkbeck and Institute of
Child Health, UCL

   Current committee memberships include

   Council, Lifelong Learning UK

   London Higher Board (chairman)

   London Development Agency Board (observer)

   London First Board; CBI council, member

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2008


                             164 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             March 18, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 255 words

HEADLINE: Gene surgery trials offer hope for diabetics and Aids sufferers

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   A PIONEERING form of genetic surgery is being tested by a British Nobel Prize
winner and could lead to new treatments for Aids, diabetes and chronic pain.
Gene therapy was hailed as a medical revolution two decades ago but progress has
been slow since then, and some patients have even died during trials.

   Under existing techniques it has been difficult to control where newly
introduced genes end up, leading to fears that they could damage existing genes
or change the way they are used.

   Sir Aaron Klug, a Nobel laureate working at the Medical Research Council's
Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, has developed a more efficient way
to target genes, so that gene therapy can be carried out with surgical
precision. His team reports in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences today that it has modified a piece of natural cellular machinery called
"zinc fingers'' - proteins that bind to DNA and control how the genetic code are
read in our cells, making a liver cell different to a brain cell. They have
devised synthetic versions, called zinc-fingered nucleases, which have the
capacity to recognise specific sequences of DNA.

   This makes them extremely good at latching on to a specific spot and
targeting particular genes without affecting others, so they can carry out
genetic surgery to knock out genes or introduce new ones.

   Sir Aaron said: "The zinc-finger design allows us to target a single gene. It
is extremely quick and reliable and opens up exciting possibilities for research
and gene therapy.''

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2008


                             165 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             March 18, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; SCIENCE; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 903 words

HEADLINE: The chickens that lay golden eggs With a few genetic alterations, hens
could soon be 'pharmed' to produce cancer-fighting drugs. Roger Highfield
reports

BYLINE: Roger Highfield

BODY:

   With Easter just days away, thoughts naturally turn to eggs of the chocolate
kind. So here's a question: what's the most valuable egg in Britain? Forget
about the elaborate creations of master chocolatiers. The genetically modified
brown eggs produced by a flock of designer hens at the Roslin Institute near
Edinburgh are the biotechnological equivalent of a Fabergé.

   Several generations of Isa Brown hens - a prolific egg-laying French cross
between Rhode Island Red and Rhode Island White - have been bred from "founder
birds'' that were genetically altered by Dr Helen Sang and her team to contain
human genes.

   Each gene provides the recipe for the production of a corresponding human
protein. In the Roslin Institute hens the human protein is found only in their
eggs, reducing the risk of harm to the hens themselves.

   The egg proteins are rich in expensive drugs that can fight cancer and other
diseases, with each egg containing enough medicine to treat a handful of
patients each year.

   With this technique, Dr Sang's team has created a potential anti-cancer
antibody as well as the drug interferon, marking an important advance in
"pharming'' - the use of farm animals for the production of pharmaceuticals.

   Existing methods for making protein drugs, such as the monoclonal antibodies
used to treat cancer and arthritis, are expensive and time-consuming. Producing
protein drugs in the eggs or milk of farm animals is potentially cheaper, faster
and more efficient, but researchers have, until now, had only limited success in
making pharming workable.

   Because GM hens can each lay 300 eggs annually and can make faithful copies
of human proteins, they could, within a few years, offer the prospect of
mass-producing drugs that currently cost pounds 10,000 a year per patient, at a
fraction of today's cost.

   To harvest drugs from eggs, Dr Sang's team worked with Oxford Biomedica, a
pharmaceutical company that specialises in gene therapy. They used a virus
called equine infectious anaemia lentivirus, which infects horses, to insert the
human genes into chicken embryos in newly laid eggs, by creating a chimera - a
blend of GM and normal cells.

   Crucially, some of the sperm cells in the resulting chimeric cockerels
carried the new gene for the human protein, and passed on the implanted gene to
their daughters. These hens also contain the human gene in every cell of their
bodies. The team controls precisely where the gene is used for protein
production in the birds, to ensure that the potent biotech drugs do not affect
the birds themselves.

   The gene is tagged on to part of the hen's gene for ovalbumin, the major
protein in the white part of its eggs. Because this gene is only used in egg
white, the protein drug does not harm the birds.

   An online experiment by the Telegraph last year showed how egg white shrugs
off bacteria and fungi to protect the precious drugs. After 50 days in our
office, a bowl of egg white dried out, with no signs of decay, because of
antimicrobials present in the white.

   The Roslin team has hatched several drugs this way: miR24, a monoclonal
antibody with potential for treating malignant melanoma; the antiviral drug
human interferon

   b-1a; and beta interferon, used to treat multiple sclerosis. The institute is
also about to publish research showing that it has around 20 birds that can make
even higher levels of alpha interferon, about a gram per litre of egg white, to
treat hepatitis C.

   Although there have also been attempts to make protein drugs in the milk of
sheep, goats, cattle and rabbits, Dr Sang believes the conversion of hens' eggs
into "bioreactors'' offers many advantages. The chickens lay eggs after six
months and are much cheaper to look after. A 5,000-strong flock could lay eggs
containing up to 100 kilograms of human proteins annually.

   Despite its huge potential, the project had a setback last November when
Viragen Scotland, the company that bought the rights to commercialise the
technology, closed following the insolvency of its parent company, Viragen Inc.

   However, the team is pressing on with its plan to use chickens to make drugs.

   The Roslin team is also working with Cambridge University to create a GM
"superchicken'' that is resistant to the avian flu virus.

   To interfere with the multiplication of the virus, including the lethal H5N1
strain, one piece of implanted DNA would allow the chicken to manufacture an
antiviral protein and short versions of another genetic material, RNA, to block
key viral genes.

   It is an exciting development for pharming, an industry that Britain helped
to pioneer by inserting human genes into animals such as sheep so that they
could be turned into living drug factories. Tracy, a Scottish Blackface born at
the Roslin Institute in 1990, was probably the most famous sheep in the world
until the birth there of Dolly the cloned sheep. Tracy's milk was rich in the
human protein AAT, used to treat cystic fibrosis and emphysema. But, despite the
support of Sir Ian Wilmut, who led the team that cloned Dolly, the manufacture
failed to materialise as quickly as expected.

   The first medicine produced from genetically modified animals (goats, in this
case) was developed by GTC Biotherapeutics, an American company. GTC purifies a
protein with anticoagulant and anti-inflammatory properties, which is secreted
into the milk of 240 GM goats - a potentially safer alternative to proteins
extracted from human blood products.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2008


                             180 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                          December 19, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 176 words

HEADLINE: 'Boy in a bubble' develops leukaemia

BYLINE: Rebecca Smith Medical Editor

BODY:

   A TODDLER who had revolutionary gene therapy to cure the rare "boy in a
bubble'' condition has developed leukaemia after the treatment went wrong.

   The three-year-old boy, who has not been named, was born without a working
immune system and had been given the experimental therapy at Great Ormond Street
Hospital.

   Sufferers of X-SCID are confined to sterile rooms, dubbed a bubble, to
prevent them coming into contact with germs and infections and are rarely able
to go outside.

   The procedure, to replace the faulty gene, was successful and his immune
system started to work, but last month he began showing signs of leukaemia.

   Doctors said the family had been warned about the risk he could develop the
cancer.

   Prof Bobby Gaspar, a consultant immunologist at Great Ormond Street Hospital,
said leukaemia was a treatable cancer with an 85 per cent survival rate and
there is hope the boy will recover.

   The child has started treatment for his leukaemia as an outpatient and so far
the results are "encouraging'', Prof Gaspar said. He said the family was
"bearing up''.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2007


                             187 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            December 14, 2007 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1058 words

HEADLINE: The pets of the future and the toys of Christmas past Shopping for a
cuddly creature to put under the tree? Brace yourself for a brave new world of
strange breeds that are genetically modified for convenience and cuteness, says
Stephen Armstrong. But if you're buying toys, the trend goes back in time, finds
Cassandra Jardine

BYLINE: Stephen Armstrong

BODY:

   Abandon your search for an iPhone, that elusive Wii console, or those
Christian Louboutin leopard-print peep-toe platform pumps. This year's Christmas
must-have is small and inbred with a pointy nose, sticky out ears and fur all
down its back. It also has a tail.

   Designers, bored with clothes, interiors and gadgets, are turning their
attention to nature, and have whipped up some intriguing little oddities for
your seasonal delight. Always wanted a pet tiger but worried that a ravenous
predator might bring down your property values? Then buy a Toyger, a hybrid
domestic cat that's been bred to resemble India's most elegant hunter. Love the
idea of frolicking with your own faithful hound but hampered by pet allergies?
For a rash-free Christmas, choose the Jabari GD, a small, hypoallergenic dog.
Annoyed by guinea pigs shedding hair all over your Eames chair? Then you need a
Skinny Pig (geddit?), a hairless rodent that was originally bred for cosmetic
medical experiments in the 1970s.

   Indeed, a combination of genetic engineering, ambitious breeding, movie
stardom and celebrity whimsy means the fluffy mammal market has started to
resemble the fashion pages of Grazia - with prices to match. A Skinny Pig is
roughly pounds 150, a Toyger should set you back around pounds 1,500, while a
Jabari costs a cool pounds 7,000.

   Of course, the more exotic the pet, the greater the cachet and the longer the
list of celebrity owners. The medium-sized Bengal cat, which looks like a
leopard but behaves like a cat - meaning more purring and less tearing out your
throat - is currently being paraded by Jemima Khan, Sophie Dahl, Jonathan Ross
and the Sultan of Brunei. Over in Hollywood, crossbreed dogs are very this
season, with Uma Thurman, Sylvester Stallone and Ozzy Osbourne choosing to own a
Puggle - half pug, half beagle - while Jessica Simpson has a Maltipoo - half
Maltese, half poodle.

   The first of these crossbreeds was the Labradoodle, created almost 10 years
ago. Breeders sought to affix the poodle's non-shedding coat to a variety of
other breeds, hence the Cockerpoo and Doodleman Pinscher. But the Puggle, a
designer pug-meets-beagle with no clear design objective, seems to have set off
a free-for-all. Pugs are now being bred with Yorkshire terriers, bichon frises,
Pekinese, rat terriers, Boston terriers, dachshunds, Jack Russell terriers and
Chihuahuas to create, respectively, Pugshires, Pushons, Puginese, Puggats,
Pugstons, Daugs, Jugs and Chugs. Beagles who mount basset hounds are making
Bagels; bassets and Shar Peis are making Sharp Assets.

   Breeder Wallace Havens first marketed Puggles 20 years ago, but in late 2005
the dog suddenly had a cadre of celebrity owners and four-figure price tags. Now
a Californian company, Lifestyle Pets, is going one better. Owned by former
dotcom boomer Simon Brodie, the company took advantage of science cracking the
cat genome to produce the world's first hypoallergenic feline in just two years.
Since then, the pace of new breed creation has accelerated. This Christmas, the
company is offering a standard shorthaired cat from $6,000 ( pounds 2,940), a
Siamese for $8-$12,000 ( pounds 3,920- pounds 5,880), and the Ashera - a
tiger-like cross between the African Serval and the Asian Leopard cat - for
$28,000 ( pounds 13,700).

   "We've sold Asheras to Germany, Russia and China,'' Brodie explains. "To
spend $28,000 seems like a lot, but we've engineered the animals to be
disease-free - cutting out vet bills - and if you add up the cost of allergy
shots for the owner during the animal's life, we don't think it's very
expensive.''

   Next year, Brodie plans to launch two new species. "We're studying the growth
gene to produce a pocket-sized St Bernard or German shepherd. I'm also keen to
see if you could use gene therapy to bring back a woolly mammoth, but you'd need
millions and the pet market isn't yet at that kind of bespoke level.''

   Of course, domestic animals have always been at the mercy of fashion's whim.
In 1967, Harrods pet department - formerly Harrods Zoo - supplied a baby Indian
elephant called Gertie for the son of the exiled King of Albania. He presented
it as a Christmas gift to then California Governor Ronald Reagan.

   Britain's largest pet supplier is Pets At Home, and their 200 stores have
noticed a significant rise in customers looking to buy a rat. "It's the film
Ratatouille,'' says manager Steve Fairburn. "Rat sales have surged 50 per cent
since it was released. And rats are actually better than hamsters. They're
clean, sociable, and can be taught to do amazing tricks.''

   The Disney toon isn't alone in affecting the seasonal pet market. Popular
culture is often behind a surge in festive furries. Scooby Doo, for instance,
saw people scrabbling for Great Danes, 101 Dalmatians produced the inevitable
result, and even Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles encouraged a rush on terrapins.

   "Film fads lead to an influx into animal rescue centres when owners realise
they are unable to cope,'' sighs Julie Stainton at the RSPCA. "A similar
situation arises every time a particular species becomes fashionable. We've seen
it with iguanas, scorpions, pythons and piglets. We are bracing ourselves for
the fallout from Ratatouille.''

   Stainton highlights the craze for owls that followed the first Harry Potter
film, with eager purchasers blithely unaware that snowy owls grow up to two feet
tall with a six-foot wing span, sharp beak and talons. They are also poor at
delivering messages.

   Indeed, animal welfare experts feel that press coverage exacerbates the
problem. Mark Johnston, professional vet and spokesman for the British Small
Animals Veterinary Association, credits the media with the fad for handbag dogs
as sported by the likes of Paris Hilton. "The idea that you buy the car, the
handbag and then the animal is irresponsible,'' he says.

   As it stands, enough of our domestic livelihood is affected by genetic
engineering. It is of great concern to millions that we have Frankenstein food
in the home. Should we also be encouraging Frankenstein pets?

   Fortunately, the Animal Welfare Act was passed in April, which makes it your
legal responsibility to look after any animal you buy. The kids may demand a
tank of Glofish - transgenic fish that glow under UV light - for Christmas, but
there's no flushing them down the loo once the fun's worn off come Boxing Day.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2007


                             189 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                          December 12, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 129 words

HEADLINE: Red tape 'strangling research'

BYLINE: Roger Highfield

BODY:

   MEDICAL research is being stifled because the Government has failed to honour
a pledge to cut the red tape surrounding animal experiments, scientists claimed
yesterday.

   They said excessive form-filling and bureaucracy deterred leading researchers
from working in Britain.

   One scientist claimed that the humidity and climate control for rats and mice
was more onerous than that for a hospital's accident and emergency department.

   The Government pledged to cut red tape by a quarter by the end of this year
but scientists said little progress had been made.

   Prof Dominic Wells, of Imperial College London, who is developing gene
therapies to combat muscular dystrophy, said: "There is a huge amount of
paperwork and that is very difficult to match with the pace of scientific
change.''

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2007


                             190 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            December 4, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Science; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: The great, the good and the very clever An appearance in 'Who's Who'
is a rare moment of public recognition for a scientist. Roger Highfield salutes
this year's new entries

BYLINE: Rogr Highfield

BODY:

   For scientists, the ultimate accolade is to become a fellow of the venerable
Royal Society, the nation's academy of science. But for hoi polloi, the ultimate
achievement is to be listed in Who's Who, the unrivalled compendium of the good
and the great.

   Fellows of the Royal Society can puff and preen among their peers for joining
the world's oldest learned institution. But the lucky few who get their precious
paragraph in the toffs' bible exert an influence that extends far beyond the
laboratory and into society itself.

   The 2008 edition of Who's Who contains more than 1,200 new entries, among
them 184 scientists and medics who can now feel superior to their peers because
they are "noteworthy and influential'', indeed are deemed to have "had a huge
impact on today's culture''. Eat nutrient media, Royal Society!

   Among those to make it into the illustrious pages is Prof Marcus du Sautoy of
Oxford University (recreations include: "No 17 for Recreativo Hackney FC''), who
delivered the Royal Institution Christmas lectures last year. "For me, it was
actually a significant moment of recognition,'' says Prof du Sautoy, who has
written a series of popular maths books (the next, Finding Moonshine, is out in
the spring) and is making a landmark series on the history of mathematics for
the BBC. "My grandfather, who was chairman of Faber & Faber when T S Eliot was
poetry editor, was in Who's Who, and as a kid I always enjoyed looking him up
and finding a du Sautoy in there. He was always a great inspiration for me. So
it is nice to be included.''

   In his new series, the professor hopes to take viewers on a pilgrimage from
ancient Babylon to the suburbs of St Petersburg, where the reclusive Russian
Grigory Perelman recently rejected the Fields Medal, the ultimate prize in
mathematics, after solving a problem that had stumped some of the world's
greatest minds. But Professor du Sautoy hasn't neglected his own research. While
gathering air miles, he has been attempting to crack the PORC conjecture, which
"tries to count how many symmetrical objects there are in mathematics with a
given number of symmetries''.

   Another new entry is Prof Christopher Shaw (recreations include: "dancing
with family''), an expert on motor neurone disease at the Institute of
Psychiatry in London. He has been working with Prof Ian Wilmut, creator of Dolly
the sheep, on creating stem cells for research on the devastating degenerative
disorder. Then there is Prof Ray Dolan of University College London ("midnight
rambling'') who is to work on a fascinating project using brain scanners to link
the world of art and neuroscience, which we examined on these pages a fortnight
ago.

   Other movers and shakers include his UCL colleague Prof Bill McGuire
("worrying about the future of the planet''), who is a master of disasters, from
tsunamis to killer asteroids; the Edinburgh University gene therapist Prof David
Porteous ("windsurfing''), who is the co-discoverer of a key gene for
schizophrenia; and plant biologist Prof Ottoline Leyser ("singing'') of the
University of York, who recently tantalised an audience at the Royal Society by
explaining how to think like a vegetable.

   Not all the entries are British. There's American particle physicist Prof
David Wark ("playing guitar (badly) and blues harp (worse)'') of Imperial
College London, who has a thing about ghostly particles called neutrinos; Prof
Linda Buck of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre in Seattle, who won the
Nobel Prize three years ago for her pioneering olfactory work that helped
explain everything from the bouquet of fine wine to the rank smell of sweat; and
Prof Frank Wilczek, who won the physics Nobel the same year for work on the
dominant, or "colour'', force that acts between quarks, which is the key to
major problems in particle physics.

   Scientists often feel neglected and unloved. But the new crop of entries in
Who's Who should help reassure them that their efforts have a huge impact on our
culture.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2007


                             191 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            December 4, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Science; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: The great, the good and the very clever An appearance in 'Who's Who'
is a rare moment of public recognition for a scientist. Roger Highfield salutes
this year's new entries

BYLINE: Rogr Highfield

BODY:

   For scientists, the ultimate accolade is to become a fellow of the venerable
Royal Society, the nation's academy of science. But for hoi polloi, the ultimate
achievement is to be listed in Who's Who, the unrivalled compendium of the good
and the great.

   Fellows of the Royal Society can puff and preen among their peers for joining
the world's oldest learned institution. But the lucky few who get their precious
paragraph in the toffs' bible exert an influence that extends far beyond the
laboratory and into society itself.

   The 2008 edition of Who's Who contains more than 1,200 new entries, among
them 184 scientists and medics who can now feel superior to their peers because
they are "noteworthy and influential'', indeed are deemed to have "had a huge
impact on today's culture''. Eat nutrient media, Royal Society!

   Among those to make it into the illustrious pages is Prof Marcus du Sautoy of
Oxford University (recreations include: "No 17 for Recreativo Hackney FC''), who
delivered the Royal Institution Christmas lectures last year. "For me, it was
actually a significant moment of recognition,'' says Prof du Sautoy, who has
written a series of popular maths books (the next, Finding Moonshine, is out in
the spring) and is making a landmark series on the history of mathematics for
the BBC. "My grandfather, who was chairman of Faber & Faber when T S Eliot was
poetry editor, was in Who's Who, and as a kid I always enjoyed looking him up
and finding a du Sautoy in there. He was always a great inspiration for me. So
it is nice to be included.''

   In his new series, the professor hopes to take viewers on a pilgrimage from
ancient Babylon to the suburbs of St Petersburg, where the reclusive Russian
Grigory Perelman recently rejected the Fields Medal, the ultimate prize in
mathematics, after solving a problem that had stumped some of the world's
greatest minds. But Professor du Sautoy hasn't neglected his own research. While
gathering air miles, he has been attempting to crack the PORC conjecture, which
"tries to count how many symmetrical objects there are in mathematics with a
given number of symmetries''.

   Another new entry is Prof Christopher Shaw (recreations include: "dancing
with family''), an expert on motor neurone disease at the Institute of
Psychiatry in London. He has been working with Prof Ian Wilmut, creator of Dolly
the sheep, on creating stem cells for research on the devastating degenerative
disorder. Then there is Prof Ray Dolan of University College London ("midnight
rambling'') who is to work on a fascinating project using brain scanners to link
the world of art and neuroscience, which we examined on these pages a fortnight
ago.

   Other movers and shakers include his UCL colleague Prof Bill McGuire
("worrying about the future of the planet''), who is a master of disasters, from
tsunamis to killer asteroids; the Edinburgh University gene therapist Prof David
Porteous ("windsurfing''), who is the co-discoverer of a key gene for
schizophrenia; and plant biologist Prof Ottoline Leyser ("singing'') of the
University of York, who recently tantalised an audience at the Royal Society by
explaining how to think like a vegetable.

   Not all the entries are British. There's American particle physicist Prof
David Wark ("playing guitar (badly) and blues harp (worse)'') of Imperial
College London, who has a thing about ghostly particles called neutrinos; Prof
Linda Buck of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre in Seattle, who won the
Nobel Prize three years ago for her pioneering olfactory work that helped
explain everything from the bouquet of fine wine to the rank smell of sweat; and
Prof Frank Wilczek, who won the physics Nobel the same year for work on the
dominant, or "colour'', force that acts between quarks, which is the key to
major problems in particle physics.

   Scientists often feel neglected and unloved. But the new crop of entries in
Who's Who should help reassure them that their efforts have a huge impact on our
culture.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2007


                             195 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           November 20, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 162 words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's gene therapy 'does work'

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   TENS of thousands of people with serious brain diseases were given hope of
successful treatment last night with the first hard evidence that gene therapy
works to alleviate Parkinson's disease.

   Scientists injected billions of copies of genes into patients' brains and now
report that damaged areas were repaired.

   There were doubts when the American team reported this summer that the work
was proving successful in case it was simply a placebo effect. But this appears
not to be the case.

   Prof David Eidelberg, of the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research in
Manhasset, New York, and colleagues report today in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences evidence that the brain metabolism of the patients
was altered by the therapy.

   Prof Eidelberg told The Daily Telegraph: "It is the first solid evidence of
benefit from gene therapy. It is objective.''

   Doctors say this could also be a landmark in the treatment of other
disorders, such as Alzheimer's or epilepsy.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2007


                             196 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           November 13, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; SCIENCE; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 1050 words

HEADLINE: Will you be Sir David's new discovery? With the launch today of our
annual competition for young science writers, Roger Highfield spells out the
criteria, while below, Steve Jones extols the advantages of print over film

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:

   How many people really appreciate the importance of science? Do they realise
quite how much it is changing our world - not just for the worse, in terms of
pollution and climate change, but also for the better, with increased life
expectancy, and the ability to experience more sensations, real and virtual,
than at any time in human history? In fact, do they understand any science at
all?

   From biology to geology to mathematics, science has made the world what it is
today. That goes for everything from flat-screen televisions and mobile phones
to hair straighteners, painkillers and anti-ageing creams.

   But science also challenges us: the impact it has is often profound and often
unsettling. Cloning, nanotechnology, in vitro fertilisation (IVF), space flight,
gene therapy and the contraceptive pill are all applications of science that
have given rise to ethical debates, and have serious social implications.

   If our country is going to work efficiently, and if people are to trust
scientists, the public needs to be kept abreast of what is going on in
laboratories and on computers around the world. Now you have your chance to make
a difference, and help bridge that gaping chasm between public perception and
the reality of science.

   That is because today marks the launch of The Daily Telegraph's 21st annual
quest to find Britain's outstanding young popularisers of science, engineering

   and technology. Some of the most distinguished figures in science, including
Sir David Attenborough, are appealing to young writers to inspire the general
reader with the joys of science - as well as getting the chance to appear in
print and win prizes worth thousands of pounds.

   Backed by Bayer, the company that invented aspirin, and with the support of
the Royal Society, this year's competition has extended the lower age limit for
entry down by a year. It is now open to anyone between 15 and 28, and will be in
two categories, 15-19 and 20-28.

   Our judges explain here what they will be looking for after the closing date
of March 31, but entries should be about 700 words long and good enough to
consider for publication on this page and on telegraph.co.uk. There will also be
prizes for the best entry from schools, and the most inspiring teacher.

   For full details of how to enter, as well as advice from great writers such
as Richard Dawkins, Fay Weldon, Boris Johnson, Martin Rees, Matt Ridley and
Peter Atkins, see www.science-writer.co.uk. For all the latest science news, see
www.telegraph.co.uk/science.

   SIR DAVID ATTENBOROUGH

   Writer and broadcaster

   "Entrants quite rightly believe that you have to engage the interest of the
reader with the first paragraph, before moving on to the subject. But the real
skill is to make sure there is a proper link between the two. Sometimes entrants
get terrific first and second paragraphs but they don't, unfortunately, fit
together. That is the biggest pitfall, and the biggest failing.''

   JEREMY WEBB

   Editor of New Scientist magazine "Choose something that intrigues you. If
you're not intrigued, you'll never succeed in exciting others. Fortunately,
nature is ingenious, and so too are the people who ask questions about it, so
there are lots of ideas to go round. Be inquisitive. The best scientists ask
difficult questions, and so do the best journalists. Finally, understand what
you're writing about. Don't fudge. If you're uncertain, find an expert and
contact him or her: you'll be surprised how receptive they can be.''

   PROF RICHARD FORTEY

   President of the Geological Society and author of Dry Store Room No 1, a
biography of the Natural History Museum, London

   "I would like to see contributions that break down the artificial divide
between the world of science and the world of arts - pieces so well written that
they propel people who have been through an arts education into thinking that
science is really exciting, and really important.''

   FAY WELDON

   Author

   "Keep it simple, keep it accurate, and don't talk down to your readers - just
because they're laypersons doesn't mean they're idiots. Mostly. Pass your
enthusiasms on, definitely, but forget the exclamation marks. Don't feel you
have to work too hard with parallels and cutesy jokes: there is so much that's
interesting going on in science that you can let the facts speak for themselves.
If your prose is lucid, precise and informative, you'll draw the readers in
anyway. One warning: polish your final sentences, because they sometimes come
over as bathetic. Good luck - you young science writers have a rare and special
skill in your ability to communicate the world of science to the rest of us.
Work on it!''

   ADAM HART-DAVIS

   Author and broadcaster

   "Before I started my writing career, I asked an expert how to write good
English. He said, 'Use short sentences, and don't start them with "It...''.'
This advice has worked well for me for 40 years, and I reckon it will work for
anyone. Also, never try to blind your readers with science. Whether you are
trying to describe the outpourings of the Large Hadron Collider or your
toothpaste tube, use simple English, short words and short sentences.''

   STEVE PAINTER

   Head of Corporate Communications, Bayer

   "I'd like to see two things. The first is the fascination of science: explore
that sense of wonder in your writing, and infect your readers with it. The
second is to relate your theme to the real world, for example by looking at the
benefits that what you're writing about will bring to the human race, the
environment, the animal kingdom, or the business world - which is itself vital
in making science relevant. If entrants can tie these two things together, they
will have a real success.''

   PHILIP CAMPBELL

   Editor-in-chief of Nature magazine

   "I am looking for one thing: creativity. By that I mean creativity in putting
together what is out there in the scientific literature into a nice piece, and
creativity in your use of imagery. That is the watchword for me.''

   MARY ARCHER

   Chairman, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust

   "In terms of medicine, we have tended to have competition entries on the 'Gee
whizz, a wonderful new treatment' theme. But stories on the science that
underpins healthcare would also be interesting. There's great new science
emerging in the diagnosis of infection, transplantation, and understanding of
the brain.''

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2007


                             201 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           October 25, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: CITY; Questor; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: GlaxoSmithKline pounds 12.49 -11p Questor says Buy

BYLINE: EDITED BY DAVID LITTERICK

BODY:

   Questor has traditionally been something of a cheerleader for
GlaxoSmithKline, the second biggest drugs maker globally and one of Britain's
most influential companies on the world stage.

   GSK is a well-run business. Its recent announcement that the highly regarded
Andrew Witty will replace Jean-Pierre Garnier in May suggests that it is likely
to remain so.

   However, Mr Garnier himself yesterday admitted life is getting tougher in the
world of Big Pharma. Everyone knows that discovering new drugs that will be
genuine blockbusters is getting harder. That is because the "easy'' science has
been done and pharmaceuticals companies are having to turn to complex areas such
as stem cells and gene therapy to get results.

   Regulators are also becoming more cautious - a trend that shows no sign of
slowing. Mr Garnier yesterday warned that the world's most powerful watchdog -
America's Food and Drug Administration - has significantly slowed its rate of
new drug approvals, partly due to an avalanche of criticism from politicians.

   GSK's shares have

   been battered in the past five months, after a prominent heart surgeon in the
US said its second biggest seller - Avandia, which treats diabetes - increased
the risk of heart attacks. The company is still waiting for the FDA to rule on
what type of

   "black box'' warning it

   will make the company

   put on Avandia's packaging.

   There are also question marks over the future growth of GSK's number one
drug, Advair, for asthma. But those two drugs aside, GSK's problems are shared
by the whole pharmaceuticals industry.

   Investors therefore face a conundrum: on the one hand, pharmaceuticals is one
of the most difficult businesses to be in and it is getting more challenging. On
the other, governments around the world are spending ever increasing amounts on
health care.

   Within its peer group, GSK has perhaps the strongest pipeline of drugs due to
come on to the market in the next three years. Its shares have come off more
than pounds 2 since Questor tipped them in February, but with a current yield of
just 4.5 times the current share price, the stock remains a good long-term bet
in an ageing world.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2007


                             202 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           October 25, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: CITY; Questor; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: GlaxoSmithKline pounds 12.49 -11p Questor says Buy

BYLINE: EDITED BY DAVID LITTERICK

BODY:

   Questor has traditionally been something of a cheerleader for
GlaxoSmithKline, the second biggest drugs maker globally and one of Britain's
most influential companies on the world stage.

   GSK is a well-run business. Its recent announcement that the highly regarded
Andrew Witty will replace Jean-Pierre Garnier in May suggests that it is likely
to remain so.

   However, Mr Garnier himself yesterday admitted life is getting tougher in the
world of Big Pharma. Everyone knows that discovering new drugs that will be
genuine blockbusters is getting harder. That is because the "easy'' science has
been done and pharmaceuticals companies are having to turn to complex areas such
as stem cells and gene therapy to get results.

   Regulators are also becoming more cautious - a trend that shows no sign of
slowing. Mr Garnier yesterday warned that the world's most powerful watchdog -
America's Food and Drug Administration - has significantly slowed its rate of
new drug approvals, partly due to an avalanche of criticism from politicians.

   GSK's shares have

   been battered in the past five months, after a prominent heart surgeon in the
US said its second biggest seller - Avandia, which treats diabetes - increased
the risk of heart attacks. The company is still waiting for the FDA to rule on
what type of

   "black box'' warning it

   will make the company

   put on Avandia's packaging.

   There are also question marks over the future growth of GSK's number one
drug, Advair, for asthma. But those two drugs aside, GSK's problems are shared
by the whole pharmaceuticals industry.

   Investors therefore face a conundrum: on the one hand, pharmaceuticals is one
of the most difficult businesses to be in and it is getting more challenging. On
the other, governments around the world are spending ever increasing amounts on
health care.

   Within its peer group, GSK has perhaps the strongest pipeline of drugs due to
come on to the market in the next three years. Its shares have come off more
than pounds 2 since Questor tipped them in February, but with a current yield of
just 4.5 times the current share price, the stock remains a good long-term bet
in an ageing world.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2007


                             209 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           September 11, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: CITY; MARKETS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1091 words

HEADLINE: THE MARKET Kelda springs to life as takeover talk bubbles up

BYLINE: Ben Bland

BODY:

   WATER company Kelda was at the centre of speculation that it could be the
next utility to be snapped up if, as expected, the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS)
sells Southern Water in the next few weeks.

   Kelda shares tumbled by more than 25pc between June and August as the bid
talk ebbed away because of the developing credit crisis.

   But Credit Suisse put the speculation back on the agenda, arguing that Kelda
is "the most obvious takeover candidate, should a transaction in the listed
sector take place''.

   The broker said that hopes of a bid were likely to be stoked further if RBS
manages to offload Southern Water for a handsome premium. Kelda shares rose 13
to 852p.

   On a day of thin trading, the FTSE 100 climbed and then dropped back several
times before ending the day 57.1 worse at 6134.1. The FTSE 250 lost 132.9 to
10974.

   As the market closed in London, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was 53.3
weaker at 13060.10.

   Continuing uncertainty about the fallout from the US sub-prime collapse meant
that many dealers were happy to take a back seat ahead of the US Federal
Reserve's next interest rate decision a week from today.

   Jimmy Yates, a trader at CMC Markets, said: "The prospect of a global
economic slowdown spinning off the back of the recent credit crisis is going to
ensure that a cautious mood continues to hang over the markets for some time
yet.''

   Even the bullish equity strategy team at Morgan Stanley, which last week
predicted that stock markets could be set for a "mania of epic proportions'',
said Friday's weak US employment figures made them "more nervous about the near
term''.

   Scottish & Newcastle, which brews Foster's and Kronenbourg, edged up 4 to
616p, thanks to ongoing rumours about a possible bid from Danish rival
Carlsberg.

   Recent reports have suggested that Scottish & Newcastle is becoming
exasperated by the continuing speculation and could ask the Takeover Panel, the
City M&A regulator, to give Carlsberg a "put up or shut up'' deadline.

   ITV was the biggest blue-chip riser, up 2.2 to 111.3p, ahead of Wednesday's
strategy update from executive chairman Michael Grade. Despite speculation that
advertising revenues have been growing faster than expected, UBS urged caution
"given the uncertain UK economic environment and expensive valuation''. The
broker said the market was not factoring in the extra investment in programming
that will be needed to support ITV's audience share.

   Barclays, which has suffered from concerns about the extent of its exposure
to the US sub-prime losses, was initially buoyed by reassuring comments from the
head of its investment banking division. The stock climbed as high as 607p
before closing 2½ lower at 580p.

   Smiths Group, the engineering and technology company that produces airport
X-ray scanners, rose on the back of an upgrade from Morgan Stanley. The broker
lifted its rating on the stock to "equal-weight'' from "underweight'', arguing
that investors will pay a premium for Smiths' exposure to long-term growth
markets. The shares added 6 to 981p.

   Associated British Foods, the food and retail group that produces Twinings
tea, shed 28½ to 808½p after warning that increased price-cutting by rivals was
hitting its Primark discount clothing stores.

   Wolseley, the US-focused building supplies group, eased 35 to 928p amid
growing fears that the credit crunch could send the US economy into recession.
Wolseley is vulnerable because it is heavily exposed to the cyclical
housebuilding market.

   DSG International, the electrical goods retailer that trades as Currys and PC
World, fell 4 to 147p after Morgan Stanley said it was "much more sickly than
most investors realise''. The broker downgraded its recommendation on DSG to
"underweight'' and warned that the dividend "appears unsustainable and could be
cut next summer''.

   Industrial pump maker Spirax-Sarco added 38p to pounds 10.13, continuing its
rise on the back of last week's solid interim results.

   Much-criticised retailer Sports Direct International ticked up 1¼ to 137¼p
after analysts were relieved to discover that there was no profits warning
attached to the company's AGM trading update.

   But fellow retailer Debenhams fell 1¼ to a new low of 115¾p because of
concern that sales have been hit by the awful summer weather. The company will
issue a pre-close trading statement next Tuesday.

   IG Group, the spread-betting company, benefited from broker comment, rising
15¾ to 352¾p after Goldman Sachs raised its price target to 460p on the back of
last week's upbeat first-quarter trading statement.

   It said that although recent market conditions should be considered
exceptional, it was raising its 2008 earnings forecast for IG by 7pc to reflect
the strong first-quarter figures.

   But Alfred McAlpine, the construction and support services group, was hit by
a downgrade from Goldman Sachs. The shares fell 20¾ to 455½p after the broker
cut its rating from "buy'' to "neutral'', saying the stock is now fairly valued
relative to its peers.

   On Aim, pharmaceutical development company ValiRx jumped 3 to 16½p after
announcing that pre-clinical trials appear to show that GeneICE, one of its gene
therapies, slows the development of cancer cells or kills them.

   AIM FOCUS

   Silverjet, the business-class-only airline, jumped 17½ to 91p after The
Sunday Telegraph reported that it was in talks about a possible link-up with one
of the major European carriers. Market speculation centred on the hope that a
deal with an airline such as Lufthansa or Air France might enable Silverjet to
start operating on the lucrative Heathrow-New York route.

   The talk provided some welcome respite for Silverjet investors, who have seen
the value of their shares collapse by more than two thirds between March and
early September.

   At present, Silverjet has just one plane flying to New York from Luton. It
was due to introduce a second aircraft in July but this was postponed until
later this month because of a technical problem.

   Yesterday, the company said in a statement: "Silverjet remains focused on its
London Luton offering and is not in any specific discussions about a move to
Heathrow.''

   It added: "Since Silverjet was first conceived we have spoken to, and
continue to speak to, many potential investors and partners about development
and joint venture opportunities for our airline - we continue to evaluate all
opportunities for the business.''

   Lunchtime stock market report on: www.telegraph.co.uk/business

   Visit our Companies & Markets link for more on commodities and currencies.
Further data on shares is available at:

   www.telegraph.co.uk/shares

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2007


                             210 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           September 11, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: CITY; MARKETS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1091 words

HEADLINE: THE MARKET Kelda springs to life as takeover talk bubbles up

BYLINE: Ben Bland

BODY:

   WATER company Kelda was at the centre of speculation that it could be the
next utility to be snapped up if, as expected, the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS)
sells Southern Water in the next few weeks.

   Kelda shares tumbled by more than 25pc between June and August as the bid
talk ebbed away because of the developing credit crisis.

   But Credit Suisse put the speculation back on the agenda, arguing that Kelda
is "the most obvious takeover candidate, should a transaction in the listed
sector take place''.

   The broker said that hopes of a bid were likely to be stoked further if RBS
manages to offload Southern Water for a handsome premium. Kelda shares rose 13
to 852p.

   On a day of thin trading, the FTSE 100 climbed and then dropped back several
times before ending the day 57.1 worse at 6134.1. The FTSE 250 lost 132.9 to
10974.

   As the market closed in London, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was 53.3
weaker at 13060.10.

   Continuing uncertainty about the fallout from the US sub-prime collapse meant
that many dealers were happy to take a back seat ahead of the US Federal
Reserve's next interest rate decision a week from today.

   Jimmy Yates, a trader at CMC Markets, said: "The prospect of a global
economic slowdown spinning off the back of the recent credit crisis is going to
ensure that a cautious mood continues to hang over the markets for some time
yet.''

   Even the bullish equity strategy team at Morgan Stanley, which last week
predicted that stock markets could be set for a "mania of epic proportions'',
said Friday's weak US employment figures made them "more nervous about the near
term''.

   Scottish & Newcastle, which brews Foster's and Kronenbourg, edged up 4 to
616p, thanks to ongoing rumours about a possible bid from Danish rival
Carlsberg.

   Recent reports have suggested that Scottish & Newcastle is becoming
exasperated by the continuing speculation and could ask the Takeover Panel, the
City M&A regulator, to give Carlsberg a "put up or shut up'' deadline.

   ITV was the biggest blue-chip riser, up 2.2 to 111.3p, ahead of Wednesday's
strategy update from executive chairman Michael Grade. Despite speculation that
advertising revenues have been growing faster than expected, UBS urged caution
"given the uncertain UK economic environment and expensive valuation''. The
broker said the market was not factoring in the extra investment in programming
that will be needed to support ITV's audience share.

   Barclays, which has suffered from concerns about the extent of its exposure
to the US sub-prime losses, was initially buoyed by reassuring comments from the
head of its investment banking division. The stock climbed as high as 607p
before closing 2½ lower at 580p.

   Smiths Group, the engineering and technology company that produces airport
X-ray scanners, rose on the back of an upgrade from Morgan Stanley. The broker
lifted its rating on the stock to "equal-weight'' from "underweight'', arguing
that investors will pay a premium for Smiths' exposure to long-term growth
markets. The shares added 6 to 981p.

   Associated British Foods, the food and retail group that produces Twinings
tea, shed 28½ to 808½p after warning that increased price-cutting by rivals was
hitting its Primark discount clothing stores.

   Wolseley, the US-focused building supplies group, eased 35 to 928p amid
growing fears that the credit crunch could send the US economy into recession.
Wolseley is vulnerable because it is heavily exposed to the cyclical
housebuilding market.

   DSG International, the electrical goods retailer that trades as Currys and PC
World, fell 4 to 147p after Morgan Stanley said it was "much more sickly than
most investors realise''. The broker downgraded its recommendation on DSG to
"underweight'' and warned that the dividend "appears unsustainable and could be
cut next summer''.

   Industrial pump maker Spirax-Sarco added 38p to pounds 10.13, continuing its
rise on the back of last week's solid interim results.

   Much-criticised retailer Sports Direct International ticked up 1¼ to 137¼p
after analysts were relieved to discover that there was no profits warning
attached to the company's AGM trading update.

   But fellow retailer Debenhams fell 1¼ to a new low of 115¾p because of
concern that sales have been hit by the awful summer weather. The company will
issue a pre-close trading statement next Tuesday.

   IG Group, the spread-betting company, benefited from broker comment, rising
15¾ to 352¾p after Goldman Sachs raised its price target to 460p on the back of
last week's upbeat first-quarter trading statement.

   It said that although recent market conditions should be considered
exceptional, it was raising its 2008 earnings forecast for IG by 7pc to reflect
the strong first-quarter figures.

   But Alfred McAlpine, the construction and support services group, was hit by
a downgrade from Goldman Sachs. The shares fell 20¾ to 455½p after the broker
cut its rating from "buy'' to "neutral'', saying the stock is now fairly valued
relative to its peers.

   On Aim, pharmaceutical development company ValiRx jumped 3 to 16½p after
announcing that pre-clinical trials appear to show that GeneICE, one of its gene
therapies, slows the development of cancer cells or kills them.

   AIM FOCUS

   Silverjet, the business-class-only airline, jumped 17½ to 91p after The
Sunday Telegraph reported that it was in talks about a possible link-up with one
of the major European carriers. Market speculation centred on the hope that a
deal with an airline such as Lufthansa or Air France might enable Silverjet to
start operating on the lucrative Heathrow-New York route.

   The talk provided some welcome respite for Silverjet investors, who have seen
the value of their shares collapse by more than two thirds between March and
early September.

   At present, Silverjet has just one plane flying to New York from Luton. It
was due to introduce a second aircraft in July but this was postponed until
later this month because of a technical problem.

   Yesterday, the company said in a statement: "Silverjet remains focused on its
London Luton offering and is not in any specific discussions about a move to
Heathrow.''

   It added: "Since Silverjet was first conceived we have spoken to, and
continue to speak to, many potential investors and partners about development
and joint venture opportunities for our airline - we continue to evaluate all
opportunities for the business.''

   Lunchtime stock market report on: www.telegraph.co.uk/business

   Visit our Companies & Markets link for more on commodities and currencies.
Further data on shares is available at:

   www.telegraph.co.uk/shares

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2007


                             217 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                              July 30, 2007 Monday

SECTION: SPORT; TOUR DE FRANCE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 973 words

HEADLINE: THE DRUGS DEBATE Julian Savulescu, a professor of ethics at Oxford
University, says sport should be prepared to think the unthinkable The time has
come to allow doping

BYLINE: By Julian Savulescu

BODY:

   ANOTHER Tour de France has been ruined. The event has moved from being the
supreme test of human endurance to a petty media-fest of allegation, innuendo,
recrimination and scandal, with the world's greatest athletes being expelled
like contestants in Big Brother.

   Doping is a part of the spirit of Le Tour. Since it began in 1903, riders
have used drugs to cope with the ordeal, resorting to alcohol, caffeine,
cocaine, amphetamines, steroids, growth hormone, EPO and blood doping. But all
sports face the drug problem. The enormous rewards for the winner, the
effectiveness of the drugs and the low rate of testing all create a cheating
'game' that has proved irresistible to some athletes.

   Drugs such as EPO and growth hormone are natural chemicals in the body and
are hard to detect. And the task will get tougher still. Gene doping, for
example, will be virtually impossible to detect. This is a technique which
allows the introduction of genes into an athlete's own genetic material, or DNA,
to improve muscular strength or endurance.

   Also, injection of insulin-like growth factor (proven to increase muscle
strength in mice) into the muscles of athletes would be simple. Detection would
require muscle biopsy, slicing a core of muscle to examine under a microscope,
which would be dangerous and difficult. EPO genes could also be directly
integrated into athletes' DNA. Such gene therapy already works in monkeys.

   How far off are these as threats to sport? They have proved successful in
mice and monkeys, which means some reckless athletes might try them very soon.
They could possibly be done relatively safely by the time of, say, the London
Olympics...

   There are only two options. We can try to ratchet up the war on doping. But
this will fail, as this year's Tour spectacularly shows. Or we can regulate the
use of performance-enhancing drugs.

   Some performance enhancers which were once illegal, such as caffeine, have
been legalised because they are safe enough. This has had no adverse effects on
sport and has removed the necessity of policing a ban and the problem of
cheating.

   Some of the recent controversy on the Tour could have been avoided if we
allowed riders to take EPO or blood dope up to some safe level, for example
where their red blood cells make up 50 per cent of their blood. This level is
deemed safe by the International Cycling Union and this level is easily detected
by a simple, reliable and cheap blood test. Other drugs such as growth hormone
can be monitored by evaluating athletes' health, looking for signs of excess,
rather than trying to detect what is a normal hormone.

   A rational, realistic approach to doping would be to allow safe
performance-enhancing drugs which are consistent with the spirit of a particular
sport, and to focus on evaluating athletes' health. Some interventions would
change the nature of a sport, like creating webbed hands and feet in swimming,
and should be banned on those grounds. But the use of drugs to increase
endurance is a part of cycling's history.

   The rules of a sport are not God-given, but are there for reasons: they
define the nature of a particular display of physical excellence, allow fair
competition, protect health, provide a spectacle - and they are enforceable. The
current zero tolerance to drugs fails on the last three grounds. The rules can
be changed. We can better protect the health of competitors by allowing access
to safe performance-enhancement and monitoring their health. We provide a better
spectacle if we give up the futile search for undetectable drugs, and focus on
measurable issues relevant to the athlete's health.

   Given the pay-offs in terms of glory and money, some athletes will always
access a black market of dangerous banned drugs which confer an extra advantage.
But overall, regulated access is better than prohibition, as the honest athletes
presently have no access to performance-enhancers.

   Under a regulated market, they would have access to some safe
performance-enhancers. This would narrow the advantage gap between the cheats
and the honest athletes. And we would create a stimulus for the market to
produce new, safe performance- enhancers. Limited resources could be better
deployed to detect the dangerous drugs.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) claims that performance enhancement is
against the spirit of sport. But caffeine does not appear to have corrupted the
Olympics. Athletes already radically change their bodies through advanced,
technologically-driven training regimes. Tour riders receive intravenous
artificial nutrition and hydration overnight because their bodies cannot take on
enough food and fluid naturally.

   Ben Johnson, stripped of his 100 metres Olympic gold at the 1988 Games, said
that the human body was not designed to run the speeds it is called upon to run
now, and steroids were necessary to recover from the gruelling training and
injuries. Jacques Anquetil, the great French cyclist, once asked a French
politician if "they expect us to ride the Tour on mineral water''. Far from
demonising these great athletes, we should admire them.

   The use of drugs to accelerate recovery and to enhance the expression of
human ability and will are a part of the spirit of sport. Some drugs, such as
modest use of EPO or growth hormone, can enhance the expression of physical
excellence in sport. The challenge is to understand the spirit of each sport,
and which drugs are consistent with this. But performance-enhancement per se is
not against the spirit of sport; it is the spirit of sport. To choose to be
better is to be human.

   What is ruining sport is cheating. But cheating can be reduced by changing
the rules. Cheating can be better reduced by allowing drugs rather than banning
them.

   Julian Savulescu is Professor of Practical

   Ethics at the Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics,

   Oxford University.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007


                             224 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             June 26, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 345 words

HEADLINE: Autism symptoms 'could be reversed'

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   THE prospect of a pill to reverse the symptoms of severe forms of autism was
heralded yesterday after a major advance in the treatment of the condition was
unveiled by scientists.

   By inhibiting an enzyme in the brain, the researchers managed to halt the
development of the condition. Their work, which provides strong evidence that
brain damage can be reversible, should boost the search for treatments - via a
pill or gene therapy.

   The researchers were led by Susumu Tonegawa - the 1987 Nobel laureate and
professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, near Cambridge, Mass.

   "I find it very exciting,'' he told The Daily Telegraph yesterday. "This is a
new target [for treatments].''

   Autism is a term for a wide range of symptoms - usually marked by an
inability to recognise and show emotions. Fragile X Syndrome - or FXS - is the
most common genetic cause of autism and affects mostly boys at a rate of one in
4,000. It is linked to a mutated X chromosome gene.

   The research, which was carried out on mice, is reported in the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences today by Mr Tonegawa.

   His team's findings, along with earlier work in Edinburgh on the most common
cause of mental impairment seen in girls, provides strong evidence that brain
damage can be reversed, even if the cause is present from the start of brain
development.

   The studies end an

   argument about whether -

   by the time a child is born -

   it is too late to counter

   the havoc caused by faulty genes. Prof Adrian Bird of Edinburgh University,
speaking yesterday from a conference in Chicago, said of the latest study: "I
find it very encouraging. It is another example of the flexibility, or
self-healing properties, of the brain which no one had expected.''

   The work of Prof Bird's team complements that of the Americans because it
focused on a disorder at the extreme end of the spectrum of symptoms of autism,
called Rett syndrome, which affects at least 10,000 children in Britain alone,
mostly girls.

   The team found that it could make Rett symptoms disappear in mice by
activating a specific gene.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2007


                             228 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                              June 22, 2007 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: Landmark advance in treatment of brain diseases

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   A MAJOR worldwide breakthrough in gene therapy was signalled last night after
injections into the brain were used for the first time to successfully treat a
degenerative brain disease.

   In a pioneering study, researchers used the treatment to bring about
significant improvements in the mobility of Parkinson's sufferers. They said it
could also herald a breakthrough in the treatment of other neurological
disorders, such as Alzheimer's or epilepsy.

   The 12 patients involved in the study - a world-first human gene therapy
trial for a brain disease - all reported a substantial reduction in their
symptoms after having a human gene injected.

   Within months, their ability to move had improved on average by 30 per cent.
Some reported a 65 per cent improvement in their mobility.

   Nathan Klein, 59, the first to undergo the pioneering treatment told The
Daily Telegraph last night that before the gene therapy, he had been "in a state
that nobody could survive''. He said: "The treatment saved my life.''

   Prof Matthew During, one of the lead researchers, said: "Nathan Klein has
further improved, I saw him just a week ago and he looked great, further
improved since I had last seen him 18 months ago.''

   Parkinson's affects about 120,000 people in Britain, with 10,000 new cases
diagnosed every year. It robs sufferers of the ability to walk and even eat,
causes long motionless periods known as "freezing'' as well as head and limb
tremors.

   As the disease progresses, higher doses of drugs are required, leading to
side-effects that include involuntary movements.

   Sufferers include the former world boxing champion Muhammad Ali and the actor
Michael J Fox.

   The study was carried out by a team in the United States. The lead
researcher, Dr Michael Kaplitt, said: "We believe this is a milestone - not only
for the treatment of Parkinson's disease, but for the use of gene-based
therapies against neurological conditions generally.''

   Dr Kieran Breen, the director of research and development for the UK
Parkinson's Disease Society, said: "There are many potential ways to treat or
cure Parkinson's, and gene therapy is one potential route holding a lot of
promise.

   "The results of the study are encouraging in terms of safety and efficacy and
we look forward to seeing the results of the larger trial planned for later this
year.''

   The research team, from the New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell
Medical Centre and the New Jersey-based company Neurologix, report their
findings in today's edition of The Lancet.

   Parkinson's occurs when the brain cells - neurons - that release the
messenger chemical known as dopamine die. Protein deposits also form in the
brain, and levels of another messenger chemical called GABA - which calms
overexcited brain cells - drop.

   The study, begun in 2003, was carried out on 11 men and one woman with an
average age of 58, who had all had severe Parkinson's for at least five years
and for whom current therapies were no longer effective.

   They were given injections of billions of copies of a genetically altered
virus into part of the brain called the subthalamic nucleus.

   The altered virus carried the human gene for an enzyme, called GAD, which
helps to make GABA. Once implanted, brain cells of the patients started to make
the GABA chemical, said Prof During.

   To show that the treatment was truly having an effect, the doctors

   injected the virus into the subthalamic nucleus of each of the 12 Parkinson's
patients, but only on one side of their brains. One reason for this was out of
concerns for the patients' safety, after deaths caused by gene therapy.

   Three months after the injections, the patients had shown up to 30 per cent
improvement. Several showed improvements of up to 65 per cent.

   "Will these remarkable improvements persist? Only longer follow-up can tell,
but prior studies in animals, including primates, suggest that the transplanted
gene does stay active for years,'' Dr Kaplitt said.

   "This breakthrough trial has implications that go far beyond Parkinson's
research. It's taken us nearly two decades of hard work to get here, but the
success of this trial lays the foundation for the use of gene therapy against
neurological diseases generally.''

   The researchers are planning a larger Phase 2 study in Parkinson's disease
this year and a preliminary trial with epilepsy sufferers.

   "This ground-breaking study represents not only an encouraging first step in
the development of a promising new approach to Parkinson's disease therapy, but
also provides a platform to translate a variety of new gene therapy agents into
human clinical trials for many devastating brain disorders,'' said Paul
Greengard, the chairman of the Neurologix Scientific Advisory Board.

   Prof Alan Kingsman of Oxford Biomedica, who will soon test his own gene
therapy treatment for Parkinson's, also lauded the results. "This is very good
news for the field of gene therapy for neurological disorders,'' he said.

   However, in an accompanying comment in The Lancet, Dr Jon Stoessl, of the
Pacific Parkinson's Research Centre at the University of British Columbia,
Canada, questioned the advantages of gene therapy over deep-brain stimulation, a
current method for treating Parkinson's disease by implanting ultra fine
electrodes to stimulate the brain.

   "During and colleagues should be congratulated,'' he said. "But much work
should be done before neurologists and neuroscientists will regard this as an
effective approach.''

   Prof During's laboratory grew copies of the human gene used in the therapy in
bacteria from DNA isolated from a human sample and the gene multiplied with the
bacteria.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                             230 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             June 21, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; In Brief; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 42 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for alcoholics on way

BODY:

   Scientists in Chile are developing genetic drugs to keep alcoholics on the
wagon.

   Rats bred to crave alcohol drank 50 per cent less after being injected with
viruses that disrupt the production of an enzyme that metabolises alcohol,
reports New Scientist.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2007


                             231 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             June 19, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Science; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1358 words

HEADLINE: Life just got a lot more complicated The deeper scientists look into
the human genetic code, the more baffling it becomes - but it is also increasing
their understanding of disease, reports Roger Highfield

BYLINE: Roger Highfield

BODY:

   Seven years ago, with much ballyhoo, scientists unveiled the book of life -
the DNA required to build and run a human being. Last week, a small army of
geneticists reported the results of the first systematic attempt to make sense
of this book.

   What they found makes uncomfortable reading for those who thought they
understood the basics of biology, but it does provide tantalising hints of new
ways to fight disease.

   This, the most detailed study of DNA, is a landmark in genetics research, for
the more scientists understand the details of how our bodies work, the easier it
will be to fix them when they go wrong. But the latest findings turn basic
biology concepts upside-down, could rewrite conventional wisdom when it comes to
common ailments, and contain many puzzles, including one that may even challenge
our understanding of the way evolution works.

   The basics of genetics go like this: DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is a long
chemical that is coiled up in sausage-like bundles, called chromosomes. Two
metres of DNA are crammed this way into the chromosomes within a single cell.
DNA is a ladder-like molecule twisted into a double helix, where the rungs
consist of chemical units, called nucleotides. These units are drawn from an
alphabet of life that consists of only four letters - A, T, C and G (see
graphic) - so the code reads GGGAAACCC and so on for around three billion
letters, the entire complement, or genome, of one set of chromosomes.

   This one-dimensional script, which was first revealed in 2000, "somehow
carries within it all of the instructions necessary to take a single-cell embryo
and turn it into a very complex biological entity called a human being,'' said
Francis Collins, whose US National Human Genome Research Institute provided much
of the funding for the new study.

   But each cell uses only a small part of the genome, so that a cell from the
liver, for example, would use a different

   part of the script to one from the brain. To do this, cells contain molecular
machinery that carries out the instructions held in particular genes, converting
them into a second kind of genetic material, called RNA, which is in charge of
the manufacture of the necessary range of proteins to build and operate each
cell type.

   A decade ago, most scientists speculated that because humans are so complex,
it would probably take 100,000 genes to describe the awesome workings of an
entire body, perhaps as many as 300,000. Then, seven years ago, when Francis
Collins and Craig Venter unveiled a rough draft of the human genome in the White
House, acres of newsprint remarked on how the actual number was closer to 25,000
genes - the same parts list as that of "simpler'' creatures such as the sea
urchin.

   This entire complement of human genes, it was believed, resided in only
around 1.5 per cent of the cell's DNA, prompting some scientists so dismiss vast
swaths - the other 98.5 per cent - as "junk''. Now the most exhaustive probing
of the genome to date, a pounds 20 million pilot project, suggests the meaning
of DNA's message remains elusive. Professor Steve Jones, of University College
London, describes the seismic implications of the new findings: "I once wrote a
book called The Language of the Genes, but now biologists are beginning to face
up to the uncomfortable truth that they have only been looking at the nouns in
life's lexicon - the crudest and most basic elements of any tongue. Now we are
reading the spaces in between - verbs, adverbs, adjectives, pronouns and all the
rest, and they are complicated indeed. Worse, the genome babbles, stutters and
mangles its pronunciation and now and again seems to speak utter nonsense.''

   The new understanding has come from an exhaustive analysis of one per cent of
the genome, some 30 million letters of DNA, published in the journal Nature by
an international team called the ENCyclopedia of DNA Elements (Encode)
Consortium, along with 28 companion papers published in the journal Genome
Research. In all, this army draws on expertise from 35 groups in 80
organisations from around the world.

   The analysis was led by Dr Ewan Birney, a computer scientist at the European
Bioinformatics Institute, near Cambridge, who said the work "poses some
interesting mechanistic questions''. In layman's language, this is an admission
that boffins are baffled. Indeed, Dr Birney said scientists might even have to
revise what they mean by the term "gene''. "It is really challenging our
dogmas,'' he said.

   The most striking finding is that much of the "junk'' DNA is not rubbish but
crucial for staying alive. Instead of finding that just 1.5 per cent of the
genome is critical in cells, most of it appears to be active. Using a computer
metaphor, junk DNA seems to be the cell's "operating system'' running the genes.

   The process - called transcription - that interprets DNA in our cells was
traditionally thought to be focused on making proteins. The new work suggests
that for every protein, 10 times that number of RNAs are made to control how
genes blink on and off, depending on the cell type, showing that RNA is every
bit as important as DNA, a fact already being exploited in treatments.

   This finding dovetails with the remarkable outpouring of discoveries
announced a few days ago by the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. Whereas
traditional gene hunts fished for DNA mutations in genes that cause rare
diseases, the consortium's trawls of the genomes of thousands of people have
revealed ubiquitous DNA mutations that raise the risk of disease. What has not
often been reported is that many of these mutations for important illnesses such
as diabetes and Crohn's disease lie in gene-free "junk.''

   By regulating how other genes are used, these snippets of DNA may be powerful
triggers for diseases - and may hold the key for potential cures. Collins
admitted that the new understanding suggests it will take longer to sort out the
mechanics, but there is a silver lining, in that a "subtle tweaking'' of the way
a gene is used - for instance by a drug - could help cut the risk of a disease.

   The new work identifies many more kinds of genetic punctuation that control
how genes are read, amounting to 35 per cent more than previously recognised. No
wonder, given our poor understanding of these control mechanisms, splicing new
DNA into the genome by gene therapy has proved so difficult.

   Groups also compared the DNA sequences across humans and other creatures,
from baboons to hedgehogs. Remarkably, some five per cent of the genome - DNA
other than that found in genes - is almost the same, suggesting it plays a
crucial enough role for evolution to preserve it while species have evolved.
When scientists compared the working elements in the human to genomes of
different animals, up to 70 per cent differed. As Collins put it, these working
elements are "clutter in the attic''. According to our current understanding of
evolution, these genes would, like attic junk, decay over the generations, so
the idea that they are being saved for a rainy day appears at odds with existing
opinion. Dr Birney admitted that this idea had already been attacked as
heretical.

   This could have major implications for the use of animals in research, said
Dr Birney. "It means, for example, that how the kidneys work in mice and humans
is not the same - not all of those bits of biology will use the same DNA; that
is, remain the same between different mammals.'' In other words, lab mice may
differ in some respects from us, which is a major shift from the current
position that, at the genetic level, we are pretty much big, tailless rodents.

   The scientists who have gazed down a microscope to watch DNA at work may not
be surprised by these revelations. Only when the DNA in a chromosome unravels
does a cell begin reading its message. Then the one-dimensional DNA script forms
a 3D spaghetti-like mess as a vast interacting network of RNAs turns its orders
into action. To reveal more secrets, the team now plans to finish the job with
another pounds 50 million. After four more years, they will probably prove the
first law of biology: life is always more complicated than you think.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2007


                             233 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             June 7, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells from skin could avoid pro-life protests

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   THE need to clone embryos could be removed by a method to transform skin
cells into versatile stem cells capable of overcoming the effects of disease.

   Along with a second study published today, the research also shows that the
proposal to use animal eggs for cloning human DNA - which the Government has
said it would allow - could become redundant as science advances and throws up
alternatives.

   Embryonic stem cells - parent cells of all the 200 or so types in the body -
could be used to generate unlimited supplies of cells and tissues, even organs
in the distant future.

   They can be generated by cloning a tiny week-old embryo from a patient's own
cells.

   But while some scientists want to use the resulting cells to avoid problems
of rejection, there is an intense search for alternatives because of pressure
from the pro-life lobby, the opposition of President George W Bush and ethical
concerns.

   Now pioneering work by a Japanese team to turn adult cells into an embryonic
state, without having to create an embryo, has been extended by the Asians and
reproduced by a second group in America.

   This work suggests that after a heart attack, for example, skin cells from a
patient might be turned by growth factors into muscle cells to repair damage to
the heart.

   Prof Ian Wilmut, who led the team that cloned Dolly the sheep and first
showed how the process of cloning can rejuvenate adult cells, said the latest
work was "extremely exciting and astonishing''.

   The new work by Prof Shinya Yamanaka, from Kyoto University, underlines that
the dream of converting adult cells into those that can grow into many different
types can be realised remarkably easily.

   Scientists have been racing to understand what it is about the process used
to clone Dolly (nuclear transfer) that enables an adult cell to be returned to
an embryonic state. They then try to mimic those events in the lab to change
cells from one type to another.

   Fibroblasts - a common cell type found in connective tissue - can be coaxed
back into a state similar to an embryonic stem cell with a little genetic
trickery, Prof Yamanaka reports in Nature. The improved method, which sees a
handful of genes added back to the cells by gene therapy before selection for a
stem cell marker, means that no embryos are harmed in the creation of these
cells.

   When they studied how genes are used in these reprogrammed cells, they were
typical of the activity seen in an embryo. In the test tube, the new cells look
and grow like embryonic stem cells.

   Both teams were also able to generate viable chimaeras from the cells, where
the embryo cells created by the new method could be mixed with those of a mouse
embryo to grow into a viable adult chimaeric mouse, which could pass on the DNA
of the reprogrammed cells to the next generation.

   Although the revised method still needs some tweaking, the research has
caused tremendous excitement because it offers the prospect of making customised
embryonic stem cells for patient-specific cell treatment from a simple skin
biopsy.

   Prof Wilmut, of Edinburgh University, said: "Yamanaka's work is extremely
exciting and it is encouraging to see it being repeated in another laboratory.
They have shown some astonishing effects.''

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007


                             238 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                              May 29, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; SCIENCE; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 539 words

HEADLINE: BOFFIN LOG

BYLINE: Roger Highfield

BODY:

   *Researchers have found that one injection of a new gene therapy can relieve
the pain and swelling, and cut joint damage caused by osteoarthritis in mice by
one third. So successful has the therapy been that the team hopes to begin phase
one human clinical trials, perhaps within 18 months. "This therapy can simply be
injected anywhere in an injured joint, and the treatment will find the nerve
endings,'' said Stephanos Kyrkanides of the University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, New York, one of the team that reports the work in the
journal Arthritis and Rheumatism. The therapy boosted by 1,000 fold receptors in
nerve cells that respond to naturally occurring painkillers called opioids.
Nerve cells involved in pain transmission, altered to have many more receptors,
became more responsive to the naturally occurring painkiller.

   *Meanwhile, mice genetically engineered to lack a single enzyme in their
brains have been found to be more adept at learning. The results, in Nature
Neuroscience, reveal a new mechanism of learning in the brain, which might help
treat post-traumatic stress disorder, Alzheimer's disease or drug addiction in
humans, says the team from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Centre,
Dallas. "It's pretty rare that you make mice 'smarter,' so there are a lot of
cognitive implications,'' said Dr James Bibb, senior author. "Everything is more
meaningful to these mice. The increase in sensitivity to their surroundings
seems to have made them smarter.'' But he warned that while the mice learn
faster, studies on the long-term effects of deleting the enzyme, Cdk5, from the
brain are continuing.

   *The genetic code - genome - of Clostridium botulinum has

   been unravelled by the Wellcome

   Trust Sanger Institute, near Cambridge. The botulinum is notorious because
the equivalent in weight of of two bags of sugar would be enough to kill every
person on Earth. Dr Julian Parkhill explained its lifestyle: "C. botulinum lies
in wait and, if it gets the opportunity, it hits its host with a microbial
sledgehammer. It then eats the remains and lays low until the next host comes
along.'' Perhaps the most important tool for its stealth attacks is its ability
to hibernate by forming dormant spores. More than 110 of its set of almost 3,700
genes control spore formation and germination when opportunity arises.

   *Humans, apes and Old World monkeys, such as macaques and leaf monkeys, all
have trichromatic vision, which allows them to distinguish between blue, green
and red. Primatologists have disagreed about whether this type of vision evolved
to help early primates forage for ripe fruit and young, red leaves among green
foliage or to help them select mates. Now a new study in American Naturalist by
Ohio University researchers André Fernandez and Molly Morris rules out an
initial advantage for mating and suggests that red-colour vision evolved for
non-social purposes, possibly foraging. But once developed, trichromaticism
drove the evolution of red skin and hair. "It looks like red skin and hair
became a sexual preference,'' said Morris. "So while the benefits in terms of
eating may not apply any more, the (red-colour) vision in some groups is now
relevant in social terms.'

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2007


                             250 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             May 2, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: Doctors test gene transplant to restore sight

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   THE WORLD'S first attempt to treat blindness by transplanting genes into the
eye has started in London.

   A team at Moorfields Eye Hospital has begun the pioneering attempt to treat a
sight disorder using gene therapy.

   Yesterday they disclosed they had carried out genetic surgery a few weeks ago
on Robert Johnson, a civil servant based in London who was born with a sight
disorder which deteriorates with age.

   Mr Johnson, who had genes inserted into just one eye, can see outlines during
the day, but little at night.

   However, it will be months before the researchers know whether the
cutting-edge technique has worked.

   "It's very difficult to say how I'm feeling. I keep ranging from extreme
nervousness to a bit of excitement,'' Mr Johnson, 23, told the BBC.

   If this gene therapy is successful scientists believe that the technology
could be adapted to treat a range of sight disorders, such as age-related
macular degeneration, one of the most common causes of blindness.

   The trial, which has received funding from the Department of Health, involves
a dozen adults and children who have a condition called Leber's congenital
amaurosis which affects one in 100,000 babies. Sight deteriorates to such a
degree that many sufferers go blind as adults. The culprit is a gene called
RPE65, which stops the retina, the layer of cells at the back of the eye that
detect light, from working.

   Lead researcher, Prof Robin Ali, based at the Institute of Ophthalmology, has
spent 15 years working with colleagues developing the technique.

   He said: "I can't help feeling somewhat apprehensive,'' he said. "There is so
much riding on it and we have all been waiting for a very long time.''

   His colleague, James Bainbridge, injected the normal genes to the retina,
using a harmless virus or "vector'' to slip the gene into the cells.

   The operation, which took three hours, required great precision as Mr
Johnson's retina was detached to allow the virus to infect the cells.

   Robert Maclaren, the assistant surgeon, said he was pleased with how the
procedure went.

   The technique has been successful in the lab and on animals. Dogs that had
the defect had their sight improved so much that they could walk through a maze
alone.

   The team includes retinal specialist Prof Tony Moore, who said: "Some
indications of the results of the trial may be available within several months.

   "However, the subjects will need to be followed up to assess the long-term
effect of the treatment. We anticipate the best outcome in younger patients, as
we will be treating the disease in the early stages of its development.''

   Health minister Lord Hunt said: "This trial is a global first of its kind and
could mean the ability to restore sight to children with this condition. The UK
leads Europe in gene therapy, with over 40 per cent of clinical trials, and we
are second only to the US.''

   Prof Leonard Seymour, president of the British Society for Gene Therapy,
said: "These early trials are really aiming to slow down deterioration of
vision.''

   He added: "It is only by performing clinical studies such as these that we
can identify what we need to do to correct the problem altogether.''

   Prof Martin Gore, chairman of the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee, which
approved the procedure, said: "Gene therapy was conceived for the treatment of
single-gene disorders.

   "In practice, more than 70 per cent of gene therapy trials have been for
cancer. This trial demonstrates that the original ideas behind gene therapy are
still very much alive.''

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             259 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            April 26, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: CITY; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 244 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY Europe agrees on stem cell regulations

BYLINE: Katherine Griffiths

BODY:

   PROSPECTS for the UK's stem cell industry to leap forward have been
dramatically increased by a decision by European regulators to push ahead with a
new regulatory framework for emerging medicines despite a last-minute attempt to
block it.

   The European Parliament voted yesterday to create regulations to cover stem
cells, gene therapy and products from human tissue.

   Last week, a Slovakian politician, Miroslav Mikolasik, tabled an amendment to
remove embryonic stem cells from the law. Politicians yesterday voted down the
amendment.

   The new framework has been in the making since 2001 and is seen as crucial
for pushing forward Europe's stem cell industry.

   While President George W Bush banned federal funding for embryonic stem cell
research, billions of dollars from private sources are flowing into the sector
in the US. Several medicines based on cell technology are on the market in the
US but have not been registered in Europe.

   Biotechnology companies say it is too difficult and expensive to gain
approval in Europe because countries' regulations vary dramatically.

   Aisling Burnand, chief executive of the BioIndustry Association, said: "The
vote is tremendously significant for both patients and biomedical research
across Europe. It will enable patients to access ground-breaking therapies.''

   Michael Hunt, chief executive of ReNeuron, a UK stem cell company, said: " A
significant obstacle in ensuring access to treatments across Europe has been
removed.''

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2007


                             260 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            April 26, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: CITY; QUESTOR; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 678 words

HEADLINE: Shire patently worth a buy thanks to new niche-market drugs

BYLINE: EDITED BY JAMES QUINN

BODY:

   Shire

   pounds 11.61 +57p

   Questor says Buy

   IN AN industry in which many of the new medicines being launched are "me
too'' versions of something already on the market, Shire makes a refreshing
change.

   Britain's third biggest drugs maker has controlled the hyperactivity market
for some time. Now it has also carved out a niche making drugs for rare diseases
such as Hunter Syndrome. Many drugs companies avoid these types of complex
illnesses because the market is small, making it hard to justify the investment
in research and development.

   Shire has proved that there is plenty of promise in these areas. Reflecting
the genuinely new science in its portfolio and the unique need for the
medicines, Shire is now armed with some of the strongest patents in the
industry.

   By the turn of the decade, when several major pharmaceuticals companies will
struggle with patent expiries on some of their blockbuster drugs, about 70pc of
Shire's sales will come from new drugs.

   Shire's chief executive, Matt Emmens, has shown in the past few years that he
is good at doing deals. His acquisition of Transkaryotic Therapies in the US did
not impress investors at the time, but it has been a successful springboard into
biologicals, generating several of Shire's medicines for rare diseases.

   Shire also snapped up New River, also of the US, giving it full control of
its latest hyperactivity drug, Vyvanse.

   A few years ago, Shire was growing sales at an impressive 15pc a year. Now
that is 20pc. Despite Shire's expansion of the R&D it is doing in-house thanks
to its expansion through acquisitions, its costs published yesterday as part of
its first-quarter results were lower than expected. Questor last recommended
buying Shire's shares at pounds 10.08 in October, since when the market has been
kind. Despite the shares being up 15pc since then - on a 2008 price-earnings
multiple of just over 22 times - Shire is still worth buying.

   Aggreko

   559p +45½p

   Questor says Buy

   EMERGENCY generator firm Aggreko doesn't appear to have an off switch. In the
last few years, the share price has surged from 220p in the days following the
devastation wrought by Hurricane Katrina to north of 500p, while turnover has
jumped 30pc a year.

   Yesterday the shares leapt another 10pc following news alongside its annual
general meeting that the company had won yet more contracts in its international
power business, selling generators in the Yemen and extending a number of
existing large contracts. As a result, Aggreko said it expects current level of
utilisation to continue into the second half.

   Profits in the first three months of the year in the US are down on the same
time in 2006 - due to the absence of severe hurricanes last summer - but Europe
has seen a continuing recovery.

   Overall, 2007 has got off to a strong start. Analysts dutifully raised their
forecasts but took note of the company's caution that the strong first quarter
had been "exceptional''. The meteoric rise in share price has even set Aggreko's
chief executive, the jolly Rupert Soames, wondering whether the company can
sustain current growth levels. Asked if he was worried about the company
over-heating from success, Soames told Questor: "My battery-powered hubris is
buzzing away.''

   The risks are there. Aggreko is a cyclical business where over-capacity can
knock prices and the stock has significant exposure to the US dollar.

   As a result, investors may feel a strong temptation to take profits sometime
soon. The forward-looking price earnings multiple for 2007 is still hovering
around 22 times, on a forecast dividend yield of 1.3pc.

   However, the company says it has plenty of "head room'' to grow in its
current markets from Africa to Shanghai. And although the lights may be back on
in New Orleans, Soames is convinced that America's days of power outages are not
over. Moreover, Aggreko has yet to complete the integration of the GE Rentals
business it bought last year, which should lift profits next year and in 2009.
No need to pull the plug, but don't be surprised if growth flickers somewhat.

   james.quinn@telegraph.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2007


                             261 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            April 18, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: CITY; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 173 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY Euro-MP threatens to sink stem cell law

BYLINE: Katherine Griffiths

BODY:

   KEY European legislation to allow companies to register medicines made from
stem cells could be scuppered by a Slovakian politician.

   The biotechnology industry is waiting today to see whether the Euro-MP
Miroslav Mikolasik will table last-minute spoiling amendments to a law that
would create a uniform system for registering advanced new medicines.

   The law has been in the making since 2001 and is seen as crucial for pushing
forward Europe's stem cell industry.

   Several medicines based on embryonic and adult stem cells are on the market
in the US but have not been registered in Europe.

   Biotechnology companies say it is too difficult and expensive to gain
approval in Europe because countries' regulations vary dramatically.

   The biotechnology industry and patient groups have lobbied for medicines from
stem cells and gene therapy to be registered at a Europe-wide level.

   Mr Mikolasik said he would table two amendments that would remove stem cells
from the impending law on advanced medicine.

   The European Parliament will vote early next week.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             262 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             April 10, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; SCIENCE; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: It's time for Britain to get serious about science Funding cuts could
damage work vital to our future, say Ian Gibson and Peter Cotgreave

BYLINE: Ian Gibson and Peter Cotgreave

BODY:

   It would be forgivable to feel that science, technology and engineering have
reached their zenith in the UK. Record spending has seen the science budget
double over the last few years. Universities that have been given support for
new buildings, equipment and research are carrying out important work on gene
therapy, nanotechnology, stem cells, agriculture, space and the crucial science
of climate change.

   However, out of the blue, pounds 100 million has been taken off next year's
research budget by the Department of Trade and Industry. What happened to the
Government's 10-year framework for increasing investment in science and
innovation?

   Will the recent Budget really make up for this shortfall? Will scientists
fight back and defend their values, or will they - as usual - let short-term
political pressures take over, and lose grants and studentships? Scientists
generally have little idea of how to influence policy, leaving it to others,
paid by corporations with vested interests.

   We need a well-trained workforce to attract young people to science; so we
have to ensure a school curriculum with practical work forming a major part of
the training. At present, three quarters of schools are cancelling practical
lessons, largely because of pupils' bad behaviour. We need to reinvigorate the
interest of those bored youngsters with innovative lessons, rather than crushing
their rebellion by making them learn the periodic table. School trips, novel
ways of teaching basic principles in physics, chemistry, biology, maths and
computing, and of interpreting science in its social context, need to be
developed.

   It is also important for those in or going into science to envisage a career
that allows them to get on the mortgage ladder, to have a life not dependent on
making City bonuses or footballers' telephone-number salaries, or even the pay
of GPs and consultants. They need to be comfortable enough to afford a good
standard of living for their family, a holiday once a year and good housing.

   It is time to set up a ministry where scientists can work together to tackle
the increasing need for a scientific input into issues that require it, but
which at present receive disjointed advice from different departments. A good
example is avian flu, which was handled by scientists from different
departments.

   A Ministry of Science and Energy would have the knowledge and the science all
in one place, and officers who worked closely together to disseminate
information as soon as it was needed by the relevant department. Civil servants
with suitable backgrounds could be recruited into this network, with a Cabinet
minister, a Secretary of State for Science and Energy, inputting the science
robustly where relevant across government.

   For too long, we have been bombarded with the idea that UK science must
measure success by volume of company formation. It needs now to focus on the
contribution innovation and design bring to our society. Where, for example, is
science and technology in the Olympic strategy? What an opportunity to showcase
science in construction, design, transport, education and facilities for
competition - the Olympic village should be a science city, a real showcase for
British science, British innovation and British companies for the long term.

   A weakness of UK science is the lack of understanding and value it receives
from the public. This arises partly from how scientists communicate their work
and partly from how the media reports and frames discussion about science. The
research is often too technical to convert to a palatable news format, or the
story chosen is the latest study of whether the presence of facial hair
correlates with academic seniority.

   Science must be woven into the daily fabric of our society, rather than being
an outpost for experts. Doubling the science budget should not be the limit of
our ambitions. It is time for an ambitious vision of what the UK can achieve
through science.

   * Dr Ian Gibson MP is the former chair of the Science and Technology Select
Committee; Dr Peter Cotgreave is the director of the Campaign for Science &
Engineering in the UK

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2007


                             264 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            March 29, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: CITY; QUESTOR; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 869 words

HEADLINE: Oxford deal with Sanofi allows it to control much more of its destiny
propels it on to a drug sub-contracting method looks like a smart strategy

BYLINE: EDITED BY JAMES QUINN

BODY:

   Oxford BioMedica

   49½p -2½p

   Questor says Buy

   DEVELOPING new drugs and therapies is at the forefront of everything "big
pharma'' is trying to do right now - and so it is little surprise that a giant
like Sanofi-Aventis is willing to hand over up to euro518m ( pounds 350m) for
one of Oxford BioMedica's leading cancer treatments.

   Oxford BioMedica is a relative minnow compared to Sanofi - with a market
value of just under pounds 266m against Sanofi's euro19.2bn.

   But in spite of that, Oxford clearly has something Sanofi wants. That
something is TroVax, a gene therapy treatment for renal cancer that could lead
to patients not needing mass chemotherapy.

   TroVax is currently undergoing what is known as Phase III clinical trials -
the final stage of trials before a drug can be approved for human use.

   As the world's second largest oncology drug company - and the number one in
Europe - Sanofi is keen to build its product pipeline, and patently sees TroVax
as being key to its future.

   Negotiations between the pair have been ongoing since the start of 2006, and
this out-licensing agreement is the result. The way such agreements work, Oxford
has to make certain development milestones before the money is paid out, with
euro29m payable upfront, plus a further euro19m due in the near-term.

   The rest of the money is based on confidential milestones linked to the
future success of the trial and then the approval process.

   Evolution analyst Dr Jonathan Senior estimates the Sanofi deal could be the
largest agreement yet signed by a British company in this field, reckoning
potential payments could come in at more than $1bn ( pounds 508m), plus future
royalties.

   So, given that the company's latest results show annual sales of a measly
pounds 760,000, why did Oxford's shares not motor yesterday?

   Largely because this deal had been expected for some time, and so the
benefits had been largely priced in.

   What the deal does however is give Oxford that extra credibility with the
City, and also gives it the money to fulfil its plans for its other treatments.

   Next on the agenda is Oxford's treatment for Parkinson's disease, which is
called ProSavin.

   In animal testing, a single treatment has demonstrated long-term benefits,
with the ability to restore normal chemical (dopamine) levels in the brain,
without the side effects usually associated with current therapies for
Parkinson's.

   The money from Sanofi will allow Oxford to put ProSavin into Phase I trials
by the end of the year and, if the results are anything like in man as they have
been in animals, there is the potential to move straight into Phase III once
Phase I has finished successfully. The decision then will be whether to look for
a partner - like Sanofi - or to go it alone.

   The beauty of the money the Sanofi deal brings through TroVax is of course
that Oxford will not need to be forced into a deal out of neccessity and,
instead, be able to choose whether to partner or to go it alone.

   The next treatment after ProSavin is one for age-related vision loss, which
is probably a year behind ProSavin in clinical testing stages. All in all, the
new agreement with Sanofi propels Oxford on to a larger stage and allows it to
control much more of its own destiny.

   Although, as the table shows, the company is some way off profitability, its
prospects look sound and it certainly seems to be one of the stronger
biotechnology companies on the market.

   Topps Tiles

   299p +2p

   Questor says Buy

   QUESTOR could not let news that one of its favourite executive chairmen is
relinquishing his executive duties go without a mention.

   So here's to Barry Bester, executive chairman of Topps Tiles, who is stepping
back to become non-executive chairman from October.

   Bester has guided the company through inception, to float and beyond. Now
aged 49, he was a founder shareholder of the tiling and flooring firm in 1984,
when he was just 23, and has gone on to guide the company from strength to
strength. He was also heavily involved in the company's expansion in Holland,
which continues to pay dividends.

   A glance at the company's performance reflects his skills. The company, worth
pounds 20m when it floated, is today valued at pounds 509m. Growth has not been
at the expense of earnings, with normalised earnings per share growing from
3.77p in 2002 to 12.74p last year.

   That trend looks set to continue. Yesterday's announcement was accompanied by
a buoyant pre-close trading statement. Sales for the six months to March are
ahead 14.9pc, with like-for-like sales up 4.4pc.

   The overall sales increase is linked to the fact that Topps now controls
100pc of its Dutch business - it was in a joint venture before - with sales in
Holland up 36pc, and like-for-likes up 19pc.

   New store openings are on track, with 30 net new stores to be opened this
financial year in the UK, with five net new stores to be opened in Holland.

   Seymour Pierce's Richard Ratner is forecasting a pre-tax profit of pounds
37.5m for the current year to September, which looks wholly achievable based on
current performance.

   Bester may be stepping back but, with chief executive Nick Ounstead and
incoming finance director Robert Parker at the helm, the best o' Topps Tiles may
still be to come.

   james.quinn@telegraph.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2007


                             270 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           February 24, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: Genetic engineering law change 'may herald designer babies'

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   BRITAIN could become the first country to sanction the genetic alteration of
human embryos, a step that a pressure group claims could pave the way to
designer babies.

   A decade after the cloning of Dolly the sheep, the Government is opening the
door to GM human embryos for research, according to Human Genetics Alert.

   David King, its director, said: "In a world first, the Government has said it
will allow scientists to begin developing the technology for genetic
modification of human beings, although creation of actual GM babies will be
prohibited for the moment. We believe the public will be horrified.''

   There is a need for a public debate on genetic alteration of embryos said
HGA. It said that it could eventually lead to "germ-line'' gene therapy, where
DNA changes are passed down generations, and to genetic enhancement, where
embryos are altered to boost intelligence or for cosmetic purposes.

   A draft Bill for legislation to replace the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Act 1990 is being prepared with the intention of including a full
Bill in the Queen's Speech next November. But Mr King called on the Government
to "draw the line'' at GM embryos.

   Although the White Paper says genetic alterations of eggs, sperm and embryos
"should not be permitted for reproductive purposes'' it adds that this is only
"for the foreseeable future, and until such time as safety and efficacy are
assured''.

   The paper says the Government "is not, however, convinced of the need to
preclude research activities that would involve altering the genetic structure
of the embryo''.

   Dr Michael Antoniou, a gene therapist at Guy's Hospital, London, was
concerned that even though germ-line therapy was too dangerous to attempt, the
White Paper signalled the acceptance of safe germ-line modification of embryos.

   Dr Richard Nicholson, the editor of the Bulletin of Medical Ethics, said:
"Every country that has legislated on this subject has banned it.

   "Thus the British Government's decision breaks ranks with the international
community, and may lead to the perception that Britain is a haven for
irresponsible and profit-driven scientists.''

   A Department for Health spokesman said: "Any sanction of the genetic
alteration of human embryos is in the context of research only.

   "The Government proposes that the law will continue to ban genetic
modification of embryos for reproductive purposes. Moreover we will extend that
prohibition to explicitly cover sperm and eggs.''

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2007


                             272 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                          February 21, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: CITY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: Pharmaceuticals Shire boosts market share with $2.6bn US deal

BYLINE: Katherine Griffiths City Correspondent

BODY:

   SHIRE, the largest maker of attention deficit medicines, has grabbed even
more of that market by buying US drugs company New River Pharmaceuticals for
$2.6bn ( pounds 1.3bn) in cash.

   The deal gives Shire control of Vyvanse, a hyperactivity drug that the
company sees as a future flagship product.

   Speculation of a possible takeover of New River by Shire had been circulating
since October, when the terms of the 2005 licensing deal between the two
companies to develop the drug - then known as NRP104 - became public.

   Shire is the largest maker of attention deficit hyperactivity drugs (ADHD) in
the US. Eli Lilly is number one in Europe. The European market has been much
smaller because consumers have been sceptical about ADHD and reluctant to give
sufferers - mainly children - treatments because some contain amphetamines.

   Analysts predict Vyvanse will generate $1bn of sales in the US. It has been
filed with the US regulator, the Food and Drug Administration. Its ruling is
expected this month.

   Shire struck a deal with New River over Vyvanse because it wanted a successor
product to its biggest selling ADHD drug, Adderall XR.

   A generics company, Barr, will start making a generic version of Adderall in
April 2009. Shire hopes to transfer many patients to Vyvanse. It will also enter
Europe's ADHD market for the first time with the drug.

   Shire said by buying New River it would not have to share profits. Navid
Malik at Collins Stewart said: "The deal washes its face by 2009 when it will be
cash neutral and earnings per share neutral.'' Shire, Britain's third biggest
drugs maker, is likely itself be a takeover target within the next two years or
so, Mr Malik said. Potential acquirers include Forest Laboratories of the US.

   Shire shares rose 40p to pounds 11.15 after it announced its plan to buy New
River. Shire shares fell after it announced its acquisition of US biotech
company Transkaryotic Therapies (TKT) in 2005.

   Matthew Emmens, Shire's chief executive, said shareholders were nervous about
TKT because at the time of the deal its products had not been approved. "TKT was
not well known in the UK.''

   Shire reported a return to the black with a full-year net income of $278.2m
against a $578.4m loss last time, on a 12pc increase revenues to $1.8bn. A
5.2455 cents second interim dividend on April 5, lifts the total 15pc to 7.1801
cents.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2007


                             281 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            January 15, 2007 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: Modified hens lay eggs to help beat cancer

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   A FLOCK of designer hens, genetically modified with human genes to lay eggs
capable of producing drugs that fight cancer and other life-threatening
diseases, has been created by British scientists.

   Researchers at the Roslin Institute near Edinburgh, which created pioneering
GM animal "drug factories'' such as Tracy the sheep as well as Dolly the clone,
have bred a 500-strong flock of ISA Browns. These are a prolific egg laying
French cross between Rhode Island Red and Rhode Island White chickens.

   Because they make proteins used as drugs in the whites of their eggs, they
offer the prospect of mass-producing at a fraction of the price drugs that cost
thousands of pounds a year per patient. This marks an important advance in the
use of farm animals for the production of pharmaceuticals.

   Existing methods for producing protein drugs, such as monoclonal antibodies
used to treat cancer and arthritis, are expensive and time-consuming.

   Using GM - "transgenic'' - farm animals for the mass production of such drugs
is potentially cheaper, faster, and more efficient than standard methods, but
researchers so far have been unable to make "pharming'' workable.

   The GM chickens are reported today in the Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences by Dr Helen Sang and colleagues in the Roslin Institute and the
companies Oxford Biomedica, which specialises in gene therapy, and Viragen,
which is commercialising the technology.

   They describe how they have produced transgenic hens by using a particular
virus - an equine infectious anemia lentivirus - to insert the genes for desired
pharmaceutical proteins into the hen's gene for ovalbumin. This is a protein
that makes up 54 per cent of egg whites, around 2.2 grams for each egg - a
massive amount by the standards of biotechnology.

   They inserted the human genes into chicken embryonic stem cells, then blended
those cells with those of a normal chicken embryo to create a chimera, a blend
of GM and normal cells.

   Crucially, the cells in the oviduct (which lays eggs) consisted of GM cells
and so passed on the implanted gene so the egg could make the drug protein.

   The working proteins in these hens included miR24, a monoclonal antibody with
potential for treating malignant melanoma, and human interferon b-1a, an
antiviral drug.

   Just as important, the genes were passed on to the next generation.

   Although there have been attempts to make protein drugs in the milk of sheep,
goats, cattle and rabbits, the team believes that the conversion of chickens
into "bioreactors'' offers many advantages. They produce more quickly and are
much cheaper to look after.

   "This is potentially a very powerful new way to produce specialised drugs,''
said Dr Karen Jervis of Viragen Scotland, which worked with the Roslin team.

   "We have bred five generations of chickens so far and they all keep producing
high concentrations of pharmaceuticals.''

   Andrew Wood, of Oxford BioMedica, whose researchers collaborated on the
project, said: "This could lead to treatments for Parkinson's disease, diabetes
and a range of cancers.''

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2007


                             285 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           January 11, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 171 words

HEADLINE: Cold virus may be used to fight the spread of cancer

BYLINE: Stephanie Condron

BODY:

   A NEW way of fighting cancer with viruses such as the common cold is to be
tested, a leading charity said last night.

   Cancer Research UK said British scientists hoped "virotherapy'' could be the
third way to fight the disease, alongside chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

   Virotherapy could be used on patients with malignant tumours that have
"spread'' despite radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Leonard Seymour, a professor of
gene therapy at Oxford University, has been working on the virus therapy with
colleagues in London and the US.

   He will lead the trials on the new treatment later this year. Using viruses
to kill cancer cells is not a new idea.

   The battle has been how to find a way of targeting cancer cells once they
have split away from the tumour and spread.

   Prof Seymour's team uses chemically modified viruses spread through the
bloodstream, geared to target cancer cells without being broken down by the
immune system.

   He said: "In principle, you've got something which could be many times more
effective than chemotherapy.''

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2007


                             289 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            January 6, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: CITY; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 385 words

HEADLINE: biotechnology Ark perks up after regulators say brain tumour gene
therapy trial is on track

BYLINE: Katherine Griffiths

BODY:

   A MEDICINE based on human genes took a step closer with a positive regulatory
review of a potentially life-saving treatment for brain tumours.

   Ark Therapeutics, the most advanced developer of gene medicines outside
China, was told by Europe's medicine's safety watchdog, the Data and Safety
Monitoring Board, that its phase III trial of Cerepro was on track.

   The drug may be given early approval to be put on the market by March.

   Nigel Parker, Ark's chief executive, said: "Ark's breakthrough in gene
medicines is similar to the discovery of the uses of monoclonal antibodies in
treating diseases.

   "Most diseases which can be fixed with chemicals have been fixed. The rest
are complex biological problems that need biological solutions.''

   Cerepro is based on a common cold virus from which the reproductive section
has been taken out and replaced with a therapeutic gene. When a surgeon removes
a brain tumour, Cerepro is injected into the brain and helps to stop more
tumours growing.

   Trials of Cerepro so far have shown one dose can give a patient with
malignant brain cancer an extra seven and a half months of goodquality life.
Those with the condition normally have eight to nine mainly painful months to
live.

   Early-stage modelling has shown giving patients more than one dose of Cerepro
may be life-saving in some cases, Mr Parker said.

   Medicines based on genes have caused controversy among those uncomfortable
with human genes being manipulated for scientific benefit. There have also been
many false starts, and experimental drugs in the this field often encounter
problems.

   Last month the advanced trial of a drug for aggressive brain cancer being
developed by Eli Lilly of the US was stopped because it did not show enough of
an improvement over chemotherapy.

   Shares in Ark rose 3.5p to 106p after the safety board said data from the
first 130 people in Ark's late stage trial showed its side effects were
acceptable. Some people get a cold but all have recovered from it. The body also
approved the way Ark has conducted its trial.

   Ark is targeting Europe first and, if the drug is approved in the spring, it
could be on the market by the end of the year. In the US, Ark has been awarded
orphan drug status because of the lack of effective therapies available, which
could hasten its progress in that country.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2007


                             292 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           January 3, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 397 words

HEADLINE: Man killed by power cable in storm was renowned scientist

BYLINE: Richard Savill

BODY:

   A RENOWNED scientist was killed when an overhead power cable came down and
struck him during a storm on New Year's Day.

   Prof Roland Levinsky, 63, the vice-chancellor at the University of Plymouth,
was walking his dog when the accident happened in a field near his home in the
coastal village of Wembury, Devon.

   His wife, Beth, a former primary school teacher, was with him.

   Prof Levinsky, a world leader in the field of immunodeficiency diseases, was
believed to have suffered a heart attack after 11,000 volts of electricity
surged through him.

   A police spokesman said: "It was a live cable and it appears to be a freak
and tragic accident.''

   Prof Levinsky was appointed vice-chancellor in September 2002. The coroner
was informed of his death after emergency services were called to the field at
about 1pm on Monday.

   In a tribute, the deputy vice-chancellor, Professor Mark Cleary, said
yesterday that Prof Levinsky's work in medical science had "international,
global status''.

   He added: "Prior to coming to Plymouth to lead the university he had a
tremendously distinguished career with children.

   "He has a network of people he has mentored right across the globe, people
who are distinguished professors themselves now. He had a tremendous intellect
but could work with people and bring them on.

   "It is absolutely tragic and I can barely imagine what his family is going
through.''

   Barry Stevens, a neighbour, said: "Roland was a big man with a big
personality. He was a very respected and clever man. I was with him on Christmas
Day. He was so happy.''

   Prof Levinsky, a father of three, who was a keen sailor and amateur artist,
trained as a doctor, specialising in paediatrics. He worked for several years at
Great Ormond Street Hospital.

   In 1990, he was appointed as dean and director of research at the Institute
for Child Health in London.

   He was appointed in 1999 as vice-provost for biomedicine and head of the
graduate school at University College London.

   He wrote or co-wrote more than 250 scientific papers, reviews, and chapters
in books, and edited two multi-author books.

   His research interests included bone marrow transplantation, the molecular
basis of immunodeficiency diseases, gene therapy and stem cell biology.

   Prof Levinsky enjoyed sailing his 43ft yacht and took part in races,
including one transatlantic crossing. Born in South Africa, he emigrated to
Britain in his teens.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                             293 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           January 3, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 832 words

HEADLINE: Obituary of Professor Roland Levinsky Pioneering immunologist who made
controversial changes as a university vice-chancellor

BODY:

   PROFESSOR ROLAND LEVINSKY, who died in an accident on New Year's Day aged 63,
was an international leader in the field of immunodeficiency diseases, working
in bone marrow transplantation, stem cell biology and gene therapy; as
vice-chancellor and chief executive of the University of Plymouth he was also a
fearless and controversial administrator.

   In his career as a physician, Levinsky performed the first successful bone
marrow transplants at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children in London
in 1979. He also helped initiate international collaborations which ultimately
led to the discovery of the genetic basis of several primary immunodeficiency
diseases.

   Levinsky understood the power that could be unleashed by the molecular
biology and genetics revolutions of the late 1970s, and was one of the first
scientists in Britain to obtain funding for gene therapy clinical trials which
have since proved successful at Great Ormond Street in treating lethal
immunodeficiency conditions.

   On his appointment at Plymouth University in 2002, Levinsky announced plans
to close down outlying colleges. He found himself confronting entire local
communities, but faced down the west country "Establishment''. He even received
a death threat as he sought to achieve his aim of locating the university on one
central site. Resistance was especially fierce when he tried to close Seale
Hayne (the agricultural college near Newton Abbot) and Rolle College (the
university's education campus at Exmouth).

   "My ideal university is a place where arts and sciences talk to each other,''
Levinsky explained. "I had campuses which did not.'' Nevertheless, farmers and
members of the House of Lords who had learned their agriculture at Seale Hayne
rallied opposition to Levinsky's vision, receiving support from the Prince of
Wales. A female student issued a death threat to Levinksy on the telephone in
the middle of the night. She claimed it was a prank, and having been disciplined
was allowed to stay at the university. She was later awarded her degree.

   Some local farmers joined in the campaign of abuse, threatening to dump
manure on his drive. Nothing came of these threats, however, and Levinksy
eventually prevailed. A physically towering figure, he was as bullish as he was
blunt.

   Roland Jacob Levinsky was born on October 16 1943 in Bloemfontein, South
Africa, his Communist father having fled there from Nazi persecution on the
Lithuania/Poland border. When Roland was 13 his father died; while still a
teenager he emigrated to Britain with his British-born mother and two elder
siblings.

   Although he intended to study Medicine, he was inspired by the biologist JZ
Young to take a first degree in Physical Anthropology at London University.
Levinsky went on to read Medicine at London before training as a paediatrician.

   He worked on kidney disease at a children's hospital in Philadelphia,
acquiring expertise in immunology, the study of the body's immune system.
Returning to London, he took research posts at the Institute of Child Health,
attached to the Great Ormond Street Hospital, first as reader in Paediatric
Immunology and later as Hugh Greenwood Professor of Immunology, heading a
research group of 60 people working on bone marrow, stem cells and gene therapy.

   During his 10 years as dean of the Institute between 1989 and 1999, Levinsky
transformed the fortunes of a declining establishment to create a world-class
research and teaching institution. When it merged with University College,
London, Levinksy became head of medicine and deputy vice-chancellor.

   In 1999 he was appointed vice-provost for biomedicine and head of the
graduate school at UCL. In this capacity Levinsky chaired a steering committee
to establish good practice guidelines in postgraduate education. During his time
there he also successfully negotiated the funding for a major new cancer
research institute.

   A warm, engaging man with a subversive sense of humour, Levinsky was
interested in the arts as well as the sciences; before becoming vice-chancellor
at Plymouth, he took a part-time master's degree in History because he "wanted
to see what it was like to be a student again''.

   Levinksy was the author or co-author of more than 250 scientific papers and
edited two books on immunodeficiency diseases.

   A skilled amateur sailor - inspired, perhaps, by a spell as a ship's surgeon
in the liner Oriana - he was a qualified master mariner who competed in a
transatlantic race at the helm of his own 43-ft yacht.

   As a talented potter who crafted ceramics in his own kiln, Levinsky was a
driving force behind Peninsula Arts, Plymouth University's umbrella organisation
that aims to transform the city's cultural life. He was closely involved in
plans to create a cultural quarter around the university campus.

   Roland Levinsky died when he was hit by a falling power cable while he was
walking his dog near his home.

   He is survived by his wife, Beth, a teacher whom he married in 1970, and by
their son and two daughters.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                             308 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            December 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1400 words

HEADLINE: 'Cystic fibrosis is not such a tragedy... ' Sarah Douglas-Pennant's
two daughters were born with the disease that afflicts the Chancellor's baby
son. One died - but there is still hope, she tells Cassandra Jardine

BYLINE: Cassandra Jardine

BODY:

   'Gosh, poor, poor them,'' thought Sarah Douglas-Pennant yesterday morning
when she read that Gordon and Sarah Brown's baby son, Fraser, had been diagnosed
with cystic fibrosis (CF). Having nurtured two daughters with the incurable
disease, she knows the seesawing emotions that lie ahead of them: the moments of
misery when a child loses ground; and the extraordinary happiness when things go
better than expected. "It is,'' she says, "an absolutely enormous burden.''

   A child with CF, an inherited disease affecting the respiratory and digestive
systems, will need physiotherapy twice a day to alleviate the abnormal
production of thick mucus that clogs the lungs. Parents have to tip a small
child forward on their knees and clap his back to get it moving.

   "Mucus is like a tin of paint,'' says Sarah. "At rest it is solid but, when
stirred up, it starts to flow.''

   Later on, a foam wedge will take the place of a parental knee and the child
will be taught to take deep breaths, then exhale slowly while clapping the chest
to cough up mucus. Eventually, she says, parents can make the exercises more fun
by incorporating somersaults and handstands.

   "Even so,'' says the former Montessori teacher from Tisbury, Wiltshire,
"doing that for half an hour a day, twice a day, with two children was very hard
work. My husband, Paddy, and I found that laughter is the best thing of all for
shifting mucus.''

   The aim in managing CF is prevention rather than cure. Sarah likens the lungs
to upturned cauliflowers with bigger tubes flowing into smaller branches and,
then, still smaller alveoli (air sacs). If the tubes become blocked by infected
mucus, they atrophy and lung function is lost. Avoiding infection is crucial but
with small children it's difficult.

   "You are always being invited for tea and other parents say, 'Oh, Henry's got
a cough.' Do you go or not? If the child is infectious, you shouldn't, but if
it's a tired old bug then you shouldn't wrap children in cotton wool.''

   The best rule of thumb, she says, is to treat a child as an old-fashioned
nanny would. That means wrap up well, no wet feet, early bedtimes and regular
meals. "Fighting infection uses a lot of calories - that's why sick people are
thin - so children need high-calorie food. And, because mucus makes the gut less
absorbent, they have to take Creon, an enzyme derived from pigs, to help them
digest.''

   Eventually, CF children will need to be on a permanent antibiotic regime,
with increasingly stronger drugs as their condition deteriorates. "Getting my
girls to swallow medication was a terrible struggle when they were small,'' she
remembers. "And sometimes oral antibiotics aren't enough, so the child has to go
into hospital for a two-week intravenous course. Parents can be taught how to
give it at home now, which is marvellous, but it can be fraught with drama. The
tube can become blocked, leak or seep - usually in the middle of the night. Or
the child can become allergic to the drugs.

   "The most important thing is attitude and morale. What you focus on, you get
more of. If you go on about how awful it is, you get a weedy, pathetic specimen.
If you take the line that 'this is a bore but, of course, you can play in the
netball match', the body tends to come, too.''

   Sarah's fighting talk and practical advice is her reaction to more than 20
years of family tragedy. As well as the agony of watching her two daughters
struggle against the disease and losing one of them to it, two years ago her
only healthy child, Johnnie, died in a freak accident at the age of 17 (his
remarkable story will be told in Monday's Daily Telegraph). In her bravery she
is living proof of her belief that coping often brings out the best in people.

   When her daughters, Anna and Milly, were diagnosed at the ages of two and
three in the early Eighties, Sarah was not so in control of her emotions. The
diagnosis came as a total shock. Neither Sarah nor Paddy, an accountant, knew
that they were among the one in 25 of the population who are carriers of the
recessive gene responsible for CF. No relatives had suffered from the disease
but, since they were both carriers, their children had a one in four chance of
inheriting it. They were given the devastating news that the girls could expect
to survive between eight and 15 years.

   When the children were still young and apparently well, it was the reaction
of others that was among the hardest things to deal with. "People used to ask,
'They will get better, won't they?' '' she remembers. "Or, 'Who's worse, Milly
or Anna?' ''

   The answer to the first question was no, they wouldn't get better. CF is a
progressive disease and at some point the lungs will be colonised by "the
dreaded bug'' Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunist bacterium that attacks
weakened systems. "Once you get that, you never get rid of it. It's a ghastly
moment when you realise you have lost ground,'' says Sarah.

   As for the second question, the Douglas-Pennants found that it was largely
luck which child succumbed to an infection. The Browns' son has been diagnosed
at just four months, which could suggest that he is in a worse state than either
Anna or Milly were at a similar age. But Sarah advises the couple not to lose
heart: "It doesn't follow that the sicker the baby, the sicker the child. I know
a mother whose baby was so ill that she would only go out if a nurse from the
hospital was babysitting. That girl now teaches sport.''

   For a decade, the Douglas-Pennant girls led almost normal lives. The first
major blow came when they became infected with Pseudomonas: Milly was eight and
Anna nine. But pony-mad Anna was still well enough to be given a pony for her
11th birthday. Cruelly, a year later she developed aspergillosis, an allergy to
the spores in hay and straw. "Her lungs became swollen and her immune system
went off the scale trying to counter it,'' says Sarah. "The whole thing got out
of control.''

   She became weaker and weaker as her lungs ceased to function and, in 1993, at
the age of 14, Anna died. "Of course we lived in dread that Milly would decline
in the same way,'' says Sarah, but she has been more fortunate. She, too,
developed aspergillosis but it was caught sooner. She did well at school,
becoming head girl at Sherborne, and started teacher training at Bristol
University. However, the student life of late nights and smoky bars wasn't good
for her, so she trained to teach English as a foreign language and went to live
in Seville. This summer, aged 25, she married her Spanish boyfriend and, despite
many crises, is flourishing. During her lifetime, understanding and management
of CF has progressed so much that average life expectancy has risen to 31 years.

   The Douglas-Pennants have certainly done their bit to improve the prognosis.
When Anna died they set up a trust in her name to fund research to benefit
people living with CF. "Most research is into gene therapy, which should offer a
cure eventually, but we wanted to fund work that would benefit Milly and others
like her,'' says Sarah.

   So far they have raised pounds 650,000 and the Anna Trust has bought a
bronchoscopy machine for Southampton General Hospital, where Anna and Milly were
treated by Professor John Warner. Projects funded by the trust have also focused
on early detection of aspergillosis and on developing an artificial protein to
make the surfactant lining the lungs more effective in repelling infection.
Currently, the trust is funding work on infection detection using DNA samples.
The aim is for drug treatments to become more focused, through developing a more
sophisticated analysis of the 200-300 bugs present in mucus.

   Such work should continue to benefit Milly, who has to take a fistful of
pills everyday: Creon, antibiotics, steroids and vitamins as well as nebulised
antibiotics. Once or twice a year, she has to have intravenous antibiotics.
"She's been jolly ill at times but she has a huge enthusiasm for life and just
gets on with it. She dances, plays dolly-drop tennis and rides a bike. You
couldn't possibly not have wanted Milly to be born,'' says Sarah.

   "As Fraser Brown grows up, life expectancy will extend further, maybe to 50,
so having cystic fibrosis is not such a tragedy.'' If someone who has been
through so much can say that, then Gordon and Sarah Brown can surely take heart.

   Donations to The Anna Trust can be sent to Tisbury House, Tisbury, Salisbury,
Wilts SP3 6PZ

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2006


                             317 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           November 16, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 850 words

HEADLINE: Dog helps find cure for fatal muscle disease Muscular dystrophy
breakthrough may be possible for humans

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   A STEM-CELL treatment for the degenerative and fatal disease muscular
dystrophy, which mostly affects boys and young men, could be available for
testing on patients within two years, following a remarkable series of
experiments reported today.

   Muscular dystrophy comes in at least 20 forms - with Duchenne being the most
common - and causes muscle wasting, progressive paralysis and eventually death,
affecting about 30,000 people in Britain alone.

   There are no effective treatments but today an Italian team reports success
in experiments on dogs that have a form of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   Golden retrievers also suffer from the genetic disease, the result of a
naturally occurring mutation and have been specially bred because they are the
most accurate animal model of the human disease.

   The dramatic results of stem-cell therapy on the animals are reported in the
journal Nature by Prof Giulio Cossu, the director of the Stem Cell Research
Institute of San Raffaele Scientific Institute of Milan. The work shows that it
is possible to halt this devastating disease and possibly even reverse it to a
degree.

   The therapy was described as "a very significant advance, perhaps even a
breakthrough'' by Prof George Dickson of Royal Holloway, University of London.

   Dr Marita Pohlschmidt, the director of research at the Muscular Dystrophy
Campaign, said: "If it does prove to be successful in humans, this technology
has the potential to develop into an efficient and ground breaking treatment.''

   Working with the University of Pavia and the Veterinarian School of Macon
Alfort in Paris, Prof Cossu's team transplanted cells gathered from small blood
vessels in muscle that are programmed to develop into muscle cells.

   The cells came from healthy dogs and were multiplied in the laboratory to
sufficient quantities. These were injected into the blood stream of dogs with
the disease and their immune systems were suppressed to stop the stem cells from
being rejected. "That worked,'' Prof Cossu told The Daily Telegraph. The cells
were carried around the body to the affected muscles and increased their
strength, which in turn improved the ability of the dogs to walk.

   One retriever, Azor, was only five months old but was already limping as a
result of the disease. But, after five consecutive injections of stem cells
extracted from adult muscle, he was able to bound around like his peers.

   "Azor regained incredible mobility, much more than when the treatment
started,'' said Prof Cossu.

   "He could not extend his hind limbs at first and was jumping like a rabbit.
But it was amazing to see how he could then move, without any fatigue. In dogs,
this is the best result so far.''

   To see if it was also possible to correct the dogs' own cells, so they would
not need anti-rejection drugs, stem cells were isolated from affected dogs and a
type of virus - a lentivirus - used to insert into the cells a corrected copy of
the faulty dystrophin protein, actually a stripped down version of the human
gene.

   Other animals - around four months and already limping - were injected five
times at monthly intervals with their own modified stem cells but there was no
improvement, even though the gene therapy seemed to work at the molecular level.

   In the long-term, this type of transplant would be preferable because it
would do away with a lifetime of immune suppression: without this, some dogs in
the trial that received stem cells from another animal rapidly lost the ability
to walk.

   Prof Cossu has already discussed human transplants with an Italian charity
and is planning clinical trials. The first attempt is likely to use stem cells
from a donor with a similar tissue type, the method that succeeded with the
dogs.

   The professor estimated that another year or two will be necessary to get a
patient's own genetically modified stem cells to work. "Even though by itself it
may not lead to a complete cure, it would ameliorate the condition, then we
could work on this to the point of getting a real cure.''

   Prof Kay Davies, of Oxford University, commented: "The use of stem cells to
treat human disease holds great promise but the actual delivery of such therapy
is thought to be many years away.

   "The data presented in the paper from Cossu's group, using a particular type
of stem cell, a mesoangioblast stem cell, changes that view . . . this is a
major step forward and suggests that this approach may be effective for use in
DMD patients.''

   Dr Peter Wigmore, of Nottingham University, said: "The importance of this
result is not only in providing a potential cure for a currently incurable
condition but also in the use of relatively easy to isolate adult stem cells.
The use of these cells avoids the controversial use of embryonic or foetal stem
cells. In addition, the relatively easy delivery of these cells via the blood
stream makes this a viable method to treat humans.''

   Prof Dominic Wells, of Imperial College Faculty of Medicine, said: "This is
yet another example of the vital contribution animal research makes to the
development of treatments.''

   www.muscular-dystrophy.org

   Video: telegraph.co.uk/news

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2006


                             320 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            November 13, 2006 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: British kidney cancer vaccine 'wipes out tumours'

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   TWO Americans with kidney cancer have had their tumours eradicated after
being injected with a vaccine based on a genetically altered virus.

   Two more patients had a partial response to the vaccine. The tumours shrank
in the two phase II trials on 24 patients with two common forms of kidney
cancer.

   TroVax, developed by Oxford BioMedica, a British gene therapy company, was
tested by Dr Robert Amato, of the Methodist Hospital in Houston, who presented
the results at a recent symposium in Prague, Czech Republic.

   "Both patients that appear to be complete responders have previously been
treated and have been given targeted treatments,'' said Dr Amato. "But now with
this vaccine we are seeing striking responses.

   "We need to find out why some patients are responding and others aren't.''

   A worldwide study on 700 patients is now under way.

   The trials are designed to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of TroVax as
a single agent, injected seven times over 41 weeks, and in combination with
standard therapy.

   To date, the two trials have enrolled patients with progressive kidney
cancer.

   All patients had been given surgery and chemotherapy.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2006


                             323 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           October 28, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES; Letter to the Editor; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 81 words

HEADLINE: Teaching the basics

BODY:

   SIR - Trevor Chilton (Letters, October 26) prefers children be taught the
principles of gene therapy, rather than the details of floral morphology. Surely
the issue is not what they are taught, but in what order?

   By all means teach algebra and calculus; but ensure the child has a good
grasp of basic arithmetic first. Teach plant morphology; move on to gene therapy
later. It is the lack of basic teaching that is the cause of many educational
problems.

   Don McAllister

   Bournemouth, Dorset

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2006


                             325 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           October 26, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 121 words

HEADLINE: No return to rote

BODY:

   SIR - I am staggered to learn that Nick Gibb, the shadow schools minister,
should be delighted by the announcement that schools may be allowed to return to
what the Government now considers as the more rigorous style of IGCSE
examinations (report, October 25).

   Has he looked at the content of IGCSE science syllabuses and compared them to
the latest GCSE specifications? Would he prefer, for example, that biology
pupils should be more familiar with the details of floral morphology than the
principles of gene therapy?

   Get rid of the coursework by all means, but let us not return to the rote
learning of facts with little relevance to the development of modern science.

   Trevor Chilton

   Head of Biology, Mill Hill School

   London NW7

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2006


                             327 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           October 11, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: CITY; City bulletin; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 64 words

HEADLINE: Ark signs US deal for Kerraboot

BODY:

   Gene therapy company Ark Therapeutics has signed a US distribution deal for
Kerraboot, its wound care device for leg and foot ulcers. Shares rose 3p to 99p
after it announced the link with Health Care Logistics. Kerraboot is already
available in Europe. Ark is developing products to stop blood vessels blocking
in kidney dialysis patients and cancer returning in brain tumour patients.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2006


                             331 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           September 25, 2006 Monday

SECTION: CITY; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1355 words

HEADLINE: Shire's sharpshooter is a quiet American MATTHEW EMMENS CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OF SHIRE Matthew Emmens tells Katherine Griffiths that he's no
gunslinger but has managed to pick off a long list of targets - and is now
hitting the expansion trail

BYLINE: Katherine Griffiths

BODY:

   Pharma's fixer

   Education Graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University in Rutherford, New
Jersey, with a degree in Business Administration.

   Career In 1974 joined Merck & Co, working in sales, marketing and training
positions before moving to help establish Astra Merck, the joint venture with
Astra Pharmaceuticals. He later became its president and chief executive.

   In 1999 he joined Germany's Merck. He moved to Darmstadt as president of
Merck's global prescription pharmaceuticals business.

   Joined Shire as chief executive in March 2003.

   Family Divorced with three children.

   Hobbies Enjoys flying and fixing old cars.When appointed in March 2003 as the
new chief executive of Shire, Britain's third-biggest drugs maker, Matthew
Emmens was asked if he was going to sack everyone at the troubled company.

   According to the mild-mannered American, "I was not a gunslinger coming into
town to shoot everybody. I said I was not here to fire everybody. I did change
some people, but I took my time.''

   Emmens, 55, replaced the charismatic Rolf Stahel, who took Shire from being a
loss-making private company to a member of the FTSE 100 and a competitor in the
global pharmaceuticals market.

   While Stahel put Shire on the map, the dramatic expansion of the company -
whose main product is a treatment for hyperactive behaviour - caused some
problems.

   Regulators had rejected both its embryonic skin patch for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and a treatment for kidney dialysis patients, and
America's Barr Pharmaceuticals was threatening to make a generic version of
Shire's top-selling drug, Adderall XR, also for ADHD.

   Living in Germany - which he disliked - and working for that country's drugs
giant Merck, Emmens spotted a newspaper story saying Stahel was leaving.

   He took the job despite thinking: "The future looked pretty bleak. We had to
structure the company in a more intelligent way, we had to have better
regulations and consolidate our sites. We also had to bring in more talent and
we had to settle with Barr.''

   Rather than shooting from the hip to accomplish all of this, "I got an
agreement from board that I wanted six months to review and then come forth with
a strategy,'' Emmens says. Emmens, who put himself through college in
Rutherford, New Jersey, by fixing cars for money, has steadily implemented that
strategy, axing 10 of Shire's main areas of operation around the world - leaving
Basingstoke as its UK headquarters and Wayne, Pennsylvania, as its main US
centre - and selling off unpromising products.

   "To say Shire has been busy is an understatement. We have restructured the
company and refocused on various products that have been successful in
regulatory submissions and more recently in regulatory approvals. We have become
one of the fastest-growing companies in our space,'' declares Emmens.

   The quietly spoken executive does not naturally seem one to blow his own
trumpet. But it is widely agreed in the City that he has ticked off most things
on the long list of targets he set himself and has also pulled off several
promising deals for future growth.

   Emmens' most dramatic acquisition so far has been the $1.6bn ( pounds 840m)
deal in 2005 for Transkaryotic Therapies, a Massachusetts-based company which
has some of the world's most advanced gene therapy technology.

   TKT brought with it several treatments for rare diseases such as the
life-threatening wasting condition, Hunter's Syndrome.

   Last month, Emmens solved the problem which most worried investors - settling
Barr's legal challenge over the patent on Adderall XR.

   The agreement, which allowed Shire to keep its exclusive rights on Adderall
XR until April 2009, prompted accusations by some that this was another example
of a pharmaceuticals company and a generics challenger agreeing a cosy deal to
the detriment of patients.

   Emmens rejects the charge: "There are settlements that are not consumer
friendly, many of which are done in the last six months of a drug's patent life
or in some cases when no patent life is left to keep a cheaper generic off the
market. We don't think that is right and we wouldn't have done it. The Federal
Trade Commission in the future probably won't allow it.''

   Having sorted out Shire's historic problems, Emmens acknowledges he will be
judged in the next few years on how well the company executes its future
strategy, including launching five drugs in the next 12 months.

   A key date will be October 6, when regulators in the huge US drugs market
rule on whether Shire can sell a next-generation drug for ADHD, NRP104, which
the company hopes will become a blockbuster due to its smooth release in the
body.

   Rumours have been going round that there might be trouble, with the Food and
Drug Administration either delaying the launch of NRP104, or classifying it as a
potentially dangerous drug because it contains amphetamine, which would restrict
sales.

   In fact that won't matter too much to Shire. Analysts have pointed out that a
delay of a year or so would bring in more profits because it would give Shire
more time to sell Adderall XR, whereas when it moves patients over to NRP104 it
will have to share profits with its partner in the venture, New River
Pharmaceuticals of the US.

   And if the drug is classified - along with existing ADHD drugs - in a more
restrictive safety category, Shire would avoid an upfront payment of $300m to
New River.

   Indeed, a seemingly adverse finding on October 6 might give Emmens the
opportunity to snap up all the rights to NRP104 from New River, or perhaps even
to buy the whole company, using some of Shire's $400m of cash or its
well-performing shares.

   Emmens says he is always looking for possible deals. "There are additional
areas that are either too small for Big Pharma to really make a difference to
them but would for us, or that Big Pharma has forgotten about because of a lack
of sexy technology.

   "You might see us in the next 12 to 18 months doing some creative things,
looking into a new therapy that we are not in.''

   At the same time, Shire - which labels itself a "specialist pharmaceuticals
company'' because it targets rare diseases in order to avoid having to fund a
large sales force necessary in areas where many drugs compete - might itself be
an attractive target for a larger company.

   What might put off some is the fact that while Shire has broadened the range
of its disease areas, ADHD still accounts for 40pc of its profits.

   Some see this as problematic as ADHD drugs have caused concern in Canada and
the US that they can lead to heart problems in children. In Europe, there is
scepticism about whether ADHD exists at all.

   Shire, which has never sold Adderall XR in Europe, is planning to enter this
market with its latest products, and Emmens asserts that all of the safety
concerns have been answered. He has made it a target for Shire to "own half the
market'' in two to three years.

   Emmens has spent 32 years working in the drugs industry, moving around in the
US in different roles before going to Germany. When working at Astra Merck, a
joint venture between Astra Pharmaceuticals and Merck, Emmens was for a year the
boss of David Brennan, a fellow American who is now chief executive of
AstraZeneca.

   Both have ended up coming to the UK to run companies with significant
problems. In Brennan's case, it was a lack of a decent pipeline of new drugs.

   Emmens says of Brennan: "I think he is doing the right thing. He is a very
hard-working guy and very smart. He has got a big ship to turn, so I wish him
luck.''

   Emmens, who lives in Malvern, Pennsylvania, and flies planes and fixes old
cars in his spare time, comes to the UK every six weeks.

   He says he enjoys running a British company: "Many of the values are the
same. There is a stoicness and a determination I find very attractive. I think
the British corporate governance rules lead the governance rules in the world.''

   He says after all the change in the past three and a half years, "for the
first time I feel the company is pretty integrated''. He jokes there is just one
problem left to solve: "I'm trying to get these people to speak American English
and I'm having a heck of a time.''

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2006


                             337 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           September 2, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: CITY; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: biotechnology Success of gene drug trials boosts Ark

BYLINE: Katherine Griffiths City Correspondent

BODY:

   BRITAIN'S gene therapy industry has taken a step forward with a medicine that
may help cure brain cancer moving closer to receiving regulatory approval.

   Ark Therapeutics, maker of Cerepro - which helps to stop cancer returning to
the brain after a tumour is removed through an operation - yesterday said it had
successfully manufactured a batch of the medicine to commercial standards and
its facilities have met European regulatory standards.

   Europe's drugs regulator, the EMEA, will decide whether to ask further
questions of Ark or to give the green light to marketing Cerepro.

   The regulator is working out its policy on medicines made from genes as it
goes along because there are no gene-based medicines on the market outside
China.

   Gene medicine has proved controversial because society has been suspicious of
a science which alters human beings' genetic make-up. There have also been
examples of experiments going wrong, for instance when gene medicines have been
injected into patients and have affected the whole body, rather than a specific
diseased area, leading to severe side-effects including leukaemia.

   However, this area is also regarded by scientists as potentially offering
some of the most promising answers to illness. On Thursday results were released
of a trial conducted by the US National Cancer Institute which showed gene
therapy had eradicated skin cancer in two seriously ill men.

   While only two out of a trial of 17 responded, the trial has been trumpeted
as evidence that manipulating the cells in people's bodies could be an effective
medicine against diseases such as cancer.

   Within gene therapy, there is a spectrum of ways in which human cells can be
altered. Ark's method is at the conservative end, and involves modifying a cell
but not affecting its nucleus.

   With Cerepro, which has been through phase 2 trials, cells are engineered to
produce a protein which kills any cancer reappearing after a brain operation.
Prevention of this type of recurrence is one of the biggest challenges in
fighting this disease.

   Nigel Parker, Ark's chief executive, said: "This review is significant
because it gives clarity to the regulatory requirements and standards that need
to be met for gene-based medicines.''

   Ark's shares rose 4¼ to 94p.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2006


                             339 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy cures dying cancer men for first time Father lives to see
his girl married after treatment wipes out advanced disease

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   GENE therapy has eradicated cancer from two dying men using genetically
modified versions of their own cells.

   Both were suffering from advanced melanoma but the technique could be
customised to attack other common cancers.

   Although scientists remain cautious because there have been many false dawns
in the use of gene therapy, the results show, in principle at least, that
aggressive cancer can be treated this way, even after it has spread and the
outlook is grim.

   Mark Origer, 53, told The Daily Telegraph last night how, after five years of
losing the battle with the disease, he was made well enough to attend his
daughter's wedding last year.

   "She wanted me to be there for her and she wanted me to be there for me,'' he
said.

   Mr Origer was diagnosed with melanoma - the most aggressive form of skin
cancer - in 1999.

   A cyst which grew on the same area of his back in 2002 was found to have
malignant cells and the cancer continued to spread until, in June 2004, it was
found in his liver. He underwent various chemical and surgical treatments, but
none was found to stop the spread of cancer.

   In December 2004, he was given the gene therapy and was discharged the same
month. By January 2005, his tumours had shrunk by half and by last September,
when he attended his daughter Katie's wedding, one small spot remained in his
liver which surgeons removed.

   Last week, doctors pronounced him completely clear of cancer cells.

   Of the 17 patients with advanced skin cancer who underwent gene therapy, the
treatment worked only on Mr Origer and "Thomas M'', aged 39, clearing the
disease from liver, lymph node and lung.

   But scientists believe they can improve the response and adapt it to fight
other cancers, notably breast, colon and lung.

   The success using the patients' genetically modified white blood cells is
reported today in the journal Science by a team at the US National Cancer
Institute led by Dr Steven Rosenberg, a pioneer in the field.

   He said: "Both patients are still free of the disease, after 18 months.''

   During the study tumours shrank in other participants, all of whom had
exhausted other forms of treatment.

   "It is the first time, with all the hype of gene therapy, we have managed to
use genetic engineering to treat cancer patients,'' Dr Rosenberg said.

   Dr John Niederhuber, the institute director, said: "These are very exciting
successes. They bring hope that this type of gene therapy could be used in many
types of common cancers and could be achievable in the near future.''

   Prof Alan Kingsman, of Oxford BioMedica, a British company developing gene
therapy and vaccines to fight cancer, said: "This is an excellent piece of work
and shows the huge therapeutic potential of immune therapy.''

   The treatment relies on the body's protective immune system, in this case a
type of white blood cell, or lymphocyte, called a T-cell. Although they attack
tumours, these alone are no match for an aggressive cancer.

   Dr Rosenberg created billions of T-cells by removing the patients' cells and
modifying them so they developed a certain receptor, a protein that helps them
to recognise and kill tumours.

   Genetically engineered cells were transfused into 17 patients with advanced
metastatic melanoma, where the disease had spread.

   The study shows that the engineered cells can shrink large tumours.

   Dr Rosenberg has found a more potent class of receptors, up to 100 times more
effective at helping immune cells attack the cancer. His team has also
engineered immune cells to attack breast, lung and liver cancers.

   "We have now expressed other lymphocyte receptors that recognise breast,
lung, and other cancers,'' he said. "They are present on half of all common
cancers.

   "We can, with these powerful receptors, convert any patient's normal cells
into cells that will recognise these common cancers.''

   Trials will start within a month, subject to approval by the US authorities,
though Dr Rosenberg did not want to identify which cancer types would be
involved.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                             340 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: How gene therapists turned one man's blood into a weapon in war on
cancer

BYLINE: Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:

   MARK ORIGER described last night how he was made well enough to attend his
daughter's wedding after doctors carried out pioneering gene therapy in which
genetically altered versions of his blood cells cleared his body of tumours.

   Mr Origer, 53, the head of the US post office in Lake Mills, Wisconsin, was
diagnosed with melanoma, the most aggressive form of skin cancer, in 1999. In
Britain alone, about 8,000 people are diagnosed annually with the disease.

   His wife, a nurse, had noticed that a mole on his back looked similar to a
melanoma shown on a television programme. "I was unaware of it,'' he said.

   A dermatologist removed the mole. When it tested positive for melanoma, he
also removed more surrounding tissue.

   A cyst subsequently developed at the same site in 2002 and it was found to
contain malignant melanoma cells. Despite many treatments being tried, the
cancer spread relentlessly. First it reached the lymph nodes under his left arm
and, then in June 2004, his liver.

   Among the treatments he tried were interferon, interleukin 2, a melanoma
vaccine and surgery. "There were emotional highs and lows, as we tried something
new and then there was a recurrence,'' he said.

   In December 2004, he received the new gene therapy from Dr Steven Rosenberg's
team at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, part of the US government's
powerhouse of medical research, the National Institutes of Health.

   In earlier work by Dr Rosenberg's team, white blood cells were removed from
patients with advanced melanoma, tumour-killing cells isolated, multiplied in
the lab and then reintroduced after other white blood cells were removed by
chemotherapy. This showed some success, getting tumour regression in half of the
patients.

   This time, the team also genetically altered Mr Origer's white blood cells to
recognise and attack cancer cells, making them more effective cancer-fighting
cells.

   To do this, they drew a small sample of his blood that contained normal white
blood cells - lymphocytes - and infected the white cells with a retrovirus
designed to deliver genes.

   The virus inserted DNA that enabled the white blood cells to make proteins,
called T cell receptors, which recognise and bind to certain molecules found on
tumour cells, so they were better able to destroy the cancer cells.

   Mr Origer - who lives on a farm in Watertown and has two daughters, aged 25
and 16, and a son, aged 23 - was discharged at the end of that December and
hoped, most of all, to survive long enough for his eldest daughter's wedding.

   Although the chemotherapy used to clear the way for billions of his
genetically altered white cells had made him feel fatigued, he soon bounced
back. In January, a scan showed that his tumours had shrunk by about half. His
doctors broke into wide grins as they reported the effects.

   In September of last year, his daughter Katie was married and Mr Origer was
able to give the bride away. "She wanted me to be there for her, and she wanted
me to be there for me. There was a lot of concern from all my children.'' By the
time he walked his daughter down the aisle, only a small spot remained visible
in his liver, one that surgeons at the NCI removed in October as part of the
protocol of the trial.

   Study of the "very small'' spot revealed that a few cancerous cells remained.

   On Monday and Tuesday of this week he was given his three-monthly assessment
by Dr Rosenberg, which involved a scan. "I'm clean,'' said Mr Origer. "Perfectly
clean. There is nothing showing up on the CT scans. I'm thrilled.''

   Mr Origer, who has had no contact with any other participants in the trial,
will continue to go back to Bethesda for follow-up scans. "Naturally, I feel a
tremendous indebtedness to Dr Rosenberg,'' he said. "I know how fortunate I am
to have gone through this and responded to this. Not everybody's that lucky.''

   He said that, despite his extraordinary experience, "we try to continue to
lead our lives as normally as possible''.

   His married daughter lives only a few miles away, his son remains at home,
though works full time, and his younger daughter has just returned to school.
"Each day is a celebration, in a sense, because they are days that I would not
have had.''

   rhighfield@telegraph.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                             344 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            August 24, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: CITY; QUESTOR; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 744 words

HEADLINE: Slough Estates should find a REIT conversion less than taxing

BYLINE: Edited by James Quinn

BODY:

   Slough Estates

   636p -24.5p

   Questor says Hold

   IT'S no surprise that property group Slough Estates has decided to convert
into one of the Chancellor's new real estate investment trusts (REITs). The move
will bring significant tax advantages and should allow Slough to release
deferred tax provisions of about pounds 460m.

   Because three quarters of its portfolio is in the UK, Slough will benefit
from becoming a REIT more than some of its rivals, which have more of their
property overseas, as foreign assets will not be afforded the same tax
advantages.

   The dividend for investors is also likely to increase when Slough becomes a
REIT, which will be from January 1 next year all being well. The one-off pounds
78m charge to convert into a REIT will be offset going forward by the tax
savings REITs make, which is one of the key reasons for conversion.

   Yesterday's first-half results were in line with expectations, and showed an
increase in net asset value per share - a key performance measure for property
companies - of 7.4pc, though this was slightly less than some sector analysts
had been expecting.

   The group saw good performance in the UK and said it expects the investment
market to be "more balanced'' in the second half of the year, though rents look
like they could edge upwards.

   In Europe, demand is increasing and the company said it was seeing little
need to offer incentives to attract occupiers.

   Even in the US, where there are concerns about an economic slowdown, business
is still performing well.

   Slough focuses on the growing biotech industry in California, which is
fuelling the real estate market there. Analysts say that the balance of new
lettings over space returned has turned positive, but there is limited scope for
much rental growth on the existing estate.

   The market will be watching to see how this improves in 2007.

   After yesterday's price fall, Slough's shares are now trading at a current
price-earnings ratio of 24.9 times, offering a 2.9pc dividend yield. Questor
recommended the shares at 522p a year ago, and investors should hang on to their
stock, in part to reap the benefits of REIT conversion next year.

   Ark Therapeutics

   93p +3.25p

   Questor says Buy

   GENE therapy is not everyone's cup of tea. The idea that you can replace a
bad gene which causes disease with a new healthy one is essentially still
science fiction. Worse still, the possibility that something might go wrong were
a gene to be replaced is perhaps so frightening it is not worth thinking about.

   So it might not be any surprise that, despite having several products in late
stage trials, Ark Therapeutics, a British company which is one of the world's
leaders in gene therapy, has a lowly valuation, reflecting investors' worries
about the science and about the still undefined regulatory pathway to get
gene-based drugs on the market.

   But investors should step back for a minute, and try not be so squeamish
about Ark.

   The company announced yesterday positive phase II trials of a gene-based
therapy, Trinam, which stops blood vessels from blocking in kidney dialysis
patients.

   The company is also working on a product to stop cancer returning to the
brain after an operation to remove the main tumour.

   Another Ark product is a treatment to stop body wasting in diseases such as
cancer and anorexia.

   While the Trinam study involved only a small number of patients, it showed
blood vessels remained unblocked for five or six times the norm.

   This will be good news for the US's giant health financier, Medicaid, which
has to foot the bill for the large numbers of poor people who end up with
diabetes, which often leads to the need for dialysis. Medicaid could provide a
powerful lobby to get Trinam fast-tracked to the US market.

   Results so far in Ark's brain cancer drug have also been very positive and
there is a hope it could be sent straight to patients.

   Ibraheem Mahmood, Investec's biotechnology analyst, points out that one of
the advantages of Ark is its diverse array of products.

   He calculates the fair value of its shares to be pounds 1.59, which could
carry significantly, depending on the outcome of various trials. As with so many
biotech companies, Ark is not forecast to make a profit any time soon. But then
investors should not look for profit in such companies but in the potential.

   Given Ark's shares are changing hands for less than pounds 1, they are worth
a punt for investors who are prepared to suffer possible setbacks along the way.

   james.quinn@telegraph.co.u

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2006


                             347 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           August 16, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: CITY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 280 words

HEADLINE: pharmaceuticals Shire gets US patent settlement

BYLINE: Caroline Muspratt and Katherine Griffiths

BODY:

   BRITISH drugs maker Shire has settled a long-running legal case against Barr
Laboratories over the American company's desire to make a generic version of its
best-selling drug for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD ).

   The better than expected terms of the settlement - which prevents New
Jersey-based Barr from making a cheap generic version of Shire's Adderall XR
until April 1, 2009 - sent Shire's shares up 6½ to 888p.

   The case was due to reach court in October.

   Shire has agreed to sell an old version of Adderall that is out of patent to
Barr for $63m ( pounds 33m).

   Shire has also agreed to pay Barr up to $165m for the rights to its oral
contraceptive and transvaginal ring technology to treat urinary incontinence in
five European countries.

   Adderall XR, which is slowly released within the body, brought in $221m of
Shire's $376m second quarter revenues. The product has about 25pc of the US
market for ADHD medicines.

   Matthew Emmens, Shire's chief executive, said: "We are very pleased to have
reached this settlement on terms that are consistent with our beliefs that
Shire's patents are valid and enforceable and [are] infringed by would-be
generic competitors.''

   Analysts said the deal would give Shire time to switch patients from Adderall
XR to its next-generation ADHD drug, NRP104.

   Shire is a specialist in central nervous system and gastrointestinal
complaints and genetic therapies.

   As well as protecting its grip on the ADHD treatment market, it has been
trying to add new drugs to its portfolio. It has just won Food and Drug
Administration approval for Elaprase, the first treatment for Hunter Syndrome, a
rare inherited disorder that can potentially be fatal.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2006


                             369 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                            April 27, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: Gene transplant 'cancer risk'

BYLINE: Roger Highfield

BODY:

   GENE transplants that have been successfully used to treat children with a
serious hereditary disease may be riskier than thought.

   A young boy has already died of leukaemia in a French gene therapy trial
involving the hereditary immune disorder X-SCID. He was one of three boys who
had a cancer-causing gene activated by the transplant.

   X-SCID - known as the "bubble boy'' syndrome because sufferers have to be
protected from infection - is caused by mutations in a gene called IL2RG, which
is responsible for a protein that helps to direct the growth of immune cells.

   In gene therapy, a normal version of the gene is introduced into the body.
But today, in the journal Nature, studies on mice conducted at the Salk
Institute in California by Prof Inder Verma reveal that the replacement gene can
promote cancer.

   A colleague, Dr Niels-Bjarne Woods, followed mice treated with the IL2RG gene
and found that one third developed blood cancer. Dr Woods said: "Curing X-SCID
by replacing IL2RG in the manner it is currently being done puts patients at an
increased risk of developing cancer.''

   Prof Adrian Thrasher, who has successfully treated eight boys with the gene
at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, said that the findings were
overstated. "On the basis of the data that is published, which is very
preliminary, it is quite possible that the effects are caused by the
artificially high levels of the gene in the animals. Certainly we and our
colleagues have found no evidence for this effect.''

   Recently, two young men who had their ability to fight infection stripped by
another hereditary disease - Chronic Granulomatous Disorder, or CGD - have been
successfully treated with gene transplants by Prof Thrasher and colleagues in
Switzerland and Germany. Both men managed to clear infections that had
previously not responded.

   The new work once again shows that gene therapy can cause genetic damage to
make cells multiply. Insertion of the new gene seemed to activate four separate
genes, which led to an expansion of the corrected cells by up to four times.

   This helps make the gene therapy more effective, leading to more cells with
the correct genes, according to Prof Thrasher. "What we don't know is whether it
is dangerous, though there is no evidence of this so far.''

   Debbie Stewart, 33, who lives near Glasgow and has a six-year-old son, Mark,
with CGD, says that gene therapy offers "a light at the end of the tunnel''.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2006


                             374 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                             March 17, 2006 Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Letter to the Editor; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: Limiting risk to drug-test volunteers

BODY:

   SIR - Some will inevitably argue that animal testing prior to a phase-one
study in human volunteers has little value, since it failed to prevent the
tragic reaction of the participants in tests at the medical research unit at
Northwick Park Hospital (report, March 16).

   It would be more relevant, however, to point out that such tragedies are
vanishingly rare precisely because potential new medicines are tested on animals
before being given to people.

   It might, nevertheless, be valid to question the relevance of safety
screening in animals where the medicine in question is based on monoclonal
antibodies or gene therapy.

   In these cases, it would be prudent, however encouraging prior animal data,
to administer the experimental drug to volunteers in a series, with a gap of at
least several hours between subjects, rather than all at once. Had this simple
expedient been employed at Northwick Park, only one volunteer would have been
put at risk, rather than six.

   Geoff Hall

   Former lay vice-chairman

   Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Trust

   London SW3

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2006


                             384 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Daily Telegraph (LONDON)

                           November 22, 2005 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Science; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: VIEW FROM THE LAB Steve Jones on mice, men and a 'gene for fear'

BYLINE: Steve Jones

BODY:

   Press release of the week: "Researcher uncovers new gene for fear factor''.
The New York Times reassured its readers that "Gene therapy to create daredevil
warriors is likely to remain the province of screenwriters'' (note the cautious
use of "likely'') while other papers headlined the finding as "Fear is All in
the DNA'' and "Cowards can Blame their Genes''. Any biologist's response? -
"Aargh, not again!'' Yes, it's the familiar four letters of the HYPE code. The
science is fine, even elegant - but a quick look at what was actually done casts
a certain doubt on the coverage.

   The work is on mice, not men: and depends on a clever technique that cuts out
a particular piece of DNA. The researchers knocked out the instructions for a
protein called stathmin. Without that stuff, which is abundant in a part of the
brain activated during moments of fear, the engineered beastie is no longer
cow'ring or timorous, but swaggers into open spaces that any sensible mouse
would avoid. So free is its modified beastie from any form of panic that the
creature does not even respond to signals that it knows to be associated with a
nasty shock. Interesting stuff: and perhaps, as the scientists say, a hint about
future treatments for anxiety, phobia and stress.

   Well, maybe, some day; but gene therapy for brave warriors, or cowardly
soldiers pardoned after a quick DNA test? I think not: and, I'm pretty sure,
neither do those who did the work. Why, then, does the story as reported put so
many of their colleagues' teeth on edge? It comes from their bitter experience
of the unholy trio of optimism, exaggeration and over-simplification that hangs
around the double helix. The most dangerous word in inheritance is "for'', as
applied to genes for legs, for fear factors or for anything else. Often, a
damaged gene does remove or modify a particular feature, be it the wings of a
fly or the caution of a mouse. It then seems obvious that its normal task must
be to make a working version of the organ involved, be it that of flight or of
fear.

   If only life were so simple. The wingless gene lives up to its name - but it
also does dozens of other jobs during development, in both fruit-flies and
humans. Most of the time when it goes wrong, its bearers die (although sometimes
they get cancer) and an absence of wings is just a minor by-product. Stathmin,
too, does more than make mice worry. It is a crucial link in the chain of
signals that controls the division of all cells for it tells the molecular
scaffolders how to build the framework upon which chromosomes attach. When it
fails, it too may lead to death or cancer. Any influence on behaviour is a
side-effect.

   Another error is to assume that the abnormal must throw light on the normal.
Certainly, some mice, and some people, have a more nervous disposition than
others, perhaps because they were born that way. But why should stathmin have
anything to do with it? Think of achondroplasia - the condition that leads to
short arms and legs. Its gene is not sold as the DNA code that, in an undamaged
state, wins marathons, but that is the logic of the "gene for fear'' story: mice
without stathmin are fearless, just as achondroplastics tend to come last in a
road race. Certain heart enzymes do come in variant forms, some of which favour
distance running, but they have nothing to do with the genes that build legs.
Any tendency towards cowardice versus bravery will probably turn out to be just
as complex.

   The best-laid plans of mice and geneticists gang aft agley, but not
everything is hype around the helix. Twenty years ago, the idea of replacing
damaged DNA by molecular surgery seemed easy. It was not; and cynics began to
take cheap advantage of those who still worked on the idea. Now, the Cassandras
have been proved wrong. The "baby-in-the-bubble'' syndrome - severe combined
immune deficiency - was among the first in which gene therapy was tried. After
two decades, there was some success - but the trials were abandoned after three
patients developed cancer. Now, without much publicity, things are looking much
better. More than two dozen children have been treated, and almost all have
working immune systems and might, cautiously, be seen as cured. One of three
children with leukaemia died but two have responded to treatment and, given the
lack of problems with a similar British trial, the whole field is in a state of
modest excitement.

   The scientists are anxious not to trumpet their results, as so many false
hopes have been raised in the past, but now is the time for real headlines about
gene therapy rather than phoney ones about fear. Some mild national
self-congratulation is called for, too, for much of the research was done at
Great Ormond Street Hospital, which hopes to start clinical work on a therapy
for another, quite different, disease of the immune system in the next few
months.

   Steve Jones is professor of genetics of University College London. 'Single
Helix' by Steve Jones (Little, Brown) is available for pounds 11.99 plus pounds
1.25 p&p. To order please call Telegraph Books on 0870 428 4112

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2005


                             395 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                         September 28, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: News Pg. 014

LENGTH: 397 words

HEADLINE: Patch that lasts all week offers hope to arthritis sufferers

BYLINE: By Nic Fleming Medical Correspondent

BODY:
A SEVEN-DAY patch to help relieve the pain suffered by millions of
osteoarthritis patients was launched yesterday.

   BuTrans is designed to provide continuous pain relief for a week and
alleviate some of the problems of those who forget to take daily drugs or other
therapies.

   The recent withdrawal of a number of painkillers such as Vioxx and the review
of the safety of oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have left many
doctors in a dilemma over how best to treat patients with severe pain caused by
osteoarthritis.

   Dr Garth Logan, president of the Primary Care Rheumatology Society, said:
"Myths and preconceptions surrounding opioids have too often limited the
appropriate use of these important drugs in primary care. Seven-day low dose
BuTrans patches can provide an alternative to the frequency of administration of
the compound analgesics and present a new and alternative treatment approach."

   Osteoarthritis, the most common arthritis, affects 8.5 million people in
Britain.

   About 60 per cent of those aged over 65 have moderate or severe
osteoarthritis in at least one joint and on average two million adults consult
GPs every year with symptoms.

   It is caused by the excessive wear and tear of joints resulting from overuse,
obesity or misalignment of bones.

   Fewer than two in five people with osteoarthritis are happy with their
medication, according to research carried out by Arthritis Care.

   About 80 per cent of more than 1,000 patients surveyed reported waking up at
night due to their pain, with nearly half saying they had pain all or most of
the time. Nearly a third reported limited mobility and over a quarter struggled
to get out of bed in the morning.

   Bob Wilson, the ex-Arsenal and Scotland footballer and sports broadcaster,
has suffered osteoarthritis pain for more than 30 years, and has undergone major
surgery to replace both hips. "My pain can be best described as a constant
nagging ache, similar to a toothache," he said.

   Gene transplants have been shown to ease the pain of the less common
rheumatoid arthritis.

   Prof Christopher Evans, a British scientist at Harvard Medical School who
developed the treatment, said trials on two women have shown "a robust clinical
response to gene therapy".

   He is planning new trials next year and hopes they will lead to improved
gene-based therapies for both rheumatoid and osteoarthritis

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2005


                             396 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                         September 28, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: News Pg. 014

LENGTH: 397 words

HEADLINE: Patch that lasts all week offers hope to arthritis sufferers

BYLINE: By Nic Fleming Medical Correspondent

BODY:
A SEVEN-DAY patch to help relieve the pain suffered by millions of
osteoarthritis patients was launched yesterday.

   BuTrans is designed to provide continuous pain relief for a week and
alleviate some of the problems of those who forget to take daily drugs or other
therapies.

   The recent withdrawal of a number of painkillers such as Vioxx and the review
of the safety of oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have left many
doctors in a dilemma over how best to treat patients with severe pain caused by
osteoarthritis.

   Dr Garth Logan, president of the Primary Care Rheumatology Society, said:
"Myths and preconceptions surrounding opioids have too often limited the
appropriate use of these important drugs in primary care. Seven-day low dose
BuTrans patches can provide an alternative to the frequency of administration of
the compound analgesics and present a new and alternative treatment approach."

   Osteoarthritis, the most common arthritis, affects 8.5 million people in
Britain.

   About 60 per cent of those aged over 65 have moderate or severe
osteoarthritis in at least one joint and on average two million adults consult
GPs every year with symptoms.

   It is caused by the excessive wear and tear of joints resulting from overuse,
obesity or misalignment of bones.

   Fewer than two in five people with osteoarthritis are happy with their
medication, according to research carried out by Arthritis Care.

   About 80 per cent of more than 1,000 patients surveyed reported waking up at
night due to their pain, with nearly half saying they had pain all or most of
the time. Nearly a third reported limited mobility and over a quarter struggled
to get out of bed in the morning.

   Bob Wilson, the ex-Arsenal and Scotland footballer and sports broadcaster,
has suffered osteoarthritis pain for more than 30 years, and has undergone major
surgery to replace both hips. "My pain can be best described as a constant
nagging ache, similar to a toothache," he said.

   Gene transplants have been shown to ease the pain of the less common
rheumatoid arthritis.

   Prof Christopher Evans, a British scientist at Harvard Medical School who
developed the treatment, said trials on two women have shown "a robust clinical
response to gene therapy".

   He is planning new trials next year and hopes they will lead to improved
gene-based therapies for both rheumatoid and osteoarthritis

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2005


                             399 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           September 09, 2005, Friday

SECTION: News Pg. 002

LENGTH: 553 words

HEADLINE: Embryo work may eradicate diseases

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
THE plan by scientists at Newcastle University to create a human embryo that
will have genetic material from two mothers is controversial but promises to
eradicate a wide range of diseases.

   Mitochondrial genes - a small set of genes outside the nucleus of cells - can
be affected by more than 50 inherited diseases of metabolism. Mitochondrial
diseases cause the most damage to cells of the brain, heart, liver, skeletal
muscles, kidney and the endocrine and respiratory systems.

   Symptoms may include loss of motor control, muscle weakness and pain,
gastro-intestinal disorders and swallowing difficulties, poor growth and cardiac
disease, diabetes, respiratory complications, seizures, visual/hearing problems,
developmental delays and susceptibility to infection.

   About one in 4,000 children born each year will develop a mitochondrial
disease by 10 years of age.

   While controversial, the proposed technique should not be confused with
cloning.

   Unlike cloning, in which the nuclei of cells are changed, the Newcastle
method would take the pronuclei - the chromosome-containing residues of the egg
and sperm - out of a fertilised egg and transplant them into an empty donor egg
from another woman.

   When the pronuclei are inserted into this egg, which is emptied of its
nuclear DNA, the result would be an embryo with the nuclear DNA from the
parental egg and sperm but mitochondria - and mitochondrial DNA - from the donor
egg.

   The journalistic shorthand for offspring born after a mitochondria transplant
is a "baby with two mothers".

   The Newcastle team cringes at this, since the nuclear DNA that really makes
us who we are consists of 25,000 genes, compared with the paltry 37 that our
mothers pass to us in mitochondria.

   Even for scientists, the new technique is radical because they have agonised
for at least three decades over what is called "germ line" gene therapy -
genetic changes passed on in eggs and sperm.

   On one side are those who would outlaw it because genes can interact in
complex ways, so the eradication of so-called disease genes could have
unexpected effects and pollute the gene pool.

   Against them in the debate are the pragmatists who say that theoretical risks
should not outweigh the potential of this work to reduce suffering.

   Moreover, the Newcastle method is unlike earlier germ line proposals because
it does not alter the "nuclear DNA" - the DNA that resides in the nucleus of
cells, which affects looks, appearance, behaviour and disease susceptibility.

   John Burn, professor of clinical genetics at the department of clinical
medical sciences at Newcastle University said: "The Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Authority interpreted the wording of the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Act referring to changing the 'genetic structure' to mean not
altering the DNA structure inherited from the mother or father.

   "The characteristics of a baby - its hair colour, height and personality -
remain untouched, as they come from the parents.

   "What we are trying to do is help a group of people that suffer from a very
serious disease. What we are not doing is trying to make 'designer babies'."

   Prof Burn said the technique was no different from a surrogate mother either
donating an egg or carrying the intended parent's child conceived through IVF
treatment.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2005


                             400 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           August 31, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: Features; Style Pg. 014

LENGTH: 1646 words

HEADLINE: Is there a case for modifying her genes? Researchers could help
eradicate devastating childhood metabolic disorders if given the legislative
green light, reports Roger Highfield

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
Behind the doors of the authority that licenses embryo research in Britain, an
intense debate is taking place. Should scientists be allowed to carry out a new
kind of genetic therapy, one that offers the first hope that an entire class of
metabolic diseases could be wiped out?

   What is fascinating about the proposal, a blend of IVF and gene transplant,
is that if a baby girl is born as a result of this genetic therapy the
beneficial effects would be passed down to future generations.

   The proposal is radical because scientists have agonised for at least three
decades over what is called "germ-line" gene therapy - genetic changes passed on
in eggs and sperm - and remain divided over whether it should be allowed.

   On one side are those who would outlaw it because genes can interact in
complicated ways and the eradication of certain so-called disease genes could
have unexpected side effects. They fear errors in the resulting "designer
babies" could wreak havoc in a person's genetic legacy and pollute the human
gene pool.

   Against them in the debate are the pragmatists who say these are theoretical
risks and should not be allowed to outweigh the very real potential of germ-line
therapy to reduce human suffering.

   But the new proposal, from a team at the University of Newcastle, is not like
the usual brand of germ-line therapy - boys would not pass on the genetic change
to their children - and marks another example where reproductive science
outpaces legislation.

   In the Newcastle proposal under consideration by the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Authority, the suffering in question is of children who are affected
by 50 or so metabolic disorders linked to faults in a small set of genes that
make and run the chemical "batteries" that power cells.

   These 37 genes are contained in mitochondria, lozenge-like structures, the
legacy of when bacteria invaded the cells of our ancestors two billion years ago
to trade chemical energy for a cosy home. Only 13 of these genes actually work
in the conventional way to make proteins. However, mitochondria are crucial.
They provide the power for our bodies, from making hearts beat to helping us to
think. And we only get our mitochondria, and their genes, from our mothers:
every one of the 15,000 trillion that power your body is the descendant of the
400 or so mitochondria in an egg.

   Compared with the "nuclear" DNA coiled up in the chromosomes in the
compartment (nucleus) in each cell, which describes the proteins that build and
operate the rest of the body, mitochondrial DNA has been relatively neglected by
scientists: there is no easy way to alter mitochondrial genes.

   When there are faults in mitochondrial genes, the results can vary from mild
to catastrophic. A woman with malfunctioning mitochondria can suffer only the
occasional migraine. But, for reasons that are not understood, she can sometimes
pass on many more of her mitochondrial defects to her children. The resulting
metabolic mayhem can cause the build-up of lactic acid that will damage the
brain, muscle, heart and liver. In Britain alone, hundreds of families suffer as
a result of these incurable diseases.

   Why not trade the faulty mitochondria for good ones? That is precisely what
is being proposed by Prof Doug Turnbull and embryologist Dr Mary Herbert, whose
efforts in Newcastle have been backed by the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign.

   Their proposal will involve taking the pronuclei - the chromosome-containing
residues of the egg and sperm - out of a fertilised egg and transplanting them
into an egg that has been donated from another woman, under informed consent.

   The donor egg would have been "enculeated" - emptied of its DNA within the
nucleus but which still contains the cytoplasm, the jelly around the nucleus
where the mitochondria sit. When the pronuclei are inserted into this enucleated
egg, the result would be an embryo with the nuclear DNA from the parental egg
and sperm but mitochondria - and mitochondrial DNA - from the donor egg.

   The idea that this method could end mitochondrial disease has already been
successfully tested in mice by Dr Lawrence Smith at the University of Montreal -
who once worked with Prof Ian Wilmut, the head of the team that cloned Dolly the
sheep - but it would take many years to perfect in humans. Unfortunately for the
Newcastle team, its proposal has been rejected twice already by the HFEA, which
is nervous about how any approval would be portrayed by the media.

   The cell surgery that Newcastle would use to trade faulty with normal
mitochondria could be seen as a variant of the one used to clone Dolly the
sheep. It has to be a variant because the process of "nuclear transfer" is
banned when it comes to making babies. But any proximity of the words "cloning
techniques" and "baby" is enough to make many people nervous, particularly since
Newcastle University has the first team in the west to clone human embryos.

   In reality, however, the similarities rest only in details of the
micromanipulation methods used to carry out surgery on cells that are around one
tenth of a millimetre across. Babies that would be born after the Newcastle
proposal are anything but clones; they would actually be conceived the normal
way but would be powered by mitochondria from another woman.

   Herein lies the second PR nightmare: the journalistic shorthand for offspring
resulting this way is a "baby with three parents" or a "baby with two mothers".
The Newcastle team cringes at this description, since the nuclear DNA that
really makes us who we are consists of around 25,000 genes, compared with the
paltry 37 that our mothers pass to us in mitochondria.

   The third objection rests on how this transplant of 37 genes is seen by some
as tantamount to germ-line gene therapy. At present, scientists are only
comfortable with carrying out gene transplants to fix genetic disease so long as
they do not affect eggs and sperm. And usually gene therapy concerns fiddling
with one or two genes, not 37. If the experience in America is anything to go
by, it will end up being portrayed as germ-line therapy, even though this is not
strictly true.

   There was a furore when the first human mitochondrial transplants were
carried out at the Institute for Reproductive Medicine and Science of St
Barnabas in New Jersey, in a controversial fertility treatment known as
cytoplasmic transfer, before the method had been tested properly on animals.

   The cytoplasm carrying the mitochondria was removed from eggs from young
donor women and injected into those of older women in a bid to make
fertilisation more likely. As a result, the child's mitochondrial DNA was a
blend of that from two women.

   But there were no controls, the amount of cytoplasm that was transferred was
small, and the evidence that it worked was unconvincing. Even though the
Newcastle team has joined in the criticisms of this work, it was crudely branded
germ-line therapy in the American media brouhaha.

   An HFEA spokesman said that the Newcastle proposal has been rejected so far
because the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 prohibits the genetic
modification of the embryo. The team is expected to make a formal appeal at the
end of September. Until a decision is reached by the HFEA, the team has told me
that it does not want to discuss its proposal.

   The Newcastle team has good reasons to battle on. What it wants to do is not
like conventional germ-line therapy, since it would only affect future
generations if used to free a baby girl of the disease. It is unlikely that the
original intention behind the 1990 Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act was to
prevent such research, which was science fiction 15 years ago, marking yet
another scientific reason why the 1990 Act is under review. As if to highlight
how attitudes are softening, a consultation document recently issued by the
Government recommends that research on the use of cell nuclear replacement to
treat mitochondrial disease should be allowed, subject to licensing. The same
document says that germ-line changes should continue to be banned, suggesting
that mitochondrial transplants are not germ-line changes.

   In addition to patient groups such as the Children's Mitochondrial Disease
Network, the Newcastle proposal also has powerful backers in the scientific
establishment. "I hope their appeal will be successful," said Prof Anne McLaren
of Cambridge University, a former member of the HFEA and a leading embryologist.

   One problem, she said, is that the current wording of the 1990 Act makes any
licence for this work vulnerable to legal challenge by pro-life groups. "The
HFEA is quite right to be cautious," she said, adding that she hopes the revised
Act will make this kind of treatment easier to license.

   As for the claims that the resulting babies would have two mothers, Prof
McLaren commented: "I think two mothers might be even better than one mother.
Speaking as a mother, I would have no problems with that. No problems at all."

   Even full blooded germ-line therapy - alteration of nuclear DNA - has
powerful supporters, so long as it is safe. Prof James Watson, who shared the
Nobel Prize for his work on DNA's double helix, is one enthusiastic proponent:
DNA manipulation could be used to make people resistant to the ravages of HIV,
or transform slow learners into fast ones, according to Watson, who has often
voiced his backing for "simply putting right what chance has put horribly wrong.
You should be allowed to improve human life."

   At the end of 2002, the International Forum for Biophilosophy in Brussels saw
delegates backing research leading toward safe and effective human germ-line
genetic modification. They concluded that germ-line therapy does not violate
human rights, including any "so-called right to be born with a human genome that
has not been modified by artificial means".

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2005


                             405 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           August 17, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: City Pg. 031

LENGTH: 133 words

HEADLINE: Investor backlash threatens to raise cost of Shire deal

BODY:
Shire Pharmaceuticals' $1.6billion ( pounds 880m) takeover of Transkaryotic
Therapies (TKT) could become more expensive after two hedge funds and a major
investor sought an appraisal of their TKT shares.

   Carl Icahn, who owns about 5.07pc, had already signalled his intent to go to
court over the value of TKT shares after positive data on one of the company's
drugs came out. Since then, a majority of shareholders have approved the deal.

   However, Millenco and Porter Orlin, two hedge funds which together hold 16pc
of TKT, have joined Mr Icahn, with a third of all shareholders wanting their
shares appraised. If a court rules that the shares are worth more than Shire is
offering, it could award the dissenting shareholders more money for each of
their shares, under Delaware law.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2005


                             423 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            June 29, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: Features; Style Pg. 021

LENGTH: 2368 words

HEADLINE: Have we been oversold the stem cell dream? Cell therapy has been
touted as the future of medicine but, finds Roger Highfield, doctors are uneasy
about the media hype

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
They offer the solution for every human woe. The infertile can use them to grow
eggs and sperm. Dementia, heart disease, blindness, Parkinson's, damaged
arteries - you name it - can also be fixed with the help of stem cells. We can
all wave goodbye to the outdated idea of repairing a body, because we can now
regenerate one. With stem cells, doctors really can rebuild you.In the past few
days, however, some prominent figures have voiced their unease about how stem
cell research is being oversold.

   While many scientists sincerely believe that huge strides will come in the
long term from research into stem cells, the parents of all 200 or more types in
the body, they fear a backlash will result when the research fails to live up to
unrealistic expectations in the short term.

   Over the decades the mismatch between the daily agenda of the media and the
glacial pace of research has set a familiar pattern, where the media turn
tentative findings into headline news and, with equal glee, seize on the
inevitable disappointments and failures that follow.

   Monoclonal antibodies, proteins with the ability to bind to a specific
molecular target, were hailed as a way to revolutionise the treatment of
disease. Their ability to find one molecule in a haystack of zillions has been a
boon for research and diagnosis and is now being used in some treatments.
However, three decades after a way to make them in the lab was developed, they
are far from the "magic bullet" once portrayed by the media.

   Gene therapy was trumpeted as a potential treatment for 4,000 inherited
diseases and a vast range of ailments with a genetic component, from cancer to
heart disease. But little progress has been made since the first clinical trial
began in 1990. In 1999, gene therapy suffered a major setback with the death of
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, as the virus used for gene transfer triggered a
severe immune response. The field then received a major boost when a French gene
therapy trial showed real promise but was tarnished again when two boys taking
part died.

   Now stem cells make headlines almost every day. Last week, researchers in
Baltimore found that human embryonic stem cells could be made to develop
spontaneously into blood cells, a team in Florida grew them into brain cells,
and scientists from North Carolina said they had successfully isolated stem
cells from human skin and coaxed them into becoming fat, muscle and bone cells.

   The most coverage was generated by Prof Harry Moore's team at Sheffield
University which told a European fertility conference how it had shown embryonic
stem cells - removed when the embryo is the size of the tip of a pin - could
develop into the earliest stages of eggs and sperm, raising the prospect that it
may be possible to clone stem cells from an infertile patient and turn these
into the required sperm or eggs for IVF.

   Behrouz Aflatoonian, a PhD student in Prof Moore's lab, was at pains to
emphasise that there was still much work to be done before the promise of his
early results could be translated into reality. Prof Moore himself said that it
is difficult at a conference to get the balance right between keeping peers up
to date with progress, engaging with the public and not over hyping findings.
"We can't win. We are criticised if we don't explain our work to the public,
but, if we do, the press usually go overboard."

   In his Gresham Special Lecture, delivered last week in the Great Hall,
Guildhall, the fertility expert Lord Winston said the announcement by the
Sheffield team "in reality is pretty trivial" and added: "There is a real risk
with stem cells that we are raising expectations that they will be much more
successful than they are likely to be."

   Lord Winston said: "Whilst I am certainly not against stem cell technology,
and indeed believe it is a vital and exciting area, we need to be cautious about
how to explain this to the public. I am not arguing that it should not be
funded, it is just that we must not make exaggerated claims. In the long term
they will come to haunt us."

   While some stem cell work, notably the use of bone marrow transplants (which
contain adult stem cells), is routine, the use of embryonic stem cells is, well,
embryonic. In the short term, they offer most potential as a means to study the
cause of disease and to test drugs, not to treat disease. "Far from being a
great success story, the use of embryonic stem cells probably is pretty limited
and are likely to remain very limited for the time being for a number of very
good scientific reasons," said Lord Winston.

   One issue, he said, is that "the idea of growing someone's own stem cells in
the laboratory for their own treatment is probably impractical. And if you try
to force their growth, you may force anomalies which might be genetic or
chromosomal. That should be a concern."

   A second issue is how to turn embryonic stem cells into the desired type.
Before they can be used for repair, researchers must find ways - without the
help of animal products - to do this efficiently, stably and in sufficient
numbers.

   There is a theoretical risk posed by even a single embryonic stem cell among,
for example, the nerve cells derived from embryo cells for transplant into a
Parkinson's disease patient. The cell could turn into the wrong type of tissue
or multiply to form a cancer consisting of a wide range of cell types called a
teratoma, or a malignant tumour.

   "There are a lot of reasons to be very cautious about putting these cells
back into people," said Lord Winston. "If you decide that you need to treat a
heart infarct with 10 million cells, how are you going to guarantee that your
population is absolutely pure and stable? You only need a few rogue cells to
initiate a problem."

   Dr Robin Lovell-Badge of the National Institute of Medical Research, Mill
Hill, agrees with this caution but pointed out that, so far at least, this fear
has not been realised. Prof Hans Keirstead and his colleagues in the University
of California, Irvine, for example, have shown how they can obtain from human
embryonic stem cells almost pure populations of the specialised cell type that
insulates nerves (oligodendrocytes). Injections of these cells improves mobility
in rats with spinal cord injuries, providing evidence that these cells can help
restore motor skills lost from acute spinal cord tissue damage, and without the
cancer problem.

   Another issue concerns the use of cloning to derive a patient's own embryonic
stem cells. Stem cell lines produced from patients with hereditary diseases are
likely to display characteristics of the disease, so probably they will not be
appropriate for direct use in treating the patients. In theory, at least, there
are ways round this, such as genetic modification.

   One alternative is to make a withdrawal from the UK's stem cell bank in South
Mimms - use embryonic stem cells derived from a normal patient with a good
tissue match. But the use of banked cells raises other problems. A recent
article in the British Medical Journal pointed out that the expansion of stem
cell cultures could allow a single stem cell line to be used for hundreds, if
not thousands of patients, increasing the potential risk of disease transmission
from a single infected donor. As emphasised by the example of the HIV spread to
haemophiliacs and BSE to people, stem cell therapy could put patients at risk of
viral or prion diseases unless appropriate safety systems are in place.

   There are also more subtle problems. Teams in South Korea, Edinburgh and
Newcastle are attempting to isolate stem cells from embryos that have been
cloned from a body cell. But the process used to do this, called "nuclear
transfer", can cause "epigenetic problems", where epigenetics refers to the ways
that genes are used in the body rather than changes in the genes themselves.

   Although every cell in the body has the same genes, each cell "plays" a
different repertoire, depending on whether it is an eye cell or a brain cell and
whether the gene is imprinted, which means that only the paternal or the
maternal copy of a particular gene is used.

   Imprinting is thought to govern the use of some genes, mostly those concerned
with the growth of the placenta. When it goes awry, the effects can be serious.
One crucial imprinted gene is a growth inhibitor called IGF2R (the gene makes a
receptor that mops up a paternal growth signal, called IGF2, from the
circulation). If imprinting is disrupted, there may be overgrowth disorders,
such as one called Beckwith Wiedemann Syndrome.

   Recently, scientists from the United States, Sweden and Japan showed how an
"epigenetic" problem improperly turns on the copy of the IGF2 gene that should
remain off, doubling the risk that a cancer-causing genetic mutation will
trigger a tumour. In other words, imprinting must be stable in stem cells if
they are to be used in treatments. Fortunately, a study by Prof Roger Pedersen
of Cambridge University has concluded that imprinting is "remarkably stable" by
studying six imprinted genes, part of a more systematic study.

   "This work is important, since it addresses one of the worries," said Dr
Lovell-Badge. "This is not only surprising but good news."

   "I could not sleep at night if I had not done this study," added Prof
Pedersen. "Now we can go ahead with a clear conscience and develop them for
therapeutic use."

   However, imprinting affects at least 75 genes, perhaps as many as 1,000, and
Prof Pedersen's study is silent on the stability of cloned embryonic stem cells,
so the work does not give total reassurance.

   Meanwhile, the pro life movement has pointed to evidence that adult stem
cells, such as those from bone marrow, can "transdifferentiate" and be turned
into nerve, heart muscle and other cell types for repair, and make the use of
embryonic stem cells redundant.

   But ProfAustin Smith of Edinburgh University's Institute of Stem Cell
Research, said that although he supports studies of adult stem cells, the claims
that they could transdifferentiate, notably from bone marrow to heart cells,
were unfounded. The stem cell community regards these claims as "embarrassing."

   The message remains that stem cell science has vast potential to do good. And
it is well worth boosting the level of government investment, which is currently
under consideration by the UK Stem Cell Initiative. But although some adult cell
applications are close, the use of embryonic stem cell treatments by doctors is
a long way from being routine.

   Timescale to treatments

   Eyes: An Anglo-American team has shown that adult stem cells can be used to
replace dead cells in the retina, reversing the damage caused by retinitis
pigmentosa, the world's leading cause of inherited blindness. The team is led by
Prof Pete Coffey of the Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London:
"At present a major problem of getting stem cells into the clinic is the
infrastructure needed to produce stem cells to clinical and regulatory grade
standards. However, for a therapy to restore the light- sensitive cells at the
back of the eye and regain vision in blinding disorders such as age-related
macular degeneration or retinitis pigmentosa, a considerable amount of basic
science is still needed to establish how to generate appropriate cell types and
to get those cells to connect with the host eye. As such, we may have to look
beyond 10 years. The success of this endeavour depends on long term funding from
government, public/private initiatives and charities. One US state alone,
California, has pledged $3 billion for stem cell research."

   Pancreas: Stem cells from pig embryos could one day be used to treat juvenile
diabetes. Speaking at the Royal Institution in London this month, Prof Yair
Reisner of the Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, reported that
42-day-old embryo tissue has the best chance to develop within the body into the
islet cells that a diabetic lacks, warning that cells taken too early in
development can turn into tumours, called teratomas.

   Prof Reisner described how the tissue mismatch can be overcome in normal mice
by "relatively reduced" immune suppression with drugs. But, aware that the
immune response will be more complex in patients, he is now conducting primate
experiments to refine the technique to replace pancreas cells in juvenile, type
1, diabetics. Although many hurdles have to be overcome, he estimated that, if
the primate study is successful, patients could be recruited for a trial in
three years.

   Ears: Treatments for deafness based on the ability to grow new cells in the
inner ear are being studied at Sheffield University.  Dr Marcelo Rivolta of the
Centre for Stem Cell Biology, who is investigating human embryonic stem cells
and foetal cells, said: "Although exciting progress has been made in the field
during the last two years, I am afraid that many things still need to be
achieved. We are still talking of a decade or so until a stem cell-based
treatment for deafness is available for clinical trials."

   Livers: Adult stem cell therapy has already been tested on five patients with
chronic liver failure by a team from Imperial College London and Hammersmith
hospital. By injecting the patient's own blood-derived stem cells, Prof Nagy
Habib hopes to improve the function of the liver. The trial has shown sufficient
promise, in terms of safety and preliminary results, for him to consider a phase
two trial on 18 patients. "The sample size is very small, so we can't shout
victory. One has to repeat it and have it confirmed by other people. But I could
not have wished better." He added that although he believed in the potential of
embryonic stem cells, "adult stem cells are with us and are not for tomorrow but
today".

   Brains: Preliminary trials of stem cells on small numbers of patients who
have suffered long-term disabilities because of a stroke are planned next year,
said Dr Kenny Pollock of the Guildford-based company ReNeuron. The company has
developed a way to mass produce human foetal nerve stem cells in the laboratory,
has created cell banks to current manufacturing standards and is already
conducting safety tests.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2005


                             427 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             June 21, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: City Pg. 029

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: Izaki tries to resolve mystery of the missing share certificates

BYLINE: By Yvette Essen

BODY:
IZAKI, the vehicle used by a group of Israeli investors to build a 26.2pc stake
in QXL Ricardo, yesterday claimed it was still waiting for delivery of stock
equal to 6.2pc of the equity of the online auctioneer.

   Spokesman Yair Tauman said: "We are waiting for 108,598 shares which we
bought more than two months ago. We want to vote for every single share we have
at the annual general meeting."

   He explained Izaki needs the stock ahead of next Tuesday's agm when
shareholders will vote on plans to appoint Professor Abraham Neyman as a
director on the board. He would represent Izaki.

   Mr Tauman claimed that the group's stockbroker, Merrill Lynch, was still
waiting for delivery of the shares from other dealers. Merrill Lynch declined to
comment yesterday.

   Dealers speculated that there is still a large short position in the stock.
Earlier this month, the company said it believed a jump in its shares was
related to "technical market issues". QXL fell 25p to pounds 30.37 yesterday.

   The FTSE 100 fell 19 points in early dealings, but recovered to close down
just 5.6 points at 5,072.0. The FTSE 250 shed 19.2 to 7,335.7. Volumes were low
with 2.2billion shares traded.

   Plasterboard manufacturer BPB, up 3= to 533=p, and property group Hammerson,
5= easier at 928p, took up their places in the FTSE 100, following the latest
index quarterly reshuffle. They replaced packaging group Bunzl, 9 better at
519=p, and steel company Corus, up to 43p.

   Insurer Alea Holdings shed 3 to 165p, and radio group SMG slipped a penny to
96p, as they fell out of the FTSE 250 and spread betting group IG Index, down 5
to 152p, and F&C Commercial Property Trust, unchanged at 208=p, replaced them.

   Shire Pharmaceuticals topped the list of blue-chip risers, gaining 32 to
627=p after revealing positive phase III trial results of the Hunter syndrome
treatment being developed by Transkaryotic Therapies - the US company it is
close to buying.

   Stockbroker Canaccord said the data removes "any lingering uncertainty of
whether the proposed acquisition of TT will go ahead". Shire is paying
$1.6billion for the group.

   Chocolate group Cadbury Schweppes rose 10 to 541=p on rumours that private
equity group KKR is eyeing up its soft drinks division, with a view to merge it
with Britvic.

   SABMiller rose 13 to 854=p on speculation it is moving closer to acquiring
Bavaria, Colombia's largest brewer, for around $7billion.

   As the oil price hit new highs, BG Group rose 6 to 455p, Shell advanced 3 to
519p, BP put on 4 to 590=p and Venture Production rallied 13 to 360p.

   However, the prospect of higher fuel costs hit the airline stocks. British
Airways fell 4= to 273p and Easyjet lost 5 to 242p.

   Recruitment group Hays took the weakness in its share price as an opportunity
to buy back 750,000 shares for cancellation at an average price of 126.9p. The
shares slipped 2 to 126p. In the FTSE 250, construction and support services
group Balfour Beatty rose 4= to 331=p after winning a five-year extension to an
existing contract with South West Water, likely to be worth more than pounds
100m.

   Taylor Woodrow edged up 5 to an all-time high of 331=p. Dealers recalled that
the housebuilder is often touted as a bid target, possibly for Persimmon, up =
to 748p.

   Discount retailer Matalan ticked up 3 to 179p on renewed takeover talk.

   Cobham fell 24p to pounds 14.34 after Geoff Cooper, managing director of the
aerospace engineer's antenna and navigation operations, resigned. Housebroker
Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein downgraded the stock from add to hold, saying his
resignation from the Cobham's Chelton division is negative for the group.

   Hardy Underwriting said it is still in talks with Omega Underwriting, despite
twice turning down paper offers from the Lloyd's insurer. Hardy rose 3= to 222=p
while Omega closed unchanged at 109=p.

   Entertainment Rights, the media group home to Postman Pat, rose to 32p on
reports that Apax is mulling a pounds 200m bid for the group. Dealers speculated
the private equity group may want to unite the group with its recent
acquisition, Hit Entertainment, which owns the rights to Bob the Builder.
Entertainment Rights closed up 1= at 29=p.

   Shares in internet retail consultancy Eretail were placed at 3= and closed at
4p. First day dealings commenced in skin treatment products group Chromo-genex.
The shares were placed at 11p and closed at 11p.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                             431 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             June 07, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: News Pg. 002

LENGTH: 211 words

HEADLINE: Gene attack on arthritis 'a success'

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
THE first gene transplants to treat arthritis have shown that the method is safe
and could eventually halt the destruction of joints caused by the common
disease, scientists report today.

   The deaths of two children in a recent gene therapy trial in France cast
doubt on the method but the latest results provide assurance that it can be
performed without harming patients.

   The trial was conducted at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
between 1996 and 1999 by a team led by a British scientist, Prof Christopher
Evans.

   Nine women with advanced rheumatoid arthritis had genetically modified cells
injected into their arthritic knuckles, marking the first time a gene was
introduced into a human joint.

   The results show that successful gene transfer can target joint inflammation
and could open the door to the development of improved gene-based therapies for
both rheumatoid and the more common osteoarthritis, which together affect about
nine million people in the UK, according to Prof Evans.

   No clinical side-effects were reported up to five years after the transplant.

   The gene was transplanted into cells previously removed from patients and
then, after gene transfer, reintroduced several weeks later after intensive
screening.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2005


                             441 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 30, 2005, Saturday

SECTION: City Pg. 031

LENGTH: 203 words

HEADLINE: Defiant Shire stands by deal despite 35pc fall in earnings

BYLINE: By Rosie Murray-West

BODY:
SHIRE Pharmaceuticals, which recently unveiled the acquisition of Transkaryotic
Therapies for $1.6 billion, yesterday posted a 35pc drop in first-quarter
earnings, depressing the shares further.

   Shire shares have fallen from over 600p to 546=p since the acquisition was
announced, but Matthew Emmens, the company's chief executive, said that the
company had visited more than 20 of its top shareholders and the "vast majority"
are positive towards the deal.

   The company's operating income for the first quarter was $14.7m against
$114.2m the previous year. Revenues rose 3pc to $334m.

   Analysts said that the weakness of the results was no surprise. The company
said that its outlook for 2005 was unchanged, excluding the impact of the TKT
deal.  "The investment story for Shire is now about the long-term future and the
rebuilding of its pipeline through the TKT acquisition," Merrill Lynch said,
adding that the benefits of the acquisition, which many analysts have described
as expensive, have been overlooked by the market.

   Shire's biggest drug is Adderall, a drug for attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder. Mr Emmens said that the drug had maintained a 25pc share of the US
market.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2005


                             452 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 23, 2005, Saturday

SECTION: City Pg. 031

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: Shire shares nosedive over US purchase

BYLINE: By Malcolm Moore

BODY:
SHIRE Pharmaceuticals was the biggest faller on the FTSE 100 index yesterday as
investors continued to question the logic of its $1.6billion purchase of US
biotechnology company Transkaryotic Therapies.

   The shares fell 20=p, or 3.7pc, to 539p following an 8pc slump on Thursday
after Shire said it would pay for TKT with $1.5billion in cash and borrow $500m
from its adviser Goldman Sachs. "This is a bad deal. The group will spend its
entire cash surplus on a loss-making US biotech company," said Peter Reid, chief
investment officer of Britannic Asset Management, which owns around 2pc of
Shire.

   TKT has one medicine on sale and a second for anaemia cleared by European
regulators.

   Mr Reid said the deal "destroys the company's growth prospects in a single
blow". Britannic called on shareholders to consider the proposals carefully but
said it could see "no good reason" for the deal to go ahead.

   Credit Suisse First Boston cut its rating on Shire shares to neutral from
outperform. Jeffrey Holford, a CSFB analyst, said: "We believe that Shire has
swapped its cash pile for more of what it had already." He said the takeover
would do little to ease concerns about Shire's potential earnings volatility.

   Lehman Brothers raised its rating to overweight from underweight, saying the
deal provided a long-term strategy for Shire, which faces generic competition to
Adderall, its best-selling hyperactivity drug, next year.

   Shire said it would take a charge of about $800m ( pounds 444m) when the deal
closes later this year and that the purchase would add to sales and profit after
2007.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             453 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 23, 2005, Saturday

SECTION: City; City Comment Pg. 033

LENGTH: 224 words

HEADLINE: Shire deal comes with warning label

BODY:
THERE'S a rough guide to takeovers which says that the market's reaction to the
news of one is nearly always the right one. This week has seen a thumbs-up to
Pernod Ricard for its deal to buy Allied Domecq and a thumbs-down for Shire
Pharmaceuticals - the latter a two-day thumbs-down that has seen a tithe cut off
the price of our third largest drugs group. The reaction is hardly surprising.
The Allied-Pernod deal brings obvious gains from scale, which the analysts can
calculate with reasonable accuracy.

   With drugs, and especially biotech drugs, even the experts are shooting in
the dark. Few of us can even pronounce Transkaryotic Therapies, let alone have
any idea what Shire is getting for pounds 840m of its cash resources. It's
obviously expensive, since the company is losing money and Shire admits it will
dilute earnings for at least the next two years, and its drug portfolio consist
of just two compounds.

   Mind you, that's one more than Shire, whose Adderall treats a disorder that
many do not believe exists.

   No wonder that the analysts were divided on the merits of the deal. Merrill
Lynch retains its buy rating for Shire shares (well, they are 10pc cheaper than
when Merrill last recommended them) while Code Securities complains that the
purchase is too expensive, and prefers to wait and see. You can see why.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             454 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 23, 2005, Saturday

SECTION: Your Money Pg. 037

LENGTH: 752 words

HEADLINE: Oil strength puts a brake on blue-chips recovery

BYLINE: by Caroline Muspratt

BODY:
THE FTSE 100 index held on to an early rise yesterday on the back of Wall Street
gains the night before, closing up 29.7 to 4849.3. Traders said the gains had
been blunted by a jump of more than $1 in Brent crude to above $55 a barrel.

   Smiths Group was the main riser in the FTSE 100, up 25= to 870p as CSFB
reiterated its outperform rating and 920p price target after a bullish
presentation from the defence-to-medical devices developer.

   Carnival, the world's biggest cruise operator, rose 59p to pounds 27.89 as
analysts at Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein said the shares looked undervalued.
They said first-quarter results from Royal Caribbean had confirmed the strength
of the cruise industry.

   BAE Systems, Europe's largest defence contractor, rose 5 to 258p as the
Office of Fair Trading said it had cleared the proposed acquisition of US-based
United Defence Industries.

   Bid speculation continued to buoy ITV, up 2* to 128p. There has been
speculation that private equity firm Apax and former BBC director general Greg
Dyke could make an approach.

   Wolseley, the world's largest supplier of plumbing and heating products,
gained 19p to pounds 11.06, supported by good results from US peer Watsco the
day before.

   Alliance Unichem rose 6= to 784=p as analysts said the group remained on
track to meet targets. The company said the first quarter had delivered a strong
financial performance.

   The FTSE 250 rose 42.5 to 7012.9, helped by engineer Weir Group, which gained
9* to 334p as the company bought back 200,000 shares at 327p each.

   Stockbroker Rathbone Brothers, which this month withdrew its takeover bid for
rival Rensburg, said its costs are estimated to be no more than pounds 1.6m. The
shares rose = to 768p.

   Ultra Electronics gained 2= to 740p as the aerospace and defence contractor
said 2005 had started well with an order book that now stands at over pounds
400m.

   Among the small caps, Tandem Group rose 3 to 23=p. The Aim-listed bicycle
supplier said pre-tax profits rose to pounds 1.2m last year from pounds 609,000
the year before.

   Traders speculated that gearbox maker Torotrak was close to signing a new
contract with a car manufacturer. The shares gained 5= to 65=p.

   The biggest faller in the FTSE 100 yesterday was Shire Pharmaceuticals, down
20= to 539p as the market continued to reject Thursday's $1.6billion acquisition
of US group Transkaryotic Therapies.

   Health and beauty retailer Boots slipped 6 to 626=p as Dresdner Kleinwort
Wasserstein downgraded the company to reduce from hold. It cut its target price
to 600p from 650p saying bid hopes were wishful thinking.

   Drinks group Allied Domecq slipped 2 to 663p a day after agreeing to
recommend a 670p-a-share takeover bid from French rival Pernod Ricard. Pernod
expects to close the gap on market leader Diageo, which shed 2= to 770p
yesterday. Elsewhere in the drinks sector, Blavod Extreme Spirits rose 1* to 17p
after it said it had sold more cases of vodka than expected over the past year.

   Spirent, the telecoms equipment testing company, led the FTSE 250 fallers,
down 2= to 42p as DKW upgraded the company to buy from sell but cut its target
price to 57p from 61p. Smith Barney reduced its price target to 45p from 75p and
Lehman Brothers cut its target to 56p from 78p after Thursday's warning that
merger fever gripping its biggest US customers would damage first-half profits.

   Morgan Crucible slid 7 to 180p as the industrial ceramics group said
performance was in line with expectations but warned adverse currency effects,
rising energy prices and higher raw material costs "remain factors in our
trading".

   Furniture group MFI fell 1 to 112=p after UBS downgraded its rating to reduce
and cut its price target to 105p from 130p.

   Among the small caps, Reefton Mining dropped 0.87 to 3*p after the company
said chief executive Simon Gilbert had resigned.

   Ramco, the oil and gas exploration group, fell 3 to 36=p as the company said
talks with an interested buyer had ended. The group confirmed it had received an
approach on February 21.

   Airport owner PlaneStation fell 1 to 11=p. Volumes were heavy as traders said
22m shares were bought at 10p in a single transaction then sold on again in two
lots at the same price. Mortgage lender Kensington Group also slid 34 to 585p
after revealing a potential bidder had walked away. It said no talks had taken
place since the company received an informal approach and the third party had
decided not to pursue its interest further.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             458 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             April 22, 2005, Friday

SECTION: City Pg. 034

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: Shire paying $1.6bn for US biotech group American deal boosts group's
drug range but at what price, ask analysts

BYLINE: By Aaron Patrick

BODY:
SHIRE Pharmaceuticals Group yesterday announced it would spend $1.6billion (
pounds 840m) buying an American biotechnology company to broaden its range of
medicine.

   The Nasdaq company, Transkaryotic Therapies, is not profitable but has access
to two drugs that have been cleared for use in Europe, and two in advanced
testing.

   One of the established medicines is Replagal, a treatment for the rare Fabry
disease, and the other is Dynepo, for anaemia from kidney disease.

   While analysts welcomed the broadening of Shire's product range - one drug
generates almost half its revenue - they were concerned about the price paid.

   The acquisition will reduce Shire's earnings this year and may not add to
profits for three years. Shire shares fell 47 to 559=p.  "Clearly they're paying
quite a full price," said Paul Diggle at Code Securities. "This de-risks the
[Shire] business by spreading the product base but none of these [new] products
are a given."

   Shire has about $1.5billion in cash and will borrow $500m from Goldman Sachs,
its adviser on the deal.

   Shire's finance director, Angus Russell, said the loan was "relatively
expensive money" but the debt would be small compared to the size of the
company, which is Britain's third-largest drug producer.

   Shire chief executive Matthew Emmens said: "It's not unusual for the acquirer
to have a share-price reaction.  "It will be dilutive [of profits] for a couple
of years but in about two years' time we will have freed up most of the
[synergies]."

   Paradoxically, the acquisition of the Boston-based company will give Shire a
larger presence in Europe, which has been less important to it than the US.

   Transkaryotic's Replagal drug is approved for use in Europe and is used for
Fabry disease, a potentially fatal genetic disorder that can lead to problems
with the kidneys, heart, skin and brain. The total market for the drug in
western Europe is estimated to be worth about $200m a year.

   The American company's other main drug, Dynepo, is scheduled to be launched
in Europe next year. Shire says the market for similar medicine is $2.3billion a
year.

   Shire's salesmen already specialise in selling medicine to renal specialists
- doctors who focus on the kidneys - which is one of the main reasons it decided
to buy the company.

   Shire has been criticised for concentrating too heavily on one drug,
Adderall, which is used to treat hyperactive children.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             476 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             March 11, 2005, Friday

SECTION: News Pg. 012

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: British success heralds gene therapy revolution'Bubble boy' Mustaf's
immune system rebuilt after transplant

BYLINE: Reports by Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
A HEREDITARY disease has been successfully treated by Britain's leading centre
for gene transplants, showing that the revolutionary promise of gene therapy is
at last being realised.

   The advance marks a renewed attempt to treat ADA deficiency - called bubble
baby syndrome because victims must be protected in a sterile environment - the
subject of the world's first gene therapy trial.

   The pioneering trial, which began 15 years ago in America, produced results
which were, at best, ambiguous.

   Now Britain joins Italy in managing the first clearly successful treatment of
this potentially fatal genetic disorder by using a virus to transplant "healthy"
genes into the body.

   The team - Prof Adrian Thrasher and Dr Bobby Gaspar from Great Ormond Street
Hospital in London - is one of only three to have reported success with gene
therapy, among hundreds of failed attempts.

   The team has already used gene therapy to treat another bubble baby disorder.

   Last night, Prof Thrasher and Dr Gaspar described how gene therapy had been
used to treat Mustaf, four, from London, with a faulty version of the gene for
an enzyme called adenosine deaminase (ADA), so that he suffered abnormalities of
the immune system, a "severe combined immunodeficiency" or SCID.

   Dr Gaspar said: "He is doing very well. He looks like a healthy boy. He is in
pre-school, and can live a life largely free of restrictions."

   News of the latest success was released at the official opening of the
Wolfson Centre for Gene Therapy of Childhood Disease at the Institute of Child
Health in London. After the first success using gene therapy to treat this
disease by doctors in Milan, the London team launched the ADA trial in 2003.

   Mustaf was selected because a bone marrow donor with a good tissue match
could not be found and he did not respond well to PEG-ADA, a drug used to
replace the missing enzyme.

   Mustaf had been born in September 2000 and, within a few weeks, was diagnosed
with ADA-deficiency, which stripped his body of the ability to fight infection.

   Without treatment, children with the disease rapidly sicken and die.

   In November 2003, the team stopped treatment with PEG-ADA and in December a
sample of Mustaf's bone marrow was removed for gene therapy.

   Stem cells - parent cells of all those in the immune system - were purified
from the bone marrow and mingled in sterile blood bags with a
genetically-engineered mouse virus containing a normal copy of the ADA gene. The
virus implanted the gene in the bone marrow.

   Then the boy was subjected to mild chemotherapy to suppress his defective
bone marrow cells and, in effect, "create space" for the transfused GM bone
marrow cells to multiply.

   Within a short time, Mustaf's body began to make the enzyme again and his
immune system was rebuilt.

   The ADA clinical trial was funded by the Department of Health, the charity
Jeans for Genes, the Primary Immunodeficiency Association, and the Child Health
Research Action Trust.

   The first gene therapy trials by the team, on another life-threatening bubble
baby disease called X-SCID, have been remarkably successful.

   Seven children and one adult have been treated at Great Ormond Street, all
have seen a significant restoration of their immune system, and none has
suffered from any significant side-effects.

   The Gene Therapy Advisory Committee insists that approval must be sought for
each child in the trial.  "The field of gene therapy has therefore grown
rapidly, although unrealistic expectation has overshadowed genuine advances, and
has focused attention more on clinical failures and unnecessary mistakes," said
Prof Thrasher.  "The time between the concept of gene therapy emerging and
success is no different from that of other significant advances, and the
continuing occurrence of side-effects associated with established approaches
such as organ and bone marrow transplantation should not be forgotten."

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2005


                             481 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             March 04, 2005, Friday

SECTION: News Pg. 011

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Check on gene therapy after leukaemia scare in France

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
A BRITISH gene therapy trial is to be reviewed after three boys developed
leukaemia in a similar French trial. One of the boys died.

   In the French trial, 11 boys received gene therapy for a life-threatening
immune disorder, severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID), freeing them from
the need to live in sterile bubbles.

   But almost three years after the treatment, white blood cells (called T
cells) of the two youngest patients began proliferating abnormally, as they
would in the blood cancer leukaemia.

   The trial by Prof Alain Fischer, of the Necker-Enfants Malades clinic in
Paris, was stopped as a result. One of the children died last year and a third
has since developed leukaemia. It marks another setback for gene therapy, which
offers hope of new treatments for the 4,000 hereditary diseases caused by a
defect in a single gene. The therapy uses a virus as a "vector" to introduce a
corrected version of the damaged gene.

   A similar approach was used to treat boys in Britain by Prof Adrian Thrasher
and Dr Bobby Gaspar, of the Institute of Child Health in London, starting with
Rhys Evans in 2002.

   In the wake of the latest leukaemia, the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee is
to carry out a safety review.

   In Britain, seven children and one adult have been treated so far with gene
therapy for X-SCID. None has shown any signs of leukaemia and all are fine.

   The same approach has also been effective in treating another immune
deficiency, called ADA deficiency, in both the institute and in Milan.

   A spokesman for the Department of Health said: "Without treatment, babies
with X-SCID rarely survive beyond their first birthday.  "Until recently, the
only cure for X-SCID was a bone marrow transplant but this can only be done
using a donor of the same or similar tissue type as the patient.  "For children
with no donor, gene therapy offers an alternative treatment."

   The Gene Therapy Advisory Committee and the Committee on Safety of Medicines
will meet this month to review all X-SCID studies data.

   Prof Fischer said yesterday the two surviving boys who developed leukaemia
"are doing well, one being now off treatment with the persistent benefit of gene
therapy".

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2005


                             482 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            March 01, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: City; Questor Pg. 034

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: Cairn looks down the barrel of demotion

BYLINE: by Yvette Essen

BODY:
WITH a week to go before the next FTSE reshuffle, traders were busy speculating
which companies would be most likely to feature in the quarterly changes.

   Oil exploration group Cairn Energy's days of blue chip status look numbered.
Packaging group Bunzl and fund manager Schroders, which is due to report
full-year figures today, are also borderline cases. Dealers reckon that should
any of the three fall out of the index, those likely to take their place would
include International Power, plasterboard group BPB and property company
Hammerson.

   Changes to the FTSE indices will be decided by companies' market
capitalisations at the end of trading next Tuesday.

   However, yesterday traders were speculating that oil and gas exploration
group Soco International, telecoms company Kingston Communications and
pharmaceutical group Cambridge Antibody Technology stand a chance of being
promoted to the FTSE 250. They reckoned these companies could come in at the
expense of media group Chrysalis and electronics company Alba. They also noted
that the FTSE Committee, which meets next Wednesday to confirm any changes,
would also have to discuss whether British Energy is eligible for inclusion in
the FTSE 250.

   The benchmark FTSE 100 rose 23 points in early dealings, but later closed
down 38.3 at 4,968.5. As London closed, the Dow Jones had shed 37 points.

   Bunzl made a strong attempt to ensure it remains in the FTSE 100, surging 30*
to 500*p as it unveiled full-year results and plans to demerge its Filtrona
cigarette filter division.

   BG edged up 7 to 408*p on renewed chatter that gas group Centrica could be
mulling a bid. Centrica was 2= better at 236=p.

   The mining stocks were stronger. BHP Billiton rose 8= to 776=p and
Antofagasta put on 14p to pounds 13.84.

   Capita, the outsourcing group behind the central London congestion charging
scheme, rose 2 to 379*p - a two-year high. Chartists said the stock had broken
through a key resistance level.

   Food producer AB Foods, 8= lighter at 770p, published a reassuring trading
update. Panmure Gordon raised its target price on the stock by 50 to 850p.
Disappointing full-year results from publishing group Pearson, down 14 to 638p,
led to negative sentiment in the media sector. Reed Elsevier shed 13= to 529=p
and Reuters fell 7= to 412p.

   Credit Suisse First Boston said rumours of a takeover for building materials
group Hanson were unlikely to be realised in the short term, with possible
bidders having their hands full and asbestos remaining a live issue. Hanson
retreated 9 to 505*p. The broker lifted its target price from 380p to 415p, but
repeated its underperform recommendation on the stock. Retailers were weaker
with Marks & Spencer down 7* to 350=p as hopes of a bid for the company faded.
Dealers also fretted that with the cold weather sales of clothing from its
spring range may be subdued. Boots shed 14 to 663=p.

   Among the second-liners, consumer goods group PZ Cussons recovered 56p to
pounds 12.84. The shares have shed over a pound since the group announced plans
three weeks ago to close its Nottingham factory and warned of problems in the
Russian market.

   Glass maker Pilkington rose 3* to 121*p, despite Deutsche Bank downgrading
its rating on the stock from hold to sell. The broker lifted its target price 10
to 100p but said: "In our opinion the recent rally has been due to bid
speculation, but we believe that an offer is unlikely at the current price."

   Body Shop International rose 4= to 203=p despite non-executive director
Ronald de Waal selling his entire 4.5pc holding - 9.7m shares - in the high
street retailer at 199p each.

   Elsewhere, shipping stock Clarkson rose 7= to an all-time high of 855p.
Traders said vague chatter of a bid, possibly from a Japanese company, was
helping to lift the stock, although volumes were modest yesterday.

   Meanwhile, twice the usual number of shares changed hands in gene therapy
specialist Oxford Biomedica as the shares rose 1 to 21p.

   Reed Healthcare tumbled 15 to 50p after the the health, social care and
education staff provider sounded a profits warning. Aim-listed drug development
group Medical Marketing also gained 6 to a three-and-a-half-year high of 130p.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2005


                             485 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           February 07, 2005, Monday

SECTION: News Pg. 05

LENGTH: 222 words

HEADLINE: DNA helps scientists to develop TB vaccine

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
SCIENTISTS have developed a vaccine against tuberculosis based on DNA from the
bacterium, one of the world's biggest killers.

   Two million people die of TB every year and one third of the world's
population, about two billion, carry TB without developing symptoms.

   Furthermore, many of those who fall ill and recover can then relapse in the
future.

   Now a South Korean team led by Dr Youngchul Sung at Pohang University of
Science and Technology reports in the journal Gene Therapy that they have
developed a vaccine which, when given with drugs to sick mice, reduced rates of
relapse or reinfection.

   This is the first study showing that giving vaccination and drugs together
can accelerate the disappearance of bacteria as well as protecting against
re-infection.  "I think that it will take four to five years to be available in
humans if everything goes as planned," said Dr Sung.

   DNA vaccines trigger immunity by injecting particular genes from an organism
into the body, where they can make proteins -- in this case from the TB
bacterium -- that are recognised as foreign.

   Significantly, when given with chemotherapy, the DNA vaccine also speeded up
the recovery of the mice.

   This could be very significant if it worked in humans, as TB drugs must be
taken for six to nine months to rid a person of the disease.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2005


                             492 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           January 20, 2005, Thursday

SECTION: City Pg. 31

LENGTH: 710 words

HEADLINE: Secondliners provide the cheer

BYLINE: BY Yvette Essen

BODY:
CONSERVATORY specialist Ultraframe crashed to a new all-time low yesterday as
dealers speculated trading had continued to be tough. The company, which sounded
four profits warnings last year, fell a further 31/4 to 593/4p ahead of next
week's trading statement.

   In December, chief executive David Moore said: "We expect profits to retard
in 2005. But we want to stabilise and slow the rate of decline." However,
dealers questioned whether Ultraframe had been successful in stemming the
decline. Other traders said nerves may have been rattled by a large transaction
of 160,000 shares at 563/4p.

   Glass manufacturer Pilkington was another talking point as bid chatter sent
the shares surging almost 18pc to 1383/4p in afternoon trading.

   The talk was that Nippon Steel, or Nippon Sheet Glass - the largest
shareholder with a 20.6pc stake - would be willing to pay 150p a share.

   Dealers rushed to buy the stock after a number of bids in the building
materials sector for companies including Aggregate Industries and RMC.

   However, Pilkington gave up much of the gains after finance director Iain
Lough said: "We are not in discussions with anyone. We are watching the stock
like everyone else and it is market speculation." The shares ended the session
up a more modest 73/4 to 1251/2p.

   The benchmark FTSE 100 rose 21 points in early dealings. A number of
companies' shares went ex-dividend, including Imperial Tobacco, British Land,
Northern foods and Kelda Group. But with Wall Street opening lower, the
blue-chip index closed 5.6 down at 4,818.3. However, there were new year highs
for the FTSE 250, up 31.8 to a 7,088.8, and the TechMark 100, 2.04 better at
1,235.22.

   Emap rose 25 to 835p as traders said Morgan Stanley had met the media group's
management and reckons the stock is undervalued. ABN Amro began coverage of the
UK and Irish banking sector. Its key selections were HBOS, edging up 8 to
8441/2p. Northern Rock, 14 better at 7811/2p and Bank of Ireland, 12 cents
higher to &euro12.25.

   Dealers also speculated Bank of Ireland is in talks to sell its UK financial
advice business, Chase de Vere, to German group AWD. They also gossiped Lloyds
TSB, improving 51/2 to 469p, may be considering a disposal.

   Morgan Stanley downgraded drugs giant Glaxo Smithkline from equalweight to
underweight and trimmed its target price from pounds 12 to pounds 11.50, saying
"with the exception of Avandaryl we are not optimistic that the other new
product launches will make much difference to GSK's revenue line". The shares
fell 16p to pounds 11.88.

   Among the second-liners, Kidde, the fire safety group being gobbled up by
United Technologies Corporation, rose 1/2 to 1653/4p. There were a number of
heavy trades, including one transaction of 15.66m shares at 166p. Dealers
speculated United Technologies was snapping up stock.

   EMI, the record label home to Kylie and Robbie Williams, fell 61/2 to 2631/2p
after Credit Suisse First Boston initiated coverage of the stock with an
underperform recommendation and 240p price target. The broker believes the music
group will struggle to deliver its 3pc sales growth forecast in the short term.

   A broker downgrade also unsettled ICAP as UBS moved from neutral to reduce,
noting the stock has outperformed the market by 15pc since November. The shares
retreated 6 to 278p.

   Elsewhere, business transformation services company Axon climbed 221/2 to
1721/2p after announcing that its 2004 trading results will exceed current
market expectations.

   Gene therapy specialist Oxford Biomedica surged 31/2 to 223/4p after saying
it had received an approach from a third party and was discussing a possible
merger.

   British Energy continued to struggle after Monday's relisting on the London
Stock Exchange. The nuclear power group fell 7 to 247p, while the warrants shed
51/2 to 159p. Shareholders who had not elected to receive stock will get cash
for their stakes. This equates to 255p a share, and 162p per warrant. Cheques
will be sent to shareholders in the next few weeks.

   Eidos, the computer games manufacturer behind Lara Croft, rose 21/4 to 70p.
Hopes that a bid will be made shortly for the group persist, although some
traders were cautious, noting the shares are at a low last seen in 1995.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2005


                             498 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           December 06, 2004, Monday

SECTION: News Pg. 06

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis patients attack link to Fungus

BYLINE: By Becky Barrow

BODY:
THE decision by Britain's biggest cystic fibrosis charity to use the cartoon
character Fungus the Bogeyman in its fundraising activities has been criticised
by sufferers for being grossly insensitive.

   More than 7,500 people in this country suffer from cystic fibrosis, a genetic
disease that affects a number of organs, particularly the lungs and pancreas, by
clogging them with thick, sticky mucus. The average life expectancy of a person
with the disease is 31.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Trust said that its "partnership" with Fungus, a green
monster with three nipples and a red Mohican hairstyle who is the star of a BBC
adaptation, was designed to appeal to the black humour of many sufferers.

   In its newsletter, the charity defended its decision to sell Fungus badges
and Christmas cards with captions such as: "Drears! And here's to more Slime and
Muck!"

   It said: "In the spirit of 'not letting the devil have all the best tunes',
and not always being too earnest about cystic fibrosis, we are pleased that this
partnership will not only raise invaluable extra income, it will also help to
encourage a greater understanding of what is cystic fibrosis." But sufferers
have posted angry messages on the charity's website.

   Roy Cole, 65, the oldest surviving sufferer, said: "They have taken the worst
aspect of the disease and made a point of focusing on it. It is insensitive and
absolutely disgusting to have a character like Fungus the Bogeyman highlighting
a condition in which sufferers are affected by abnormal levels of mucus."

   Other sufferers were more light-hearted. One said: "I'm starting to see the
funny side. I am nicknamed Markus Mucus by some after all."

   Yesterday the charity said its association with Fungus was simply "a
fundraising opportunity" to help raise money for vital gene therapy research.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2004


                             504 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          October 20, 2004, Wednesday

SECTION: Features Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1314 words

HEADLINE: Could this fix a damaged brain? Cloned nerve stem cells and the use of
viruses as micro-surgeons could soon help people with serious illnesses. Science
Editor Roger Highfield reports

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
The human brain is the most complex known object in the universe. Even though
scientists still understand little about how the 100,000 million nerve cells in
this chemical machine store memories and create consciousness, they are racing
to develop ways to repair the brain as it ages and after it is damaged by
strokes and diseases such as Parkinson's.

   In the past few weeks, two British companies have announced promising new
approaches: one is growing replacement nerve cells and the second is using
viruses to carry out delicate brain surgery at the molecular level.

   In Guildford, Dr John Sinden's company, ReNeuron, has found a way to mass
produce - clone - human foetal nerve stem cells in the laboratory. The result is
a potentially unlimited supply of human nerve stem cells for repair.

   Previously, scientists have tried to treat Parkinson's with foetal brain
tissue. But this required several foetuses for each patient, which raised
practical and ethical concerns, and there was poor control over what tissue was
being implanted. One company, Layton Biosciences in America, used nerve cells
isolated from a special cancer, called a teratocarcinoma. But there is unease
about implanting cancer cells.

   Instead, ReNeuron took a few thousand brain cells from a tiny sample of brain
material from a single foetus aborted for medical reasons - with ethical
approval, consent of the mother and no inducement - and found a way to derive
around 100 cell lines, from which a handful of promising lines was chosen.

   The tricky part was finding out how to multiply the cells into vast
quantities, so freeing the scientists from the need to use any more foetal
material, said ReNeuron's Dr Kenny Pollock. The team eventually found that a
virus could be used to introduce a growth-promoting gene, called c-mycER, which
enables the foetal brain cells to divide endlessly. Using this approach, a
single cell can generate a billion identical cells. The clever part was that,
for the gene to work, a drug called 4OHT also had to be added. And when 4OHT was
withdrawn, the cells stopped dividing.

   By using genetic surgery to temporarily "immortalise" cells, the company has
banked millions of nerve stem cells in its laboratories. One such cell line,
called ReN001, was tested in rats and reliably turns into functional nerve cells
or neurones.

   "They have the world's first ever clonal immortalised stem cells which are
100 per cent stable, and are homogeneous and fully functional," said Sir Chris
Evans, chairman of Merlin Biosciences, which has helped fund the work since it
was started by Dr Sinden at King's College London a decade ago.

   Stem cells, as the name suggests, are parent cells of other types. The hope
is that when ReNeuron's nerve stem cells are implanted, naturally present growth
factors will turn them into various types, be it brain cells to treat stroke and
Huntington's, nerve cells to repair a damaged spine, or retinal cells for
blindness.

   Earlier this month, encouraging studies of the use of the human stem cells to
treat stroke in rats were reported to the American Neurological Association
annual meeting in Toronto by Dr Sinden. The cells, though human, caused a
minimal inflammatory response and treated rodents had a "significant"
restoration of movement and an enhanced sense of feeling, in detecting and
removing sticky tape on their paws. Later this month, at the Society for
Neuroscience meeting in San Diego, the company will also publish encouraging
results in treating animal models of the brain disorder Huntington's disease.

   After further safety checks in animals, ReNeuron hopes to have approval to
begin clinical trials by the start of 2006, initially in around 30 patients who
have suffered long-term disabilities after stroke. If injections improve
sensation and function, ReNeuron believes its ReN001 could be the first neural
stem cells to treat a major disease.

   Meanwhile, the use of viruses to modify brain cells is being developed by
Professor Alan Kingsman of Oxford Biomedica. For two decades, he and his wife,
Sue, have studied a family of viruses, including HIV, called lentiviruses. From
one, the equine infectious anaemia virus, they have perfected a way to carry out
genetic surgery. Crucially, while most viruses invade dividing cells, these
lentiviruses offer a way to deliver genes to non-dividing cells such as
neurones, the major functional cells of the brain.

   The Kingsmans dismantled these viruses: some genes (called gag/pol) make the
core, which determines the ability of the virus to invade non-dividing cells;
others code for the envelope, which makes a halo of "spikes" that enable the
virus to stick to cells; and there are genes that regulate how a host cell is
turned into a virus factory.

   Inessential bits are stripped from the natural virus and replaced by genes
that treat disease. The result: modified viruses that are unable to cause
infection but can deliver a therapeutic gene or genes to the patient.

   The resulting "lentivectors" blend genes according to the task. One mission
is to repair the damage caused by Parkinson's disease, when 200,000 cells in a
part of the brain called the substantia nigra no longer make dopamine, a
messenger chemical. An inability to move and tremors develop because dopamine is
needed by another region of the brain, the striatum. Now the team has developed
a virus to implant three dopamine-making genes into this region and not into
others, since this could cause side effects.

   Experiments on rats show how the genes can be delivered precisely by
injections of a millionth of a litre of virus. "What we find is that, with the
right volume of material going in at the right pressure, we can control the
distribution of the genetic modification in the brain," said Prof Kingsman.

   An animal model of the disease has shown that injections of this lentivector,
"ProSavin", produce remarkable improvements. Injections can restore almost
normal movement. "The ProSavin animals are up and jumping about and look
completely normal," said Prof Kingsman. The company hopes to apply to use the
approach, which would require injections directly into the brain, next year.

   In other research, the Oxford BioMedica team has coated a lentivector with
the proteins from a rabies virus. This has enabled the team to exploit a
remarkable property of this virus: once introduced into muscle by a bite, the
natural virus can infect motor neurones, the nerve cells in the spine that have
extensions - called axonal projections - that project up to a metre to transmit
brain signals to muscles.

   Rabies-coat proteins enable the engineered lentivector to hitch a lift on
molecular motors that travel up and down the neurones so it can dump its
therapeutic genes into the heart of the motor neurone. Aside from being a
"fascinating research tool", this virus offers a way to treat motor neurone
disease.

   One form of the disease, called ALS, usually results in paralysis and death
three to five years after onset. There is currently no known cure for the
disease, which affects about 100,000 people in Europe and America.

   In Oxford Biomedica's treatment, a lentivector is injected into muscle to
deliver the gene for VEGF, a nerve-protecting factor, into the nerve cells of
the spine. A single jab delayed onset and slowed progression in mice, extending
life expectancy by 30 per cent, according to a recent study in the journal
Nature by Dr Mimoun Azzouz of Oxford BioMedica and the Centre for Transgene
Technology and Gene Therapy, Belgium.

   Human trials are now planned in 2006, bringing hope to the 5,000 or so
sufferers in Britain. The downside is that, to get the virus in all the motor
neurones, patients would be turned into pincushions. But, given that it is such
an awful disease, Prof Kingsman expects patients to have few qualms. "This is
amazing technology," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2004


                             506 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           October 05, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: Features; Style Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1470 words

HEADLINE: Too rare for them to care? For those with a rare disease, diagnosis
often comes late and research funding is scarce. But the future looks brighter,
reports Christine Doyle

BYLINE: By Christine Doyle

BODY:
There are few things more devastating for parents than to be told their child
has a rare disorder that will severely affect his routine and probably shorten
his life. Spencer Owens, seven, is one such child; he has Ataxia-Telangiectasia
(A-T), a rare inherited disorder that weakens the immune system and damages the
part of the brain that co-ordinates movement. At the moment, he can just kick a
ball, but he is likely to be in a wheelchair within five years.

   Spencer is not alone. There are about 5,000 rare diseases, some so uncommon
they affect fewer than 30 people worldwide. There is even a disease with only
one known sufferer. Symptoms, usually inherited, can arise at any time.
Medically, these very rare conditions are called "orphan diseases", and,
according to an official European definition, affect five or fewer people in
every 10,000. About 200 people in Britain are known to have A-T.

   These diseases attract little research funding from the Government or drug
companies, which are reluctant to spend millions to develop drugs that will
bring little return. But some progress is being made. Thanks to advances in
biotechnology and gene research, new drugs dedicated to rare conditions are
being developed. Jenny Dickinson, who has Fabry disease, is now treated
fortnightly with a drug that replaces severely depleted levels of a missing
enzyme. Having been on the verge of kidney failure, suffering bowel problems and
regular exhausting fevers, she says: "The treatment has given me back my normal
life."

   Other drugs that replace or repair the effects of faulty genes are already in
use or under trial for other rare disorders. An increasing number are in the
pipeline, as the faults caused by inherited or mutated genes are deciphered.
Treatment arising from progress in stem-cell research and gene therapy could, in
the next five to 10 years, make a huge difference to the lives of sufferers.

   However, these new treatments are expensive. Jenny's enzyme replacement
therapy, for example, costs pounds 100,000 a year. Some primary care trusts,
struggling to meet soaring drugs bills, delay or refuse payment.

   "We were on the verge of taking legal action against one PCT, which did not
want to pay for the treatment of a child who was severely ill with Fabry
disease," says Dr Uma Ramaswami, a leading specialist in the disease in children
at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge. "We gave the trust one month to rethink
its position and it eventually agreed to pay."

   Such medicines could add many millions to a soaring NHS drugs bill. Today,
the dilemma facing the NHS of developing, assessing and paying for expensive
drugs that could improve life for just a few people will be discussed at a
conference in London. The conference has been organised by the Royal College of
Physicians and the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (Nice), which
evaluates medicines used by the NHS, against a background of specialists' fears
that the institute will set unrealistic prescribing guidelines on their use.

   However, Dr Ramaswami says it will increasingly be seen as unethical not to
pay for treatments for rare diseases. "If an experienced clinician considers
that a particular drug or treatment could bring improvement and slow progress of
a rare disorder, it should not be denied."

   Dr Atul Mehta, consultant haematologist at the Royal Free Hospital, London,
says one problem is that Nice is used to analysing trials on thousands of
patients over years before approving the widespread prescription of drugs for
conditions such as heart disease and cancer. "Some of the new drugs are, for the
first time, treating the fundamental abnormalities in rare disorders. We can see
the difference they can make, but it is too soon to say how effective they will
be in the long term."

   One way forward, some specialists believe, is for the 300 primary care trusts
nationwide to share the cost of these expensive drugs using centralised funding.

   "The last thing we want is to end up with guidelines from NICE which ration
the only treatments that work," says Dr Mehta . "This is a question of
compassion."

   Ataxia-Telangiectasia Society, tel: 01582 760733, or see:
www.atsociety.org.uk. Contact a Family, tel: 0808 8083555, or see:
www.cafamily.org.uk
'We knew there was no cure'

   Spencer Owens, seven, seemed a healthy, normal baby, although Jennifer, his
mother, noticed early signs of poor co-ordination. "He leant back in an odd way
when he started to sit and was a late walker," she says. "By the time he was two
and a half, there was definitely something wrong.

   "He was diagnosed with Ataxia-Telangiectasia, which means poor co-ordination,
combined with extra blood vessels, which are especially noticeable in the whites
of the eyes. We were lucky in getting an early diagnosis - the consultant at
Southampton had seen A-T before - but it was a shock."

   Jennifer finds it hard to be positive about Spencer's future. "We knew there
was no cure, and it is heartbreaking to think of what lies ahead. Despite a lot
of physiotherapy, he is deteriorating. His immune system is also affected, so he
is prone to colds and whatever is going around. But he is a cheerful boy, who
loves kicking a ball."

   Spencer's walking is becoming less co-ordinated, his speech is slower than
normal and he finds it difficult to eat mushy food without spluttering. But he
goes to primary school and is helped by a full-time assistant. A distant cousin
also suffers from A-T.

   "When children become adolescents, they begin to realise the extent of their
disability," says Prof Malcolm Taylor, who helps to diagnose the condition by
analysing blood samples that neurologists send to him, and assesses how the
disease might develop.

   "It can be hard to deal with. I know of two 20-year-olds, with excellent
minds, who spend much of their time watching television. Although we can
alleviate the symptoms and treat depression, the disease affects the part of the
brain that controls movement. We need to find some way of treating the
fundamental brain defect directly, perhaps by transplants of foetal cells."

   Actress Susannah Harker was inspired by Spencer, who is her nephew, to appeal
for donations to the A-T Society on BBC Radio 4 this week . "Finlay, my son, is
just two years older than Spencer and the two look similar, with blond hair and
green eyes. The contrast between the boys is so poignant."

   Saved by a wonder drug

   JENNY DICKINSON's father died of Fabry disease when she was six, so she knew
the life-threatening, hereditary disease was in her family. However, while she
was growing up, doctors believed it did not affect women severely, if at all. It
was almost too late before she linked the childhood bouts of burning pain in her
hands and feet and her frequent fevers with her father's condition. The symptoms
had diminished as she grew older, but 10 years ago, more serious ones emerged.

   "I had severe abdominal pains, nausea and diarrhoea, extreme tiredness and
high temperatures," she says. "My GP gave me antibiotics in case I had an
infection and, over the next few years, I saw a sequence of specialists. Few
inquired into my family history and I still did not make a connection. I reduced
my job as a travel consultant to two days a week, but the unexplained symptoms
and exhaustion grew much worse."

   Not until Jenny decided, by chance, almost six years ago, to read some
articles about Fabry did the truth strike home. "I had all the symptoms," she
says.

   In Britain, the disease severely affects about 600 people. The accumulation
of glycolipid, a product of fat metabolism, causes non-cancerous skin growths to
form over the lower part of the trunk. Men tend to be most severely affected,
though 60 per cent of women with the gene have some symptoms and, like
Dickinson, can suffer severely.

   When she was diagnosed, the only drugs on offer were painkillers. "It was a
dreadful time for my family," Dickinson says. "We all felt depressed and cried a
lot. Soon, I was in the first stages of kidney failure."

   Dickinson, now 44, knew that two drugs that make up the enzyme deficiency
were being trialled and, three years ago, she was treated at Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, with one called Replagal.

   "Within six months, I changed dramatically from being terminally ill to being
my usual cheerful self. I even returned to work." She will have to take this
costly drug for life. To her relief, however, her two children, aged 17 and 13,
do not carry the gene.

   Dr Stephen Waldek, from Hope Hospital, Salford, who has worked on Fabrazyme,
the other drug for Fabry, urges greater awareness. "This is now a treatable
condition. If we treat early, we could prevent the damage developing."

   Society for Mucopolysaccharide Diseases, tel: 01494 434156, or see:
www.mpssociety.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2004


                             512 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          September 11, 2004, Saturday

SECTION: News; Heart bypass tables Pg. 03

LENGTH: 791 words

HEADLINE: Holding back the years with a little passion Sam Leith takes the pulse
of Britain's first anti-ageing conference

BYLINE: BY SAM LEITH

BODY:
"WE are giving birth," announces the trim, pretty blonde woman in the white
trouser-suit, "to a new way of life".

   Heather Bird, organiser and chief sponsor of Britain's first anti-ageing
conference, is a woman who uses words like "search", "quest", "passion" and
"mission" - as in: "It is my passion to get this information out."

   Her personal journey has taken her from a Mormon childhood in Utah, via the
World Health Organisation in Geneva, to a Beauchamp Place clinic and the modest
title of "Europe's leading health and anti-ageing entrepreneur".

   She believes that the time for anti-ageing medicine has come, and this
two-day conference - which opened yesterday in Kensington town hall amid the
vague smell of expensive moisturiser - is its showcase.

   She introduces Dr Ronald M Klatz - founding President of the American Academy
of Anti-Ageing Medicine ("A4M"), Doctor of Medicine (Central America Health
Sciences University, Belize), and inventor of a patented "Brain Cooling Device".
He has the stage presence of a cashiered televangelist, and if I didn't know he
was an accredited expert in anti-ageing medicine, I'd have guessed that his
lustrous chestnut-brown hair was a dye job.

   "Passion," he says, "drives us." He is on a mission to defeat the defeatists:
the conventional gerontologists who take a palliative, or "disease-based" view,
of ageing. Why nurse the symptoms of age when you can prevent them in the first
place?

   Dr Klatz brings up a slide showing three photographs. "Vote for your vision
of ageing," he says. On the left is a plump woman salsa-dancing in a frumpy
dress - the centrepiece, he says, of the American Association for Retired
People's ("unsuccessful") $100 million campaign to recruit baby-boomers.

   In the middle is an ancient old doll being looked after by a nurse - the
conventional gerontological vision. On the right is an orange-tanned hunk doing
a cheesy Charles Atlas body-building pose, with a bikini-clad lady body-builder
draped admiringly down his flank.

   These are A4M's poster-people: 84 and 72 years old respectively. Hooray!

   The keynote speaker, Dr Robert Goldman (curly grey hair and a faint look of
Robin Williams) is A4M's chairman. Among the credentials cited to introduce him
are the ability to perform 321 handstand push-ups and 13,500 consecutive
sit-ups, and "a black belt in Chinese weapons". He counts Arnold Schwarzenegger
as "a very personal and good friend of mine".

   With even more jocularity than his predecessor, he takes up the tune. What do
we want to look like when we're old? "Sophia Loren!" he cries as her image
appears on the screen. "Hot! Almost 80! Hot!"

   Someone murmurs in the audience. "Oh. She's 70?" he says. "Seventy! Still
hot!"

   Other speakers over the two days of the conference are to address topics
including Alzheimer's diagnosis; the Pineal Life-Clock; RNA-based therapies;
aspects of obesity treatment and hormone replacement therapy, among other
things. The event has the feel of maybe 40 per cent trade fair; 40 per cent
publicity exercise; 20 per cent academic conference.

   Much is made of the "science's" interest in respectable peer-reviewed
research into such topics as stem cells, nanotechnology and gene therapy. But
anti-ageing keeps its mind open to "alternative medicine and emerging
therapies": the pills and potions beloved by a public always keen to be on the
safe side. This is big business.

   Wandering around the exhibitors' stalls outside the lecture hall, I'm offered
the chance to have my urine sent to Paris; I'm offered "nutraceuticals" and
"cosmoceuticals" and "isolagen"; skin creams and "heavy detoxification protocol.
. . physician-proven to help support the body's natural detoxification"; glossy
brochures on mesoestetic skin treatment; Ultra-Potent C 1000; Rejuvenal Dietary
Supplements. . . I have no doubt that all of these are exactly as efficacious as
they sound.

   The actress Brigitte Nielsen, 41 - vying with Shirley Bassey to be the jewel
in the crown of the evening's gala dinner - has no doubts either. She is happily
gobbling her vitamin pills while her 26-year-old Italian fiance scuffs his feet,
muttering: "Basta, Brigitte. Basta (Enough)."

   "I'm here because I love health and it's important to eat well and stay
healthy," she tells us. "I'm here for some tips."

   She ruffles a photographer's hair. She makes a V-for-victory sign.

   "Lots of love," she says. "Peace." She seems a bit mad.

   Later, I corner Heather Bird. "This may be the only circumstance in which
it's polite to ask a woman her age," I say. "How old are you?"

   "How old do you think I am?" she asks.

   I guess: "36?"

   She looks a tiny bit crestfallen. "I'm 34," she says. Then she rallies:
"Usually I tell everyone I'm 70."

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2004


                             518 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            August 13, 2004, Friday

SECTION: News Pg. 12

LENGTH: 234 words

HEADLINE: Monkeys motivated with laziness 'cure'

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
SCIENTISTS have managed to turn procrastinating primates into workaholic monkeys
by switching off a gene in the brain circuit.

   Like many humans, monkeys tend to slack when a goal is distant, but work
harder as a deadline looms. But scientists in the United States have found a
gene therapy - blocking the brain messenger chemical, dopamine - that makes the
animals work hard all the time.

   The monkeys, which had been trained to perform simple computer tasks in
return for treats, lost their sense of balance between a reward and the work
required to earn it, says a team at the National Institute of Mental Health, in
Bethesda, Maryland.

   The team used a technique to turn off a gene that makes a receptor for
dopamine, said Dr Barry Richmond. "The gene knockdown triggered a remarkable
transformation in the simian work ethic. Without the dopamine receptor, they
consistently stayed on-task and made few errors.

   "This was conspicuously out of character for these animals," he added. "Like
people, they tend to procrastinate when they know they will have to do more
work."

   Dr Richmond, Dr Zheng Liu, Dr Edward Ginns and colleagues report their work
in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The find could lead to advances in treating conditions such as depression,
schizophrenia and obsessive-compulsive disorder, in which the ability to
associate work with reward is disturbed.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2004


                             538 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            June 03, 2004, Thursday

SECTION: City Pg. 31

LENGTH: 794 words

HEADLINE: Sky threatens to fall in on satellite broadcaster

BYLINE: By Yvette Essen

BODY:
SATELLITE broadcasting group BSkyB fell to a 14-month low after a large line of
stock was placed at 593p and a leading broker advised investors to sell the
shares if they go below 595p.

   A single transaction of 7.1m shares, representing 0.4pc of BSkyB's equity,
was placed through broker Execution on behalf of a US institutional investor.

   The note, understood to have been written by Collins Stewart, was said to
tell clients to sell the stock if it fell through the 595p support level, as it
could go as low as 550p. The broker, which declined to comment yesterday, was
said to "see considerable pressure on the downside".

   BSkyB, which was trading at 776p in February, closed down 4 1/2 at 596p. The
stock has now fallen 106p, or 15.1pc since the beginning of the year.

   The benchmark FTSE 100 rose 36 points in early dealings but eventually closed
up just 0.1 at 4422.8. The FTSE 250 gained 23.7 to 6050.2. Volumes remained low,
with just 2.7billion shares changing hands.

   A number of shares went ex-dividend, including National Grid Transco,
Enterprise Inns and Scottish Power. Marks & Spencer, also on the xd list,
finished 7 5/8 higher to 366p.

   BG Group was one of the main gainers, 7 1/2 better at 342 3/4 p after JP
Morgan repeated its overweight view and 400p target for the UK energy giant.

   Kingfisher, owner of B&Q, rose 6 3/4 at 288p before today's first-quarter
figures.

   Mining companies gave back recent gains with BHP Billiton off 16 1/2 at 447
1/2 p, Anglo American down 26p to pounds 11.32, Xstrata 14 lower at 684p and Rio
Tinto shedding 25p to pounds 12.90.

   In the FTSE 250, bid chatter continued to lift furniture retailer MFI with
volumes reaching 27.2m shares against a daily average nearer 10m. Traders
speculated about a buyout at between 180p and 210p a share. MFI touched 161p,
before closing up 7 3/4 at 156p.

   Matalan was again a talking point, rising 8 3/4 to 197 1/4 p. Traders said
volumes have been heavy over the past four trading sessions, after news of
Philip Green's renewed interest in M&S, on hopes the discount retailer could in
line for a bid. Yesterday 5.9m shares were traded, against the usual 4m.

   Traders said companies with exposure to America were cheered by a bullish
report by Credit Suisse First Boston on the resilience of the US markets.

   The world's largest maker of plasterboard, BPB, which generates 20pc of its
revenues from the US, rose 4 3/4 to a two-year high of 396p. Plumbing giant
Wolseley, reliant on America for 60pc of its business, advanced 11 1/2 to 831
1/2 p.

   Barratt Developments rose 9 1/2 to 573 1/2 p after Britain's largest
housebuilder said it had a record sales order book and that the housing market
remains sound.

   Cairn Energy reported the successful drilling of an appraisal well on the
Mangala oil field in northern Rajasthan, India. After the update, ABN Amro
repeated its buy rating and pounds 11.75 price target. It described the news as
"highly encouraging," but added: "We had already factored more good news into
our estimates." The shares gained 30 1/2 p to pounds 10.85.

   Gold mining and exploration company Randgold Resources said its 2-for-1 share
split will become effective from June 11. The share split was approved by
shareholders at the company's annual meeting in April and is designed to improve
liquidity demands. The shares fell 34 to 941p.

   In the same sector, mining group Vedanta Resources slipped a further 7 to new
low of 272p. The stock has never traded above December's flotation price of
390p.

   Minnow gene therapy group Oxford BioMedica rose 2 3/4 to 19 1/4 p after
reporting pre-clinical tests on its drug Innurex have shown it can repair nerve
damage.

   Diagonal, the information technology services company, edged up 1/2 to 37p on
good volumes. Traders said the group could be a bid target as an institution was
rumoured to be mopping up the shares.

   Baltimore Technologies, the former FTSE 100 technology company-turned-cash
shell, eased 1/4 to 43 3/4 p. Largest shareholder Acquisitor Holdings purchased
a further 188,000 shares, taking its stake from 20.7pc to 21.05pc. Last month,
Acquisitor attempted to sack Baltimore's board of directors.

   On Aim, Crown Corporation jumped 37 1/2 to 512 1/2 p after selling rights to
fulfil security and waste management contracts in South America for $350m.

   Avingtrans rose 5 1/2 to 51 1/2 p after announcing it had bought Crown, a
maker of supports for roadside cameras, for pounds 1.56m.

   Cobra Biomanufacturing, a biopharmaceuticals company, tumbled 18 to 37p after
posting an pounds 1.24m interim pre-tax loss against a pounds 482,893 profit.

   Dealings began in Vane Holdings, a gold and silver mining company with
prospects in Mexico. The shares were placed at 11p and closed at 12 1/4 p.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2004


                             539 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             June 01, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: FeaturesHealth & Wellbeing Pg. 14

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: An answer to Parkinson's? Recent research into gene therapy has
produced encouraging results, reports Christine Doyle

BYLINE: By Christine Doyle

BODY:
Few professors of neurosurgery would be so confident as to describe the results
of recent research as "fabulous". When, however, the professor is Tipu Aziz,
consultant neurosurgeon at Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford, and regarded by the
Parkinson's Disease Society as a "key opinion leader", it is safe to assume that
he is on to something.

   The research that excites Aziz was carried out in France and relates to gene
therapy. It involves genetically manipulating viruses to produce dopamine, the
neurotransmitter that controls smooth movement and is deficient in the brains of
Parkinson's sufferers.

    Parkinson's is a progressive and devastating neurological disorder that can
affect all activities, including talking, swallowing, walking and writing. It
arises when defective cells in the part of the brain that controls movement die.
Why this happens is unclear, but once 80 per cent of the cells have been
destroyed, the symptoms emerge. About 120,000 people in Britain are affected,
and 10,000 new cases are diagnosed each year.

   "The manipulated viruses would act as a 'repair' - rather than simply an
alleviation of symptoms - in the hope that drugs would become unnecessary," says
Aziz. "So far, the research with viruses has been carried out only on animals.
Initial results in rats were encouraging, and work last year in monkeys is even
more promising - fabulous. Basically, normal movement, activity and behaviour
were restored. The technique appears to be safe and the monkeys have continued
to produce dopamine." The next step is to test the concept in humans, and Aziz
is planning an initial trial.

   "It could start within 18 months, once approval is given by the gene therapy
advisory committee," Aziz is due to tell those attending the second in this
year's Science Today, Health Tomorrow lectures at the Royal Institution in
London on June 16. These lectures, which enable members of the public to
question experts about the latest research, are supported by The Daily Telegraph
and sponsored by the healthcare company Novartis.

    In fact, the Oxford trial would not be the first gene therapy trial for
Parkinson's. A trial under way in New York involves switching off the
hyperactivity of the subthalamic nucleus that drives the Parkinson's symptoms.
However, Aziz has reservations. "The technique turns a critical area of the
brain from positive to negative. We do not know enough about the brain's neural
interactions to know what that will do."

    At present, drugs that restore levels of dopamine in the brain are the
mainstay of Parkinson's treatment. Although they are initially effective, they
cause severe side effects in up to 70 per cent of patients. These include
confusion and hallucinations.

    While future drugs might minimise these problems, neurosurgery is
increasingly used in the meantime. And thanks to molecular and technological
advances over the past 10 years, it is ever more exact. Pallidotomy, for
example, which involves burning out tissue in a part of the brain called the
globus pallidus to reduce involuntary movement, is less likely to cause side
effects than in the past.

    Fifteen years ago, American researchers showed that the subthalamic nucleus,
which had not previously been associated with Parkinson's, was over-active in
sufferers. This led to the development of the deep brain stimulation technique.
The surgeon implants electrodes in the subthalamic tissue and they are
controlled by the patient using an external switch.

   This technique, pioneered in France, has become a major and - at more than
pounds 30,000 - expensive form of treatment. About one in five patients might
benefit, and it can reduce tremor, rigidity and slowness of movement.

   "Another one in five patients have a related syndrome - a kind of
'Parkinson's plus' condition -and are unable to move properly," says Aziz. "This
syndrome is resistant to drugs, so the patients have no break from their
excruciating symptoms. We are now working on stimulating the peduncular pontine
nucleus, an area deep in the brain, but it could be four years before we can try
it in patients."

    The targeted injection of chemicals - nerve growth factors - into affected
brain tissue is another approach, being researched in Bristol.

    Inevitably, some therapies have failed to live up to their promise. "Foetal
cell transplants did not lead to a dramatic improvement," says Aziz. "The
logistics of collection after terminations were horrendous - and controversial."

   An equally controversial alternative is to transplant stem cells developed
from embryos used for research and manipulated to produce dopamine. "One
drawback is that in animal studies some transplants get out of control and grow
tumours deep in the brain. Although the technique offers real hope, we are more
than five years from clinical use."

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2004


                             543 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           April 28, 2004, Wednesday

SECTION: News Pg. 06

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: New gene therapy to tackle dementia

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
AN EXPERIMENTAL form of gene therapy has given hope of a significant advance in
the treatment of dementia.

   The therapy, in which a nerve growth factor delayed the loss of brain cells,
led to increased metabolic activity in the brain of Alzheimer's sufferers and a
reduction in the decline of cognitive functions.

   Though the study was small, the subjects seemed to show indications of a
reduction in the advancement of their disease, according to Prof Mark Tuszynski
of the University of California, San Diego, the study's principal investigator.

   "If these effects are borne out in larger, controlled trials, this could be a
significant advance over existing therapies for Alzheimer's disease," he said.

   Prof Tuszynski presented his preliminary findings yesterday, which suggested
that brain cells in eight volunteers responded to the insertion of growth
factor-producing grafts.

   Patients' own skin cells were genetically modified in culture to produce
Nerve Growth Factor, NGF, a naturally occurring protein that prevents cell death
and stimulates cell function.

   The NGF-producing cells were then surgically implanted into a deep brain
region where cell degeneration occurs in Alzheimer's disease, affecting the
"cholinergic system", which is important in memory and cognitive function.

   Using a brain-scanning method, the patients showed increased metabolic
activity in those areas of the brains after treatment with NGF, compared with
non-treated Alzheimer's disease patients. An autopsy of a patient who died
showed active NGF production in the brain, and a growth response of brain cells
to the NGF delivery.

   Alzheimer's affects one in 20 of those aged over 65 and nearly a quarter of
those over 85, causing bouts of dementia, loss of memory, personality changes
and, eventually, death.

   There are half a million sufferers in Britain, although some predict that
there will be as many as one million sufferers within two decades.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2004


                             546 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            March 30, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: News Pg. 07

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: 'I am not sure about the long-term effects'

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
THE Deacon family has mixed feelings about using gene therapy in the womb to
treat haemophilia, which causes uncontrolled bleeding.

   Ismena Deacon, 35, a consultant engineer, and her husband Chris, 36, an
executive in financial services, have no history of the disease in their
families so it came as a shock when their son was diagnosed with severe
haemophilia A.

   A few hours after Alexander's birth at Queen Charlotte's and Chelsea Hospital
he collapsed with bleeding into his abdomen and had to be resuscitated in
intensive care.

   "It was touch and go for a while," said Mrs Deacon. Alexander was found to
have less than one per cent of normal levels of factor VIII and diagnosed with
the bleeding disorder. He bruised easily while crawling at home in Fulham,
although the family was spared serious bleeding that would have meant hospital.

   "Though it is serious, 98 per cent of the time we could treat him just like
we do our daughter," said Mr Deacon. Since the end of last year, the
one-year-old has had three injections of the missing factor each week "which
makes a huge difference and should prevent him having a joint bleed", said Mrs
Deacon.

   His diagnosis raises the possibility that Ismena and her four-year-old
daughter, Helen, are carriers of the faulty factor VIII gene that causes the
disease. Would she consider gene therapy if her unborn child were diagnosed in
pregnancy?

   So long as the risks and side effects of the technique were fully explained
along with the benefits, Mrs Deacon felt it was worth considering.

   "The idea of gene therapy is fine and not meddling too much, so long as it is
well controlled."

   She added that foetal gene therapy should be considered only for medical
uses, not to enhance a child's intelligence or for cosmetic reasons to create a
designer baby.

   "There has to be tight control of this technology."

   Her husband said if gene therapy in the womb were viable, potentially it
could be effective, as haemophilia A was caused by a single component and
affected only clotting.

   But he would prefer conventional gene therapy in which corrective genes are
introduced at intervals over a lifetime to correct the condition.

   He is sceptical about how easy it will be to use gene therapy to treat more
complex conditions.

   "I am not sure we know what the long-term effects of genetic modification
will be," he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2004


                             547 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            March 30, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: News Pg. 07

LENGTH: 603 words

HEADLINE: Genetic surgery in the womb moves closer British scientists lead in
the use of HIV to deliver a pre-birth cure after successfully treating blood
clotting in foetal mice, reports Roger Highfield

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
BRITISH scientists are preparing to conduct genetic surgery on an unborn child.
The team reported yesterday that it is the first to use gene transplants in the
womb to cure an inherited disease - the blood clotting disorder Haemophilia B.

   Success in using a "tamed" Human Immunodeficiency Virus to implant corrective
genes to cure foetal mice was reported to the British Society for Gene Therapy
in Keble College, Oxford, by Dr Simon Waddington and colleagues from Imperial
College London.

   Consultations on conducting transplants on unborn children are about to
start, along with discussions with the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee, which
supervises human trials.

   Gene therapy in the womb has been studied for a decade by Imperial's Gene
Therapy Research Group, headed by Prof Charles Coutelle. This first application
was funded by the Medical Research Council and a charity, the Katharine Dormandy
Trust for Haemophilia and Allied Disorders.

   The approach was advancing to where it could be considered on patients in
special circumstances, said Dr Waddington, notably when a hereditary disorder
was diagnosed during pregnancy and the parents, for religious or personal
reasons, refused a termination even though the baby might die soon after birth.

   The group has joined with Prof Charles Rodeck at University College and the
Royal Free Hospital, London, to explore the safe use of gene therapy on a human
foetus. Dr Michael Themis of Imperial is assessing the safety of the adapted
Human Immunodeficiency Virus used for the transplants.

   The team will also consult doctors and patient groups to explore ethical
dimensions. The advance is likely to stir debate since a method to correct
diseases could also be used to create "designer" babies.

   These investigations were likely to take several years, said Prof Coutelle.
If shown to be efficient and safe in larger animals, such as sheep, an injection
of virus-derived medicine offers the promise of a cure for diseases such as
enzyme deficiencies, perhaps even muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis.

   There are reasons to think gene transplants will be more successful in the
foetus than in children or adults, among them the better access to cells that
need to be corrected before the disease develops, and fewer immune reactions.

   Inefficient gene transplants have caused problems, along with immune
reactions.

   Despite huge promise, human trials have only worked convincingly after birth
in treating immune deficiencies, when so-called "bubble babies" are stripped of
the ability to fight infection.

   Other issues are raised by foetal gene therapy, notably whether transplanted
genes can end up in eggs and sperm. However, a screen of the sperm made by mice
in the Imperial experiments did not reveal genes transferred this way.

   Prof Edward Tuddenham, of Imperial, who is working on adult gene therapy for
haemophilia, said there was often knee-jerk opposition to foetal gene therapy.

   Half a dozen trials have been conducted in America on patients. These trials
implanted either factor VIII or factor IX genes, but only at levels that would
reduce dependence on treatment.

   One trial detected the virus used for the transplant in semen, raising
concerns about germ-line transformations. All but two are discontinued.

   As more patients use more expensive biotechnology-manufactured clotting
factors, lifetime treatment costs may rise to pounds 5 million.

   "No wonder most of the world's haemophiliacs receive no treatment at all,"
said Prof Tuddenham. "Gene therapy offers the hope of freeing patients from a
lifetime's dependence on the needle."

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2004


                             554 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           February 17, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: News; International: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: Gene jabs 'are the future drugs for cheating athletes' American
Association

BYLINE: Reports by Roger Highfield Science Editor in Seattle

BODY:
ATHLETES will soon be using gene transplants to boost their performances,
according to a scientist who says he has used the method to double the strength
of rats.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency has begun research on how to detect the use of
gene therapy, but it is likely that sportsmen will put themselves at risk of
harm by trying out this next generation of performance enhancement "long before"
the technology to detect it has been perfected, the American Association for the
Advancement of Science was told yesterday.

   Genetic enhancement of muscles could potentially benefit elite athletes,
patients rehabilitating from muscle wasting and elderly people who are limited
by muscular weakness, Prof Lee Sweeney and his co-authors will report next month
in the Journal of Applied Physiology.

   Yesterday he told the association's annual meeting in Seattle how exercise
and genetic enhancement worked together to increase mass and strength in rat
muscles. The scientists injected a GM virus that contained an IGF-I rat gene
into a hind-leg muscle of rats. The gene increases production of the growth
factor IGF-I, which promotes gains in muscle strength and mass.

   "The fact that we had seen not only beneficial effects in old animals and
animals with muscle disease, but also muscle growth in young sedentary animals,
suggested the possibility that such a treatment could lead to genetic
enhancement of muscle performance," he said.

   Genetically enhanced rats that worked their way through ladder-climbing
weight-bearing exercise regimes doubled their muscle strength and retained more
of their muscles after they stopped working out than exercise-only and
genetic-enhancement-only rats. Even without any training, the injections gave a
15 to 30 per cent strength increase.

   Prof Sweeney predicted human trials of gene enhancement for muscle diseases
in the near future. However, this effective and less detectable method for
altering athletic physiology would be in demand within the lucrative world of
competitive sports, he said.

   "The prospects are especially high that muscle-directed gene transfer will be
used by the athletic community for performance enhancement, just as many drugs
are used and abused today," said Prof Sweeney.

   "This is but one example of a number of potential gene therapies that are
being developed with disease treatment as a goal, but if given to a healthy
individual would provide genetic enhancement of some trait."

   Richard Pound, from the World Anti-Doping Agency and McGill University, told
the meeting that the position paralleled that of performance-enhancing drugs 30
or 40 years ago - when detection techniques and regulatory mechanisms were not
in place.

   Mr Pound praised the medical uses of gene therapy but said that in the case
of drugs, "we let the genie out of the bottle in the Sixties and Seventies" and
have had to catch up. But research on how to detect gene therapy had already
started. "I am worried about the potential."

   Dr Thomas Murray, president of the Hastings Centre, New York, and author of a
study into the use of performance enhancing drugs in sport 25 years ago, said
there had been only one or two definitive successes in the trials of gene
therapy to date.

   "It is extremely promising but at a very early stage."

   Long before the technology was perfected, however, some people would peddle
what they would claim were enhancement technologies. Some would be shams, others
clumsy attempts at gene therapy.

   "There will be some disasters," he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004


                             564 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            January 19, 2004, Monday

SECTION: Sport; Soccer: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1067 words

HEADLINE: Obituary of The Rev Professor Gordon Dunstan Moral theologian who
contributed much to the discussions of ethical problems created by advances in
medicine

BODY:
THE REVEREND PROFESSOR GORDON DUNSTAN, who died on Thursday aged 86, was one of
the Church of England's leading moral theologians.

   He held an important teaching post as Professor of Moral and Social Theology
at King's College, London, but his most significant work was undertaken in the
field of medical ethics, where he won the confidence of the leaders of the
medical profession and contributed a great deal to the discussions of ethical
problems created by the spectacular advances in 20th-century medicine.

   The requirements of these high-powered discussions well suited Dunstan's
beliefs and methods. His approach to morality was firmly rooted in the Christian
tradition and he was highly critical of the exponents of "situation ethics" and
other flexible approaches to right and wrong. Yet he was equally certain that in
the modern world the church was no longer in a position to lay down the law
about new and often highly complex problems.

   Sound judgment, he argued, required the coming together of the best minds in
particular fields to consider with Christian theologians and secular
philosophers the issues at stake and the right way forward when, as so often, no
black or white judgment was possible. Dunstan was at his best in such
discussions. He mastered the scientific material under consideration and, with
the aid of a first-class analytical mind, outlined in a quietly spoken voice the
moral issues and choices.

   He was president of the Tavistock Institute of Medical Psychology and
vice-president of the London Medical Group and of the Institute of Medical
Ethics. During the 1960s he was a member of a Department of Health Advisory
Group on Transplant Policy, and from 1989 to 1993 he served on a Department of
Health committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy. From 1990 onwards he was a
member of the Unrelated Live Transplant Regulatory Authority and from 1989 to
1993 he served on the Nuffield Council on Bioethics.

   Gordon Reginald Dunstan was born in Devon on April 25 1917. He went from
Plymouth Corporation Grammar School to Leeds University, where he took a First
in History and obtained an MA with distinction. He prepared for Holy Orders at
the monastic College of the Resurrection at nearby Mirfield. Between 1941 and
1946 he held curacies at King Cross, Halifax, and Huddersfield Parish Church.

   Dunstan's academic gifts were then recognised by his appointment as
sub-warden of St Deiniol's Library - the Gladstone foundation at Hawarden -
where he came under the influence of its then warden, Alec Vidler, who
encouraged him to extend his historical interest to a concern for some important
contemporary matters.

   When Vidler became a canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, he secured
Dunstan's appointment as Vicar of Sutton Courtenay with Appleford, near Abingdon
- a post which he held from 1949 to 1955 and which gave him freedom to lecture
at Ripon Hall, Oxford, and at William Temple College, Rugby, an institution
specially concerned with the Christian evaluation of social and industrial
issues.

   The experience of tackling such issues turned Dunstan's mind firmly in the
direction of moral theology and when he became a minor canon at Windsor in 1955
he found himself in the company not only of his friend Alec Vidler but also of G
B Bently, the most respected Anglican moral theologian of that time.

   Besides his duties in the ordering of worship in St George's Chapel, Dunstan
served as secretary of the Church of England's Council for Social Work; in 1959
he moved to a minor canonry at Westminster Abbey in order to be more available
for the Council's developing work and in due course to edit its journal
Crucible. In 1963 he became secretary of the Church Assembly Joint Board of
Studies but gave this up in 1966, by which time he had succeeded Vidler as
editor of Theology, a widely-read Anglican quarterly. In the same year he was
appointed Canon Theologian of Leicester Cathedral.

   Dunstan was also serving in a group appointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury
to examine the workings of the divorce law; its report Putting Asunder (1966),
which proposed the irretrievable breakdown of marriage as the sole basis for
divorce, was influential in subsequent changes to divorce law. In 1962 he
published his first book The Family is Not Broken, and from 1964 to 1966 he was
chairman of the British committee of the International Union of Family
Organisations.

   In 1967 Dunstan was appointed to the newly-created F D Maurice Chair of Moral
and Social Theology at King's College, London, a post he occupied for the next
15 years. He played a full part in the life of the college as well as
undertaking a great deal of work in medical ethics. He was also a member of a
Foreign and Commonwealth Advisory Group on Arms Control and Disarmament, and of
a Home Office Advisory Committee on Animal Experiments. From 1981 to 1993 he
served on the Council of the Advertising Standards Authority. From 1959 to 1976
Dunstan ministered in the Chapel Royal at St James, first as a Deputy
Priest-in-Ordinary, then as a Priest-in-Ordinary to the Queen. On his retirement
from his office he was made a Chaplain to the Queen. His skills as a mediaeval
historian were kept alive in the editing of five volumes of The Register of
Edmond Lacy, Bishop of Exeter 1420-55, which were published during the period
from 1963 to 1972.

   But for the most part his writing was devoted to ethical questions. The
Artifice of Ethics and A Moralist in the City were published in 1974, and he
edited, often jointly with medical writers, numerous volumes on subjects such as
euthanasia, the human embryo and, most notably, Doctors' Decisions: ethical
conflicts in medical practice (1989), and Death, Dying and Medical Duty (1996).

   He became a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1974, a Fellow of King's
College in 1974 and, uniquely for a priest, an Honorary Fellow of all the royal
medical colleges. Exeter and Leicester Universities awarded him honorary
Doctorates, and in 1989 he was appointed CBE.

   On his retirement in 1982, Dunstan returned to his native Devon where he
became a research fellow at Exeter University. From 1984 to 1987 he was
president of the Devon and Cornwall Record Society. The final years of his life
were spent in Birmingham.

   He married, in 1949, Ruby Maud (nee Fitzer), who predeceased him. He is
survived by their two sons and a daughter.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2004


                             566 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          December 03, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1592 words

HEADLINE: Mother Nature's eye problem Evolution deprived our eyes of the ability
to regenerate. Roger Highfield looks at how Telegraph readers can help
scientists overcome this hurdle

BYLINE: by Roger Highfield

BODY:
The quest to help the blind to see is no longer the province of miracles.
Surgeons and scientists are increasingly confident that restoring lost vision is
feasible, at least for some. And much of this growing confidence rests on their
burgeoning knowledge of why nature makes such a mess of repairing eyes.

   The understanding could benefit more than those affected by eye injury and
disease. Having difficulty with focusing affects many people above the age of
40, and scientists are coming closer to the day when an old lens, stiffened by
age, could be replaced with a soft, artificial one to restore youthful vision.

   Surgeons are wary of eye operations for the same reason that blindness and
impaired vision are so common: scar tissue is a common side effect of injury,
disease and operations. And scar tissue can wreck the workings of the eye.

   Evolution has seen a trade-off between the need to regenerate and the need to
repair damage. Making good a wound with rapidly-growing scar tissue, principally
to stop infection, does not mean the same thing as making good a damaged eye.
Better to put up with disorganised scar tissue to halt the risk of infection,
even if it does put an eye out of operation, than leave an open wound so as to
facilitate eye regeneration.

   "Somewhere in evolution, we have lost our ability to regenerate," says Peng
Tee Khaw, professor of ocular healing and glaucoma and head of the ocular repair
and regeneration biology group at Moorfields Eye Hospital and the Institute of
Ophthalmology. "Our genes don't normally regenerate the eye, they just repair
it."

   For reasons not fully understood, not all living things have made this
"choice" in evolution. The salamander wallows in unhygienic conditions yet is
able to replace its spinal cord, gills, parts of the brain, jaw and parts of the
heart, along with its limbs and tail. And, to the envy of eye surgeons, its
retina and iris, too.

   But the problem remains that humans lack the regenerative abilities of the
salamander and possess eye-repair mechanisms that often cause blindness. Prof
Khaw is one of a team at Moorfields and the institute trying to sidestep this by
turning off natural repair mechanisms and enhancing natural regeneration.

   The new International Children's Eye Centre planned for the Moorfields site
will build on this understanding for improving the treatment of young people
with eye problems, a venture readers can support by backing the Daily
Telegraph's Christmas charity appeal (see advert).

   Repair mechanisms culminate in scarring, probably the major culprit when it
comes to loss of sight. To find out what triggers scarring, when a disorganised
mixture of proteins and cells patch up an injury, Prof Khaw and colleagues
studied molecules that circulate in the eye.

   About a decade ago they found that one protein, called transforming growth
factor (TGF) beta, seemed particularly important. It is no accident that
previous work in Manchester revealed how this protein is almost absent from the
foetus, which does not scar. This offered new hope of a way to prevent scarring
by blocking TGF beta.

   Prof Khaw had shown that a quick and easy way to prevent scarring was to use
a sponge to apply a drug that is also an anti-cancer agent. Although now the
most commonly used method in the UK, it can have some side effects.

   To devise a more subtle way to achieve the same end, Prof Khaw's group teamed
up with a company called Cambridge Antibody Technology, a specialist in devising
molecules, called antibodies, that can bind to, and knock out, other molecules.
In this case, the target was TGF beta.

   The team decided to test the antibody in the treatment of glaucoma, a leading
cause of blindness, where the reduction of the normal flow of fluid through the
drainage channels in the eye causes the build-up of pressure and damage to the
eye. There is an operation, called a trabeculectomy, to make a little trapdoor
valve in the eye. However, subsequent scarring can cause problems, particularly
for children: they heal more quickly but suffer more scarring as a result. "This
remains a serious problem," says Prof Khaw. "When the operations fail, the
children can then go blind from glaucoma."

   Now surgeons are injecting the antibody Trabio (lerdelimumab) into the skin
around the eye to prevent scarring during trabeculectomies. A pilot trial showed
that the tissue looked much more natural and that there was little scarring
after the operation. "That was very exciting for us. That was the first time a
protein antibody against TGF beta was used in patients," he says.

   Doctors are now half way through several larger international studies. One
hope is that the antibodies will mop up TGF beta without significant side
effects. "So far, the results have been promising," says Prof Khaw, who hopes
the antibody can be used to make glaucoma operations last for life.

   The antibodies could find other uses. One common cause of blindness,
particularly among the elderly, is macular degeneration. In one form of the
disease, blood vessels leak under the retina. As a consequence, there is also
secondary scarring. Although many new therapies for macular degeneration are
under development to halt blood vessel growth, "anti-scarring therapy could
help," says Prof Khaw.

   TGF beta is also important in the tissue repair that leads to damage to the
optic nerve at the back of the eye caused by glaucoma. "If we can stop the optic
nerve being compressed in glaucoma we can prevent people ever becoming blind,"
says Dr Francesca Cordeiro, head of the glaucoma and optic nerve research group.
She is developing new methods of halting the scarring processes in the retina in
glaucoma with novel gene therapy and drugs to stop nerve cells from dying.

   Teams at Moorfields and the Institute of Ophthalmology are also studying
repair mechanisms at work in the lens of the eye. This, they hope, will improve
the success of a very common operation to replace a lens that has become clouded
by dead cells (cataracts).

   Unfortunately, up to 30 per cent of patients who undergo cataract surgery
suffer a secondary loss of vision over time that necessitates corrective
surgery. The problem lies with a "bag" in the eye that contains the old cloudy
lens which has to be replaced.

   During the cataract operations, the old lens is sucked out of the bag and
replaced by a plastic lens. But this can trigger repair mechanisms in the bag,
causing it to contract and turn stiff and opaque, "like a plastic bag in the
sun", says Prof Khaw. As well as ruining the operation, the same repair
mechanism prevents much more flexible artificial lenses from being implanted
because they would be constrained by "a bag of scar tissue".

   One approach would be to use the antibody or other anti-scarring treatments
to turn off this repair mechanism. As well as preventing a common side effect of
millions of operations, it would also realise a long-held dream of
ophthalmologists: they would be able to insert into this flexible capsule an
accommodating lens, perhaps by injecting materials such as hydrogels, which are
elastic just like the natural lens. "The reason you can read a newspaper is that
your lens is accommodating, getting fatter and smaller: it is not stiff. If the
capsule can be prevented from going stiff, then flexible lenses under
development around the world could allow you to read without reading glasses,"
says Stephen Tuft, a cataract and cornea specialist at Moorfields.

   Other research is concentrating on how to regenerate tissue. One approach is
to make vital cells multiply again. The Moorfields consultant Frank Larkin is
studying innovative ways, including gene therapy, to make the non-repairing
endothelial cells which line the inside of the clear corneal window divide again
and repair the eye. These cells pump water out of the eye; when they fail the
cornea goes cloudy. Restoring these cells could clear the cornea, meaning a
corneal transplant with the risks of rejection would not be required.

   Another approach is to use "parent" cells, or stem cells, from which all
other types grow. These parent cells are exploited by the salamander: when they
sever a limb, stem cells form a mound called a "blastema" and re-differentiate
to form the tissue to rebuild the limb.

   Injuries to the cornea and certain diseases cause failure of the stem cells
found on the outside of the cornea, and this failure is responsible for the
blindness that strikes with a disease called aniridia. As a consequence,
abnormal tissue invades the cornea and makes it opaque. "If we could replenish
these stem cells, we could not only help this condition but also treat other
diseases or eye damage," says Dr Julie Daniels, head of the epithelial stem-cell
transplant laboratory.

   For this kind of use, and for cells to repair the back of the eye (retina)
too, a "state of the art" stem-cell transplant unit is being built at the
institute and Moorfields. Transplant of stem cells or regenerated cells from a
donated eye - or even from a patient's healthy eye - could help restore sight in
children and adults.

   "Scarring or poor regeneration of tissue plays a role in every major blinding
disease in the world today, in both children and adults," says Prof Khaw. "If we
could fully understand and control these processes, most of the children with
glaucoma that

   I see could be cured for life, and better still, we could begin to prevent or
treat most of the blinding diseases that are currently untreatable."
[PS]Features [ES]

   Science:

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2003


                             568 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           November 18, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: Angina treatment to be tested on 900 patients

BYLINE: by Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
THE biggest trial of gene therapy has been launched to test a promising
treatment that can boost blood flow in the hearts of angina sufferers.

   The two multi-centre trials, each on 450 people, will test if the chest pain
experienced by people with coronary artery disease, caused by restricted blood
flow to the muscle of the heart, can be relieved by gene therapy.

   The therapy was described at the Edinburgh gene congress by Dr Pran Marrott
and colleagues of Berlex Laboratories, Montville, New Jersey. It is one of the
first in the field of gene therapy to enter advanced clinical trials.

   The therapy involves pushing a catheter into the coronary arteries to
administer a harmless virus - a form of the common cold virus called an
adenovirus - containing a gene for fibroblast growth factor (Ad5FGF-4) to foster
the growth of new blood vessels.

   The treatment, developed by the pharmaceutical company Schering, will be
tested in two trials, one in North America and one outside.

   The latter, co-ordinated by Dr Peter Schofield of Papworth Hospital,
Cambridge, will be on patients with "refractory angina" who are not responding
to medication and cannot have bypass surgery.

   Dr Schofield said the results of the study, in which three groups will
receive placebo, low-dose or high-dose treatments, would be ready in two or
three years.

   "It seems to be effective without any major side-effects, so far," he said.

   "Obviously, we will study this further in the larger population."
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2003


                             569 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           November 18, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: 'This disease is a daunting thing to live with'

BYLINE: by Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
CARA Doran, 25, is one of the 7,500 sufferers of cystic fibrosis who would like
to take part in the forthcoming British gene therapy trial.

   As soon as the community of CF patients finds out about a new treatment,
"they all want to try it out", said the Glasgow University graduate, who is the
Cystic Fibrosis Trust's Patient Advocate for Scotland, based in the Vale of
Leven Hospital, Alexandria.

   "The gene therapy consortium is a good idea," she said, adding that she
missed out when the earlier trials took place in Britain. Four decades ago, the
life expectancy of a baby born with the disease was under five years and most
died of malnutrition caused by an inability to absorb nutrients from food, a
problem that has been mostly addressed by medicine.

   Today the average life expectancy is 31, with deaths mostly caused by lung
problems.

   Miss Doran is acutely aware of her expected lifespan, even though one doctor
thought she would make the age of 40. "Anyone can be run over by a bus, of
course, but you have that stamped on your life and it makes it more daunting."

   When Cara recently applied for a mortgage, her bank manager said she would
offer a 25-year mortgage so long as Cara could obtain life insurance.

   Miss Doran began yesterday, as always, with physiotherapy - special breathing
techniques - to clear her lungs of thick congealing mucus, inhaled some
liquefied antibiotics, used a nasal spray and took vitamins. "Gene therapy, we
have been told, will relieve the burden of care." Rosie Barnes, the chief
executive of the Cystic Fibrosis Trust, said: "The increased life expectancy has
been achieved only with a heavy burden of care."

   Some children require three hours of treatment each day, she said.

   For the parents of the children, despite the improvements, there is a
"nightmare of living every day with courage and optimism and cheerfulness and
yet fearing that the inevitable would happen for their child", she said.
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2003


                             570 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           November 18, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Researchers team up to tackle cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: by Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
HOPE of an effective treatment for sufferers of cystic fibrosis, the most common
genetic disease in Britain, was raised by the announcement of a major gene
therapy trial yesterday.

   All three British groups - Oxford, Edinburgh and Imperial - that have
conducted preliminary trials have joined forces to set up the UK CF Gene Therapy
Consortium, funded by pounds 15 million from the Cystic Fibrosis Trust.

   At the European Society of Gene Therapy's annual congress in Edinburgh, the
plans to establish a major gene therapy programme to help the one in 2,000
babies born with the disease were outlined by Prof Eric Alton, of the Royal
Brompton Hospital and Imperial College London.

   The faulty CF gene, called the CFTR gene, was isolated in 1989. It causes a
problem with the "electrics" of cells, which leads to the production of heavy
mucus and undermines the bacterial defence mechanisms that protect lungs.

   When the gene replacement trials took place in the spring of 2005, they would
be the biggest to have originated in Britain, said Prof Alton. "We hope to do 60
patients in a multidose trial, and three of those trials in five years."

   Five preliminary trials have taken place in Britain already: one in
Edinburgh, two in Oxford and two in London. Overall, they showed that it was
possible to produce a short-term correction of the underlying genetic defect.

   The trials suggested that a 25 per cent restoration of normal lung cell
function is possible. Of the CF gene therapy trials that have taken place around
the world, the British researchers believe that this has come closest to showing
how patients can be relieved of a gruelling regime of drugs and physiotherapy.
They now want to build on this success.

   The team plans to transplant a normal version of the faulty CFTR gene in the
lining of the lungs of patients with a fat particle called a liposome. Unlike
viruses, they can be used again and again without causing an immune reaction.

   "Putting three teams together is no trivial task, but it has given us a
critical mass of 50 people," said Prof David Porteous of the University of
Edinburgh, where he leads the local consortium with Dr Chris Boyd. "We feel
confident that we have got all of the adequate understanding, knowledge and
capacity to put into place."

   Prof Norman Nevin, the chairman of the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee, said:
"CF is by far the commonest genetic disorder among children. That is the biggest
challenge facing scientists and clinicians today." If the British trial worked,
"it will make a tremendous difference", he said.

   One of the greatest hurdles facing the use of gene transplants to treat the
muscle-wasting disease muscular dystrophy might have been overcome, the congress
was told by Prof Jeff Chamberlain of the University of Washington, Seattle.

   Scientists have been dubious that it will be possible to insert a corrected
version of the faulty gene responsible for the disease into all muscles in the
body.

   However, in an experiment on mice with the disease, correction was produced
in a range of skeletal muscle by using an adeno-associated virus to insert the
gene.

   Britain had conducted 93 gene transplant trials in the past decade, more than
any other European country, Prof Nevin said.

   Overall, the success had been modest, he said. "There is a long haul in front
of us before gene therapy becomes a bedside therapy."

   There have been 505 trials in America and 143 in Europe, 93 of these in
Britain. Three quarters of the British trials were aimed at developing a new
treatment for cancer.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2003


                             577 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          October 15, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 4906 words

HEADLINE: IDS faces full inquiry into wife's salary Call for vote of confidence
in leader as he rages at 'cowards in the shadows'

BYLINE: By Toby Helm and Benedict Brogan

BODY:
THE crisis engulfing Iain Duncan Smith deepened last night when the Commons
standards watchdog announced a full inquiry into allegations that the Tory
leader paid his wife Betsy from public funds for a non-existent office job.

   Sir Philip Mawer, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, said his
decision did not mean the claims by the investigative journalist Michael Crick
had been proved. But he made clear they were serious enough to merit a full
investigation.

   In a series of defiant and emotional broadcasts last night Mr Duncan Smith
insisted he would be cleared and described the allegations as a "downright lie".

   He branded those seeking to destabilise his leadership as "cowards in the
shadows" and accused them of using his wife in a plot to destroy him.

   Meanwhile, several senior Tory MPs who are not among those plotting against
Mr Duncan Smith urged him to call for a vote of confidence to test support among
the 163-strong parliamentary party.

   They told him such a step - similar to John Major's "back me or sack me"
challenge of 1995 - could force his opponents into the open.

   "This would give him a chance to find out if he has the support of a majority
of Tory MPs," one said. "Only 54 of us backed him in 2001, and he has to show
he's got more support than that."

   Announcing the investigation Sir Philip said: "The nature of the information
given to me - some of which is from anonymous sources - makes it necessary that
I should undertake further inquiries before reaching a conclusion.

   "It is in the public interest that these inquiries should be conducted
thoroughly, fairly and as expeditiously as possible."

   Sir Philip also called on those making anonymous allegations to "break
cover". "People who want to make serious allegations against a Member of
Parliament or, indeed, anybody else have got to be prepared essentially to put
up or shut up," he said.

   Some MPs regarded the announcement as a severe setback to Mr Duncan Smith's
attempts to shore up his leadership. But others said it could buy him
desperately needed time until Sir Philip issued his report.

   A furious Mr Duncan Smith said: "These cowards have gone after my wife as a
way of getting after me. It's intolerable. I

   NAMIBIA 14

   COURAGE can take you only so far in international rugby and for all their
bravery Namibia were cruelly exposed yesterday by what was effectively
Argentina's second XV, conceding 10 tries against a ruthlessly efficient Pumas
side.

   In mitigatiaused when the body attacks itself, according to a study published
today.

    The finding could eventually categorise some eating disorders as a so-called
'auto-immune disease' alongside rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis and
open up new avenues for treatment.

    Using blood from female patients diagnosed with anorexia nervosa, bulimia
nervosa, or both, Dr Serguei Fetissov and Prof Tomas Hokfelt from the Karolinska
Institute and colleagues report in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences that most of the patients produced antibodies that selectively attached
to certain cells from the hypothalamus and pituitary.

    Both the hypothalamus and the pituitary secrete chemicals called
neuropeptides that regulate metabolism and play a key role in appetite, among
other things.

    As yet, it is unclear if or how the antibodies affect the brains of women
with eating disorders, but Dr Fetissov said that the antibodies could directly
destroy, or indirectly interfere with brain signals that regulate food intake
and body weight.

    Because a small number of healthy control subjects also carried similar
antibodies, Dr Fetissov said that the presence of these antibodies did not
guarantee development of an eating disorder and more research is necessary.

    The condition could be triggered by stress but, until follow up studies are
completed, "it is not yet proven that anorexia and bulimia are autoimmune
diseases," he said.

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   A TREATMENT used more than eight decades ago for carbon monoxide poisoning,
the leading cause of fatal poisoning in the industrialised world, appears to be
more effective than the modern equivalent.

    Dr Josh Rucker and colleagues at the Toronto General Hospital compared the
standard treatment of 100 per cent oxygen with a mixture of mostly oxygen and
some carbon dioxide.

    The latter treatment was though to help stimulate breathing when it was in
common use in the late 1920s and 1930s. But it was discontinued in the late
1940s when mechanical ventilators became available.

    They found the standard treatment seems to constrict blood vessels and
decreases the total oxygen delivered to the brain, according to the study in
Annals of Emergency Medicine. However, a small amount of carbon dioxide in the
oxygen counteracts this effect.  "Most doctors believe that giving patients
oxygen is like giving them chicken soup -- it can't hurt." said coauthor Dr
Joseph Fisher. "But, in fact, we find that treating carbon monoxide-exposed
participants with pure oxygen actually limits the amount of oxygen that gets to
their brains. That is worrisome."

    Although clinical studies need to be completed before recommending a change
in the first-aid treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning, the results of this
study suggest that simply maintaining carbon dioxide levels during treatment
will result in more oxygen delivery to the brain, thereby decreasing the risk of
permanent brain damage in severely poisoned patients.

    Carbon monoxide is an odourless colourless gas formed during incomplete
combustion of the fossil fuels - gas, oil, coal and wood used in boilers,
engines, gas fires, water heaters, solid fuel appliances and open fires.

    When carbon monoxide is inhaled--even in tiny concentrations--it combines
with the haemoglobin in the red blood cells to prevent the delivery of oxygen to
the body. This results in few symptoms until the poisoning is advanced.

    Those suffering from carbon monoxide poisoning may initially complain of
headache, nausea and fatigue but the symptoms can rapidly progress to coma and
even death.

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   WOMEN who carry mutations in a gene called BRCA1 may have a much higher risk
of early onset of breast cancer if they have used birth control pills for five
or more years, scientists report today.

    In general, the pill does not appear to increase the risk of breast cancer
in the wider population but in those women with mutations in a gene that, when
faulty, has already been linked with the disease.

    The one in 200 women with mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have a 50
to 80 per cent risk of developing breast cancer. Among BRCA1 carriers, however,
women who used oral contraceptives for five or more years have a 33 per cent
increased risk of early onset breast cancer compared to women who have never
used birth control pills, concluded a team led by Prof Steven Narod of the
Centre for Research in Women's Health at Sunnybrook and Women's College Health
Sciences Centre and the University of Toronto.

    Prof Narod, lead author of a paper published today in the Journal of the
National Cancer Institute, also found elevated risk levels for women who used
birth control pills before age 30, women who were diagnosed with breast cancer
before age 40 and women who first used the pill before 1975.

    Previous research has indicated an association between the use of birth
control pills and an increased risk of breast cancer in young women. That
prompted Prof Narod and colleagues to examine whether this risk is due to
genetic susceptibility and how that risk is modified by factors that influence
hormone levels in the body.

    From 1997 to 2001, the researchers examined the medical histories and oral
contraceptive use of 1,311 pairs of women known to carry either the BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutation. Women were recruited from 52 centres in 11 countries.  "The
findings of this report are relevant only to women who carry BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations," said Prof Narod. "In general, the pill does not appear to increase
the risk of breast cancer in the wider population. And, while there is no
evidence of adverse effects for BRCA2 carriers, more study is needed to confirm
these findings."

    Based on their findings, the authors conclude that for women carrying the
BRCA1 mutation, age should be an important consideration when prescribing an
oral contraceptive.  "I suggest that women with BRCA1 mutations not use the pill
before age 25," said Prof Narod. "From ages 25 to 30, women may use the pill for
birth control reasons as required. However, this is a complicated issue and I
recommend that women get individual assessments for a comprehensive risk
evaluation that takes into account all relevant factors."

    The new findings suggest that "oral contraceptive use after age 30 is not
likely to increase the risk of breast cancer among BRCA1 mutation carriers and
can be used safely to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer," they conclude.

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   THE INCIDENCE of variant CJD - "human BSE" - now seems to be in decline,
according to figures released yesterday by the Department of Health.

    There have been 15 cases so far this year, compared with 20 last year and 28
in 2000. To date, 119 people have died from definite or probable vCJD.

    Some early estimates of the human epidemic were as high as hundreds of
thousands though recent work by Dr Azra Ghani of Imperial College, London, has
scaled down the toll to thousands and yesterday's figures will reduce it still
further, she said.

    Last week's claim that eating BSE-contaminated meat may have led to other
forms of CJD remains controversial and a recent study by Prof Christl Donnelly
of Imperial has revealed that the total number of cattle infected during the
epidemic was up to four million, not one million as previously thought.
"Because we are seeing the same number of vCJD cases, it looks like, although
there were more infected animals slaughtered for consumption, individually,
those animals were less infectious than previously thought," she said.

    Prof Donnelly said it is not possible to rule out that another, possibly
larger, vCJD epidemic may occur, with the current epidemic only affecting a
genetic subtype of the British population with shorter incubation periods.

    Yesterday, the director of the CJD Surveillance Unit in Edinburgh
University, Prof James Ironside, backed calls for widespread screening for the
disease so the health service can estimate the size of the epidemic.

    Although millions ate contaminated meat, scientists have been unable to
weigh up the impact on the population because there are a number of unknowns,
from the amount of infectious protein required to cause disease to the
incubation time (the time from exposure until symptoms appear) to the way
genetic variations among people affect incubation.

    The size of the human epidemic "could be very large indeed. We simply don't
know."

    There is already one proposal which was discussed yesterday by Prof Ironside
with the Public Health Laboratory Service: to check for the disease in the
80,000 tonsils that are removed each year.

    But the ideal test would be a sensitive assay on blood and able to detect
the disease before symptoms develop - a test that is still under development -
said Prof Ironside. "I think much more emphasis needs to be placed on that."

    Frances Hall, secretary of the Human BSE Foundation, whose son died of vCJD
in 1996, said screening could wreck victims' lives without offering any hope of
treatment. "Would people want to be told they are incubating a dreadful disease
and be told that nothing can be done?" "It really won't serve any useful purpose
at all, other than to end their lives there and then."

    Positive tests would make it impossible for victims - many of them at the
start of their adult lives - to get access to financial services like mortgages
and life insurance, she said.

    Prof Ironside said that testing would be done on an anonymous basis so the
health service can weigh up the extent of the epidemic, as was done with Aids in
the early days. "The ethics of who should be tested and when should be debated,"
he said.

    However, he agreed that there may come a time when healthcare workers feel
it is necessary to tell people who have tested positive - given that the test is
dependable enough - so that they do not donate blood, and so that special
precautions are taken with surgical instruments if they undergo an operation.
"These are difficult ethical issues but we need to debate them now," he said.

    Although there has been a surprising lack of progress in developing tests
capable of telling if a person has been infected with BSE before symptoms
appear, Prof Ironside added that there are experimental drugs that show promise
in arresting the disease. "The prospects for treatment are looking a lot
better," he said.

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   A NEW theory on the origin of life that overturns some existing ideas is put
forward today and suggests alien life may be more common than currently thought.

    Since the 1930s, one of the most widely accepted theories claims that
chemical reactions in the earth's most ancient atmosphere produced the building
blocks of life - in essence - life first, cells second and the atmosphere
playing a role.

    Now research by Professor William Martin of the University of Dusseldorf and
Dr Michael Russell of the Scottish Environmental Research Centre in Glasgow,
suggest cells came first.

    These first cells were not living but made of iron sulphide and were formed
not at the surface but in total darkness at the bottom of the oceans.

    Life, they say, is a chemical consequence of convection currents through the
Earth's crust and in principle, this could happen on any wet, rocky planet,
according to a paper published in Philosophical Transactions B, a learned
journal produced by the Royal Society.

    Dr Russell said that as fluid rich in compounds such as hydrogen, cyanide,
sulphides and carbon monoxide emerged from the earth's crust at the ocean floor,
it reacted inside the tiny metal sulphide cavities.  "They provided the right
microenvironment for chemical reactions to take place. That kept the building
blocks of life concentrated at the site where they were formed rather than
diffusing away into the ocean. The iron sulphide cells, we argue, is where life
began."

    One of the implications of the theory is that life on other planets or some
large moons in our own solar system, might be much more likely than previously
assumed.

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   EXPERTS have greeted the latest claim that the first human baby clone will be
born within a few weeks with a mixture of scepticism and contempt.

    Scientists feel contempt for the controversial Italian fertility expert, Dr
Severino Antinori, because animal research suggests that the risks of cloning
are too great for it to be attempted with humans - few embryo clones survive and
why those that do often have serious medical problems.

    Aside from the ethical concerns, shared by scientists and clerics alike,
experts are sceptical about the first clone birth - supposedly due in January -
because Dr Antinori has made this kind of claim before: in April he announced
that one woman he was treating was eight weeks pregnant.

    Unless the clone's gestation time was unnaturally long, the baby should have
been born by now. Dr Antinori would not explain the discrepancy when he spoke
about the forthcoming birth at a news conference in Rome on Tuesday.

    Nor has Dr Antinori submitted his cloning research for independent scrutiny
and many scientists, notably Prof Ian Wilmut, who cloned Dolly the sheep, have
said that no one has any real idea of what Dr Antinori has achieved, let alone
if he has the expertise to bring a cloned baby into the world.

    Dr Antinori, who first made headlines in 1994 when he helped a 62-year-old
woman have a child, supports the cloning of human beings as a way for infertile
couples to have children.

    In Rome, he said three women he has treated are now carrying foetus clones
in the advanced stages of pregnancy.

    He refused to give any detailed information about the identities of the
women involved, but said all three women are "in the same geographical zone."

    He talked a little about one of the pregnancies, due to reach term at the
start of January. "It's going well. There are no problems," Dr Antinori said,
adding that ultrasound scans showed the foetus currently weighed 5.5-5.9 pounds
and was "absolutely healthy."

    Even if this turns out to be a clone, the evidence of ultrasound falls far
short of being reassurring. Prof Wilmut has cited the example of a cloned lamb
that appeared normal at birth which started hyperventilating and had to be put
down. An autopsy revealed malformed arteries leading to the lungs.

    Dr Antinori refused to reveal the location or nationality of the pregnant
woman, saying he had a duty to protect her privacy. He denied that he had been
in charge of the project to impregnate the women but that he had only made a
"scientific and cultural contribution."

    The other two women carrying embryo clones were in the 28th and the 27th
weeks of their pregnancies, Dr Antinori said.

    Dr Antinori first pledged in January 2001 with Dr Panayiotis Zavos to
attempt to clone a baby by the end of that same year. Last September, the
International Association of Private Assisted Reproductive Technology Clinics
and Laboratories voted to expel Dr Antinori for "disreputable conduct."

    Earlier this year, Dr Zavos said that they had fallen out, adding that Dr
Antinori had clones, no laboratory, no patients and no doctors to help him with
his programme. Yesterday, Dr Zavos told The Daily Telegraph: "It is easy for
someone to announce a pregnancy and furthermore to deliver a pregnancy, but it
is rather difficult to prove that those two are indeed...cloned. I am hoping
that Dr Antinori knows and understands the seriousness of what he is announcing
to the world... a cloned pregnancy or a cloned pregnancy withall the necessary
proof. He needs to offer to the world independent confirmation of these events
and developments."

    Dr Zavos, president of Zavos Diagnostic Laboratories, a firm based in
Kentucky, added: "We are totally committed to carry on with our effort and also
simultaneously tell the world what we have done and provide the proof."

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   SCIENTISTS have created an artificial cell that can harness the energy of
light and convert it into chemical energy, marking a step towards mimicking the
Earth's most important chemical process that enables plants to process sunlight.
"We have built a kind of biological power source that draws its energy from the
sun," commented Prof Devens Gust of Arizona State University, Tempe, who
describes the feat today in the journal Nature with colleagues.

    Photosynthesis transforms sunlight into chemical energy, ultimately powering
almost all living things and allowing them to dominate the earth.

    Prof Gust's team has developed an artificial photosynthetic membrane across
which light causes calcium ions to shuttle, mimicking natural processes in which
calcium transport plays a role ranging from muscle contraction to vision.

    These artificial cells, or liposomes, do not contain genetic material and so
are not in any sense living. However, they offer the means to mimic some of
crucial chemical processes in living organisms.

    Beginning with an artificial membrane with a molecular structure similar to
that of a living cell, the team created "shuttle" molecules that were soluble in
the membrane, but not in the water inside and outside the "cell."

    These molecules can bind calcium ions at the outside of the artificial cell
and transport it across the membrane inside the cell. The traffic across the
membrane is controlled by an "artificial reaction centre" molecule.  "The net
result is the use of light energy to transfer calcium to the interior of the
artificial cell," said Prof Gust. "In lay terms, the shuttle molecule is like a
taxicab that transports the calcium ion across town. The artificial reaction
center is the engine that powers the taxicab, closing and opening its doors, and
the light is the fuel that makes that happen."

    A similar setup could be used to transport chemicals into and out of cells,
which would act like microscopic factories, he said. "It could in principle be
used to power various biological processes, such as enzymatic synthesis of
pharmaceuticals or other chemicals," he said.

    The artificial cell could also be used for basic research to understand many
biological processes, such as muscle function, vision, and neurotransmitter
release, which depend upon moving calcium across cell membranes.

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   EVIDENCE that the incidence of 'human BSE' in Britain could be significantly
greater than thought, causing a broad spectrum of incurable degenerative brain
diseases, is published today by a leading team.

    Since 1990 there have been 588 cases of 'sporadic' CJD in Britain, compared
with only 117 cases of the variant CJD that is usually linked with mad cow
disease.

    The National CJD Surveillance Unit is considering reevaluating these
sporadic cases to see if they too are caused by BSE.

    The new work also raises the disturbing - though speculative - possibility
that there are other types of human BSE, where people may show unexpected
patterns of symptoms, whether depression or abnormal behaviour.

    The alarm was raised by experiments in which BSE was used to infect GM mice
that have been 'humanised' with human genes so they can model the effects of the
disease agent, an infectious protein called a prion.

    BSE infection led to disease that looked like variant CJD, the "type four
pattern" the scientists had expected. However, Prof John Collinge and colleagues
from the Medical Research Council's Prion Unit in London were surprised to find
BSE could also cause a "type two" pattern consistent with sporadic CJD.

    And the infection rate was much higher than they expected. "We were taken
aback," said Prof Collinge.

    The discovery, published in the European Molecular Biology Organisation
Journal, raises the possibility that "there will probably be several different
disease patterns in humans all caused by BSE" such as forms that progress slowly
and cause subtle changes in behaviour.

    One pattern could be conventionally classified as sporadic CJD, which is on
the increase: there were 28 cases of the disease in 1990 which rose to 53 last
year. "It seems to me to be a pretty steady upward trend," said Prof Collinge.
"We are not proposing all that the whole of that increase is due to BSE. Maybe
none of it is."

    Prof Collinge pointed out that the sporadic disease, recognised since the
1920s, had been thought to be linked to a spontaneous mutation, or change in the
shape of the prion protein but in fact the cause is unknown.

    There has also been rapid two or three fold increase of the sporadic disease
in Switzerland over the past 18 months, a country also affected by BSE. One
suggestion is that this rise is due to better diagnosis but "is that the whole
explanation" asked Prof Collinge.

    Prof Collinge is also concerned by the implications of his work for the
reuse of surgical instruments because suggests there is a greater risk that they
have come into contact with infected people and could pass on the disease.

    And he believes that the new findings increase the urgency to conduct a
study of up to 80,000 tonsils over a year to get a picture of the incidence of
CJD in the population.

    Given that tonsils are usually removed from young people, this study will
not be possible in a few years, given how increasing numbers of them will never
have been exposed to BSE.  "The wheels of Government seem to move extremely
slowly," said Prof Collinge. "There is only so far you can get with animal
models."

    The study also raises the possibility that some strains of the sheep form of
the disease - scrapie - could actually be BSE.

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   ANIMAL research has revealed a new way to block the muscle-wasting caused by
muscular dystrophy, offering a novel way to treat the most common inherited
lethal disease of childhood.

    Blocking the activity of a protein called myostatin could be an attractive
strategy for scientists attempting to halt muscle degeneration, while
circumventing problems associated with conventional gene therapy, according to a
study published today in the journal Nature.

    Dr Tejvir Khurana of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and
Pennsylvania Muscle Institute, Philadelphia, and colleagues found that blocking
the activity of the protein in a mouse model of Duchenne's muscular dystrophy
signalled pre-existing muscle "progenitor" cells to make more functional muscle,
significantly increasing muscle size and strength, while reducing degeneration.

    Myostatin is known to keep muscle mass in check and, when it is knocked out,
is responsible for the enormous musculature in 'double-muscled' Belgian blue
cattle. "Our team plans to extend the studies in mice and dogs that suffer from
muscular dystrophy to learn more about the limitations of this strategy, such as
potentially accelerated depletion of muscle progenitor cells, before considering
if it is viable to try and generate the reagents needed for human trials," said
Dr Khurana.

    The find has been backed by studies at Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore, Maryland, reported in a forthcoming issue of Annals of Neurology.
"Knocking out the myostatin gene isn't possible for treating patients, but
blocking the myostatin protein might be," commented Prof Se-Jin Lee.
"Increasing muscle mass and strength by blocking myostatin could conceivably
delay progression or improve quality of life," added first author Prof Kathryn
Wagner.

    Duchenne muscular dystrophy is the most common muscular dystrophy, affecting
one in 3,500 live male births. (The genetic mutation that causes it is found on
the X chromosome, and so is "covered up" in girls, who have two X chromosomes.)
At present, there is no effective treatment and few patients survive into
adulthood.

    Early in the disease in humans, the regenerative capacity of progenitor
cells in muscle, known as satellite cells, keep up with the damage, but
eventually the damaging factors win. The result is not just loss of muscle, but
also its replacement with non-muscle tissues, essentially scar tissue and fat.

    This scarring process, called fibrosis, is also seen in mice with the
muscular dystrophy-causing mutation. The Hopkins team found that loss of
myostatin function significantly reduced the amount of fibrosis, while the
Pennsylvania team reported increased proportion of fibres, suggesting that the
muscle regenerative process was improved. "Improved muscle regeneration is also
being recognised as a mechanism by which the eye muscles remain the only muscles
spared in patients of muscular dystrophy. Thus, pharmacological methods which
attempt to enhance regeneration, may actually be using a strategy already being
used by nature," said Dr Khurana.

   By Roger Highfield, Science Editor

   STUDIES of a tiny fly with a big love life suggest that sexual exhaustion
could make a key contribution to the process of ageing.

    The 'antler fly' - Protopiophila litigata - lives from a few days to four
weeks, making its home on a single antler, dropped from a moose or deer.

    But the fly makes the most of its limited lifespan by mating several times
for hours on end, wielding a penis that is as long as its body - providing
scientists with a unique insight into the links between love, violence and
death.

    It turns out that, according to a study published today in the journal
Nature, that the wild insects often do not die before they get old. Instead, as
a result of sexual exertion - and fighting to get a mate - they fade away so
that they eventually become victim to a spider or drowning in a drop of water.

    The work highlights the cost of a casanova-style sex life, spiced with
violence against male peers. "There is good evidence that sex is costly (in
terms of energy and material resources) for humans as well as flies," said
Russell Bonduriansky, one of the Canadian team.

    Whether or not more sex translates directly into a shorter life for people
is difficult to say, though it is likely to have some impact. "A human would
have to have sex remarkably often to spend as much effort on it as the flies do,
so sex in humans probably has a much smaller direct cost," he said.

    With Chad Brassil at the University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Mr
Bonduriansky marked 609 individual males and followed them day by day. They
found that as timed passed, flies become more likely to die and their
reproductive ability also declined steadily.

    The number of times the flies mate decreased with age, although their sex
sessions still lasted for an average of 2.3 hours. The simplest explanation for
these observations is that the flies increasingly suffer from sexual exhaustion,
said Mr Bonduriansky.

    The work marks a rare example of where the effects of ageing can be seen in
a wild population as well as those of disease, predators and accidents that take
a toll on creatures in their prime of life.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2003


                             581 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          October 01, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 06

LENGTH: 618 words

HEADLINE: Researchers hail skin cancer 'vaccine' British team 'making big steps
to finding a cure' as go-ahead is given for trials on humans

BYLINE: By Nick Britten

BODY:
ONE of the world's first cancer "vaccines" is to be tested on people for the
first time.

   The treatment is being hailed as the "closest thing yet" to a cure for skin
cancer.

   Researchers are ready to begin human trials of the gene therapy system, which
teaches the body's immune system to detect and destroy skin cancer.

   After successful trials on animals and on human cells, scientists at Cancer
Research UK Institute said they were "making big steps to finding a cure".

   Melanoma skin cancer has, over the past decade, been the fastest increasing
cancer in Britain, with about 6,000 new cases reported each year, claiming about
1,600 lives, a third more than in Australia.

   Prof Lawrence Young said his team, based at Birmingham University, had been
working on this method for two years.

   "For 30 years we have learnt a lot about cancer and how to detect it but in
terms of treating it we have discovered very little," he said.

   "But we are now moving into a very exciting time. We are now making big steps
to finding that Holy Grail. And what we are doing with skin cancer may prove to
be a massive step forward. I don't want to jump the gun but this is very
exciting.

   "What we are doing is teaching the body to fight the cancer itself. In the
past, treating cancer has been mainly focused around using drugs.

   "The pre-clinical trials have been a massive success and we are confident
that [the gene therapy system] will also prove to work in humans. We are at the
forefront of a major breakthrough. This is the first time that anything like
this has been done in the world."

   Successful trials of the pioneering therapy have been carried out on rats,
mice and human cells in a lab.

   Prof Young said that, if the tests on humans are a success, the treatment
could be developed to deal with other types of cancer, such as prostate. The
researchers have been given the go-ahead by the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee,
which regulates the safety and ethical risks of treatment on humans, to begin
human trials.

   "Now that we have been given the green light we can really put all our hard
work to the test," Prof Young said.

   The therapy involves taking a blood sample and breaking it down to isolate
the blood cells. They are then developed and introduced to a weak strain of
melanoma, recognise it as alien, attack and kill it. The new cells are then
injected into the body.

   Prof Young said: "This works like any other vaccine, where people are
injected with tiny amounts of a disease to then protect themselves against it.
Once the new cells are injected back into the blood stream it is hoped they will
kick start the rest of the immune system.

   "If humans react in the same way to our pre-clinical trials then not only
will the body fight and beat cancer but it will also become immune to it.

   "So in future the immune system will recognise the signs of melanoma itself
and fight against it.

   "This treatment has the potential to save thousands of lives and could be
developed to help deal with other cancers. I hate talking of a cure for cancer
but this would be a vaccine which would be able to fight the disease."

   Prof Young added that, if successful, the new method could be available
within 10 years, by which time "people who are most at risk of skin cancer could
have an injection of the vaccine to prevent them developing melanoma". Julie
Sharpe, a science information officer at Cancer Research UK, said: "This is a
very exciting new area of research.

   "We are very pleased with the results so far and we are now looking forward
to seeing the results of the clinical trials.

   "Prof Young is world-class in his field and we are very proud of the work
that he and his team are doing."

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2003


                             590 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          September 02, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: The fun starts here

BYLINE: By GILLIAN REYNOLDS ON RADIO

BODY:
I can't get over it. Not only was there a decent night's viewing on BBC2 on
Saturday, there was a really funny new show on Radio 4 last Thursday. Two such
unexpected pleasures must have a cause beyond the ordinary. Should we credit the
proximity of Mars or the prospect of licence fee review?

   Either way, Radio 4's That Mitchell and Webb Sound has to count as the
greater creative achievement as all the BBC2 scheduler had to do was follow a
superb Prom with a solid old movie. What was so good about Mitchell and Webb?
They did a dozen or so sketches in half an hour, all of which came at the
familiar from unexpected angles, some (such as "Hairdressers Sans Frontieres")
brilliantly.

   I had begun to dread an autumn tinged only with the uncomic horrors of Adam
Bloom (Radio 4, Wed) and Simon Munnery (Radio 4, Tues), two comics whose
indulgence of the self could break world records. Now, thanks to Mitchell and
Webb, their supporting cast and producer Gareth Edwards, at least Thursdays will
be worth waiting for.

   Not that they are perfect. One of their sharpest arrows was sent pinging in
the direction of Radio 4 science shows and featured a shouty presenter, who kept
paring things back to the wrong conclusion. Now, while I have seen this done on
television and heard it on many a news sequence, radio science programmes seem
invariably patient, painstaking and resourceful.

   Take last night's Young Man, Old Body, a documentary featuring Tom Isaacs,
diagnosed with Parkinson's disease at the age of 27. He is determined to
contradict "the look of pity in people's eyes" when he tells them why he shakes
or cannot control his limbs, and did a 4,000-mile walk and ran the London
Marathon, raising pounds 35,000 for research into the disease. He is optimistic
that a cure will be found but weary of always being told it is five years away.

   The programme followed him as he investigated three research programmes: stem
cell research, gene therapy and the implant of a pump delivering a vaccine. Of
the three, it was the last that gave him what he described as the "Eureka
moment" and is also the one that may be only four-and-a-half years away from
delivery.

   There are 120,000 Parkinson's sufferers in Britain, a huge challenge for the
National Health Service and one expected to increase. Almost everyone knows
someone with it. This was a personal perspective on its symptoms and how hard it
is to live with them. It admitted to "scratching the surface" but still
reviewed, accurately and engagingly, the progress towards alleviation and
possible cure. The producer, Lucy Dichmont, deserves equal credit with Tom
Isaacs for an imaginative investigation that conveyed hope without raising it
falsely.

   A century ago, on August 22, 1903, Cecil Sharp was staying with a Somerset
vicar friend and heard the gardener singing a song, The Seeds of Love. He went
into the garden, gave him a pipeful of tobacco and took down the words and tune.
That afternoon Sharp did an arrangement of the song for piano and a professional
singer performed it that night in the vicarage parlour. This was the start of
Cecil Sharp's quest to trace the lost folk songs of England and of the
controversy ever since about whether those songs belong in the mouths of the
working people who sang them, in books, on concert platforms or in new forms
such as folk-rock. The story was told with due regard to the various arguments
by Malcolm Taylor in a beautifully crafted midday documentary, (Radio 4, Tues)
The Seeds of Love.

   The song itself is odd, cryptic, full of symbols in its language and leaping
lifts in the tune. It goes back at least 300 years and was, with Early One
Morning, a favourite of serving maids. Taylor and his producer Julian May
explored it, showing why some people on the academic side of the folk world get
angry about what they see as Sharp's cultural appropriation, while others, such
as singers Shirley Collins, Martin Carthy and Norma Waterson, take a kindlier
view. The power of the song itself is curiously abiding. I bet anyone who heard
it here will have been haunted by it all week.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2003


                             599 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            July 23, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1013 words

HEADLINE: These Britons could lead the world in gene therapy... if only they had
enough cash Experts worry what impact the Government's White Paper on genetics
can have if it's not matched with money. Katrina Lythgoe reports

BYLINE: By Katrina Lythgoe

BODY:
When it unveiled its White Paper on genetics, the Government said that the NHS
should use the new knowledge to the benefit of all patients, and that Britain
should lead the world in genetics research and development. Today, we reveal the
verdict of the genetics community: the paper marks a step in the right direction
but they will need more money if it's to have an impact.

   This snapshot of their opinion has come from an exclusive poll commissioned
by The Daily Telegraph, conducted with the help of Government adviser Prof John
Burn and the British Society for Human Genetics . From a diverse range of fields
and laboratories, 73 experts gave us their opinion on the extra pounds 50
million the Government will spend. Nine out of every 10 polled had reservations
about whether the additional investment would allow Britain to keep up with the
rest of the world in the area of gene therapy. A quarter categorically said that
we would fall behind.

   The Government has said that it will invest an additional pounds 3 million in
gene therapy for the 4,000 single-gene disorders, and a further pounds 2.5
million for cystic fibrosis, the most common of them. It has also allocated
pounds 4 million to pay for the vectors - viruses and other means to carry
healthy genes into patients' bodies - that make gene therapy possible.

   These amounts may sound like a fortune to the parents of a child suffering
from a genetic disorder, but genetics research is not cheap. This amount of
funding is a "drop in the ocean", as one expert put it. "Peanuts compared to
charity work recently funded," said another senior geneticist. "This will make
no difference."

   To put these figures in perspective, consider the cost of gene therapy trials
for the "bubble babies" who have X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency,
X-SCID , which strips the body of the ability to fight infection. Developing
gene therapy to fight this disease cost Great Ormond Street children's hospital
pounds 1 million, and it costs pounds 100,000 to treat a single child. The
hospital will receive some extra funding from the Government but will still rely
heavily on charities.

   "Amounts like pounds 3 million for gene therapy and pounds 2.5 million for
cystic fibrosis are almost insignificant on a national level," said Dr Stephen
Hart, a molecular immunologist at the Institute of Child Health.

   Not everyone agrees. Many experts questioned whether more money should be put
into gene therapy at all. "In terms of progress towards treating genetic
disease," said one, "I don't believe gene therapy is the most cost-effective
area to target resources."

   Although gene therapy has been a fashionable topic for a decade, success has
been limited. The Great Ormond Street team is one of only three worldwide to
have reported unambiguous positive results, and there are concerns about side
effects. "I am sceptical about gene therapy as research has been ongoing for
many years with very little success," said one molecular geneticist. "I am
concerned that the hopes of families with single-gene disorders, such as cystic
fibrosis, are raised with the increased publicity of a 'cure'."

   The second controversial issue concerns the NHS's ability to diagnose those
who have faulty genes. As Professor John Burn, director of the Northern Genetics
Knowledge Par k, mentions in his accompanying article, the Government has set
impressive targets for the testing of genetic disease. But more than eight out
of 10 of our experts said they had reservations that the targets could be met.
"The target for identifying unknown mutations in genes seems unrealistic," said
one.

   "This paper will fuel unrealistic patient expectation with no prospect of
delivery by an already overstretched laboratory workforce," another senior
geneticist added.

   And therein lies the problem. You can pump all the money you like into new
buildings and new equipment, but if there are not enough people processing the
tests they will not be able to cope. The Government has allocated money to train
90 new lab oratory scientists in recognition of this. What many of our experts
wonder, however, is who will train them?

   "There is an acute problem with shortages of trained staff, to the point that
there is limited capacity for existing staff to train new individuals even if
the promised funding becomes available," said one. A consultant clinical
geneticist added: "The real problem is in staff retention in the labs and that
can only be addressed by improving pay." The trouble is, improving pay for
laboratory technicians is not going to do much to improve the Government's
profile.

   Despite their reservations, most experts welcomed the White Paper - if only
because it will put genetics in the spotlight, giving hope for better funding in
the future. "Clearly it demonstrates a raised profile for genetics, at least
until the next hot topic comes along," one geneticist replied.

   "The UK is ahead of the United States and the rest of the world in many areas
of genetic science and its clinical application," said Prof David Porteous, head
of medical genetics at the University of Edinburgh. "This is despite relatively
low investment in basic science and a dreadful record on biotech investment. The
Government investment is fully justified, but only sufficient to make modest
changes in UK effectiveness. We could be global leaders. We have the knowledge
base and we have the NHS, an unrivalled combination."

   These words are at odds with the Government's gung-ho pronouncements:
"Britain's academic and industrial research prowess means that we are already
among the leading players in genetics research and development," writes John
Reid, the Health Secretary, in his forward to the White Paper. "We are
determined to harness that potential and ensure the benefits of genetics are
realised throughout the NHS."

   But one of our respondents, from the front line, remains gloomy: "I hope the
Government doesn't believe its own publicity material, or we are in a worse mess
than I thought."
[PS]Features [ES]

   Science:

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2003


                             600 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            July 23, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: It's time to talk targets

BYLINE: By John Burn

BODY:
Whatever its failings, the NHS has cultivated a genetic services network almost
without parallel. We are not constrained by religion or politics and the method
of funding means people are less worried about genetic testing being used
against them in, for example, an increase in health insurance premiums. The
White Paper recognises our existing strength and aims to build on it. To have
gone to the trouble of declaring support in this way is a major boost to the
service and its future development.

   The devil is in the detail. When I sat on the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee
six years ago the phrase "in the next five years" was commonly used and still
is.

   Gene therapy is still in its infancy. But there are now signs that it can
work and, indeed, Britain has one of the three groups in the world to pull off
this difficult feat. The genetics community do not see gene therapy as their
central concern but wish it well. Britain can be a world leader in this
technology but it will take a much larger investment to keep us at the leading
edge.

   What of the centrepiece of the White paper, the pounds 18 million to upgrade
our genetics laboratories and funds to create 50 new counsellors and 90 trainee
scientists? It sounds a lot but it's not enough. Rather than describing UK
Genetics as the best in the world, it is, to paraphrase Churchill, the worst in
the world except for all the others. In Newcastle we have had the good fortune
to redevelop our NHS laboratories as part of the Millennium landmark Centre for
Life but many regional centres are wedged into the corners of overcrowded
hospitals. The ruling that all genetics laboratories must achieve accreditation
by 2005 obliges Trusts to invest rapidly or face loss of their regional
facility, so there is hope.

   The other key ruling is that diagnostic genetics tests must be completed in
three days when needed for pregnancy testing and within eight weeks for a
routine spelling check in genes such as the "breast cancer" genes BRC1 and 2. In
most areas a wait of two years is commonplace. This will be a tough target to
meet without a lot of resources. The White Paper speaks of 200 genetic disease
tests. We are already up to 240 different conditions, most lacking adequate
investment to make them available to all and there are hundreds more new tests
in the pipeline. Collectively the rare diseases affect one in 20 people. Almost
all of us is a carrier for one of them. For these rare diseases, it makes no
sense to develop the test in more than one or two centres but hard-pressed
trusts dare not set up a new test unless they can be sure of attracting the
money to pay. That budget does not yet exist. At a national level it will need
to be measured in millions per year.

   A recent audit revealed that the second most common use of the time of
scientists responsible for DNA testing in the NHS is organising for tests to be
done somewhere else in the country. The cost of moving pounds 100 from one
hospital to another can exceed the value of the invoice and finding it in the
system would challenge a chess grandmaster. The million pounds to sort out
genetic computer links should make a difference and is a welcome feature of the
White Paper. The new Genetics Commissioning Advisory Group and UK Genetic
Testing Network might streamline the process but a lot more money is needed or
we will continue to see unnecessary suffering.

   People criticise "targets" but they are preferable to the use of waiting
lists as a form of NHS currency. No list, no money. Now Genetics has some
targets of its own. When hard pressed Primary Care Trusts are faced with trying
to pay for the latest drug, they will not so easily cancel genetic spending as
happened to us last year.

   The new money is welcome but small in national terms. Genetics can and will
have a big impact on health care but we cannot avoid sustained NHS investment.
And that must not be calculated on the usual single figure percentage growth. As
my dad used to say: "Five per cent of nowt is nowt."

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2003


                             605 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            July 05, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 417 words

HEADLINE: IOC pay-up threat

BYLINE: By Mihir Bose in Prague

BODY:
ATHLETES whose governments fail to pay their share of funding for the World
Anti-Doping Agency should not be allowed to march behind their national flags at
the Athens Olympics, and their anthems should not be played during medal
ceremonies. Accreditation for defaulting sports ministers should also be denied,
it was proposed yesterday.

   Dick Pound, the Canadian head of WADA, made the proposal after it emerged
yesterday that funds to fight doping in sport have been cut by pounds 2.75
million.

   At the International

   Olympic Committee session, which ended here yesterday, it was revealed that
many governments have not paid their dues to WADA, the body jointly funded by
the IOC and government.

   Pound said: "We planned a research budget of $5 million [ pounds 3.75
million] a year but this year we have had to cut this to less than $1 million [
pounds 600,000]. It is very critical research, particularly new programmes into
steroids, oxygen enhancers and even genetic manipulation."

   Professor Arne Ljungqvist, who is head of the medical commission of both the
IOC and WADA, said: "We are losing opportunities by not being able to fund the
research. If you want to detect gene therapy being used by athletes and their
coaches then you have to fund the research now. We are losing time. The other
danger is we will lose the scientists. We tell them we want them to do research
but then we do not give them money. They will lose patience and go to places
where they can find the money and structure their research differently."

   The British have paid the pounds 380,000 due for 2003 but the United States,
France, Spain and Italy are among many nations who have not, leaving WADA about
pounds 6 million short of their pounds 14 million annual budget. This has been
made worse by the IOC only matching the government money as it comes in rather
than paying their half up front. In May, WADA had just enough to pay salaries
until July - their monthly costs are about pounds 500,000 - and key conferences
had to be cancelled.

   Meanwhile, Dr Kim Un-Young, the Korean who was issued with a severe warning
following the investigation into the Salt Lake City corruption scandal, was
elected vice-president of the IOC. This is despite the fact that his son is in
prison in Bulgaria awaiting extradition to the US to answer FBI allegations that
he accepted illegal favours from people involved in the Salt Lake City bid for
the 2002 Winter Games.
[PS]Sport: [ES]

   Athletics:

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2003


                             610 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            July 02, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1347 words

HEADLINE: My triumph over the tremors Parkinson's sufferer Rosalind Grimshaw has
fought with the disease to produce an artistic masterpiece. Cassandra Jardine
reports

BYLINE: By Cassandra Jardine

BODY:
There are certain professions that might seem an ill-advised choice for a person
who suffers from Parkinson's disease. Plastic surgeon or graphic designer, for
example, or stained glass artist: making an involuntary movement while working
with precious and often ancient pieces of fragile glass would appear to be a
recipe for disaster.

   Yet the disease has not stopped Rosalind Grimshaw from producing one of the
finest contemporary pieces of stained glass, for Chester Cathedral. The
15ft-high window of intricate design, with its grand overall conception of the
hand of God moving through Creation, has reduced some viewers to tears.

   The mystery of how Grimshaw managed to produce it in a matter of months is
explained in a new book, which draws upon the diary she kept, the history of her
illness and the thoughts of leading artists in the field. "The material," as
Marc Chagall wrote, "is light itself." And Grimshaw's passion for light in many
colours and moods has triumphed.

   "Today is a good day," she says, as she greets me at her Bristol home, a
bohemian house in which her work and her life muddle together. Window designs
hang all over the place, and, in the midst of it, Grimshaw - a bouncy 58 -
shakes my hand. But soon the hand which she proffered begins to behave as if it
has a will of its own, flipping behind her back and whooshing up towards her
face.

   The "wiggles", as she calls the uncontrollable motions of her limbs, are, to
her, a relatively minor problem because she has known much worse. Ten years ago,
she was bedridden. "At my worst, I was unable to move or talk for eight hours a
day," she says, and, of course, she could not work.

   Her greatest fear then was that, like the author Mervyn Peake, another
Parkinsonian, she might be confined to isolation in a darkened room. Although
her boyfriend, Patrick Costeloe, also a stained glass artist, would never have
let that happen, she is no stranger to the depression that hits many sufferers
who see their future as one of physical decline while their brain remains
unaffected.

   She first saw a neurologist in 1983. At that stage, she says, "I didn't have
a tremor, but my handwriting had got smaller - that's classic - I had lost my
sense of smell and my leg dragged." When the neurologist found that she could
not touch her thumb with her fingers, he diagnosed Parkinson's.

   "You get the symptoms," she explains, "when 80 per cent of the dopamine in
the brain has gone, so the messages aren't getting through. Too much dopamine
leads to schizophrenia, too little to Parkinson's. At that stage, I worried
about what might have caused it. There are some cases of it running in families,
and my father suffered from it in old age. But one in three over-75s have a
Parkinsonian condition and the symptoms aren't the same as in younger people. I
thought it might be connected to a fall I had when I was seven - many are
diagnosed after a fall. But now I don't bother with why I have it, I just try to
deal with it."

   Every Parkinson's case is different. Tremors, an immobile mask-like face and
dyskinesia (involuntary movements) are common symptoms, and of these, it is the
last-named that afflicts Grimshaw most.

   Her regime in the early years was one of drug therapy, chiefly apomorphine,
which she insisted was not pumped into her arm so she could keep working. Having
given up teaching art at schools and universities to work with stained glass,
she was awash with ideas and didn't want the disease to interfere. But it seemed
to be gradually taking over.

   "Like most people, I would always try to appear at my best for the
appointments with specialists, dressing up and timing my tablets so I appeared
under control." But, as yet another drug was added to her prescription, she
found herself increasingly helpless and couldn't face the prospect of a brain
operation, which might help, but might also mean she would lose her sight.

   The hero of Grimshaw's story - as she tells it - is not herself, nor a
specialist, but a general physician, Dr Clive Bowman, who now runs Bupa's care
services. Telling her that he would make her "a taxpayer" again, he took her off
all the drugs, observed her condition and then reintroduced one drug at a time.

   "The worst thing," she says, "is the fear that goes with Parkinson's. And
that is what Dr Bowman sorted out. His treatment did not just control the
spasms, he also dealt with fear and depression through Valium and Prozac. I
still have the dyskinesia, but it troubles other people more than it does me.
People think I'm drunk, but it is a lot less bad than turning to stone."

   Grimshaw is being brave. When I visit, it is the best time of day for her. At
other times, despite regular rests, she suffers from insomnia and pain. But this
didn't stop her putting forward a proposal for her biggest stained glass project
yet, in the summer of 2000. Her ideas for the refectory window at Chester
Cathedral, inset in a wall of rose-coloured sandstone, were so outstanding that
the Dean scrapped the shortlist. Hers was obviously going to win.

   The window combines ideas from Genesis with modern illustrations. For "Let
there be Light", she includes car tail-lights and skyscraper windows. Elsewhere,
she incorporates a scan of her Parkinsonian brain and the double helix of DNA,
as well as a tiny homage to Matisse, whose designs for Vence church in Provence,
produced when he was in a wheelchair, inspired her.

   To bring to life the designs, which involve thousands of pieces of coloured
glass, she started by making it up out of paper and dye she had found in
Morocco. She selected all the glass herself, from sources around the world and,
on good days, cut it, too. The only part she couldn't manage was the leading,
which she delegated to Costeloe. Had she had more time, she would have painted
parts of the glass - "it's a way of controlling the light".

   In her diary, she wrote that once the glass was installed, she went through a
"post-window depression". But it was short-lived. Since then, she has completed
four large commissions, and she is now trying to control her excitement at the
thought of a rose window that is being built in a new choir school next to
Chester Cathedral.

   "Have I permission just to think about it?" she asked the architect. To her
delight, he said "Yes".

   Imagining how one shaft of light might play with another, how the angle of
the sun in the course of the day casts the colours on to the walls and floor,
occupies her during the long hours when she cannot sleep. But gloomy talk is not
for her. "Parkinson's," she says, "is a life sentence, but it does not have to
be a full stop."

   Six Days: The Story of the Making of the Chester Cathedral Creation Window,
created by Rosalind Grimshaw (Allistair Sawday Publishing), is available for
pounds 11.95 plus pounds 2.25 p&p. To order, call Telegraph Books Direct on

   0870 155 7222

   Symptoms, care and new research

   What is Parkinson's disease? Parkinson's is a progressive neurological
condition affecting movements such as walking, talking and writing. It is named
after Dr James Parkinson (1755-1824), the London doctor who first identified it.
It is caused by the loss of dopamine in the brain, and symptoms include tremor,
muscular stiffness and slow movements.

   How common is it? About 120,000 in Britain have Parkinson's. Most are over
50, but each year, 10,000 people under the age of 40 are diagnosed with
young-onset Parkinson's. There may be a genetic susceptibility.

   How is it treated? There is no cure, but drugs help to control the symptoms.
Speech, language and occupational therapy and relaxation techniques can provide
relief, too.

   What's the latest research? New drugs that ease the symptoms are being
developed. Researchers are currently studying gene therapies that could halt the
disease, as well as the implantation into brain stem cells of embryo cells to
replace lost dopamine.

   The Parkinson's Disease Society, 215 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SW1V 1EJ.
Helpline: 0808 800 0303 (9.30-5.30, Mon-Fri), or see: www.parkinsons.org.uk

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2003


                             611 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            June 28, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 306 words

HEADLINE: Doctors see work rewarded after many setbacks

BYLINE: Reports by Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
EVEN though ADA deficiency is the most complex and difficult form of bubble baby
disease to treat with gene therapy, it was the subject of the world's first gene
transplant, in America in 1990.

   The cells of four-year-old Ashanthi DeSilva took up the ADA gene, but there
were too few copies to make enough of the missing ADA enzyme to correct her
immune deficiency. Although a scientific success, it was a clinical failure and
doctors fell back on replacing the missing enzyme using the drug PEG-ADA.

   The condition was also the subject of the first British gene therapy trial on
Carly Todd in 1993 by Dr Bobby Gaspar and colleagues at Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children, working with groups in Holland and France.

   That trial also failed and in 1996, aged four, Carly had a successful bone
marrow transplant from an unrelated donor. "She is doing remarkably well," said
Dr Gaspar.

   New hope came when a more sophisticated form of gene therapy was conducted on
an Arab-Israeli girl called Salsabil, from Jerusalem, by Prof Claudio Bordignon
of the San Raffaele Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan, and Prof Shimon
Slavin's team at the Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Centre in Jerusalem.

   Salsabil was born into a family where ADA deficiency had already killed one
child and afflicted another, but there were no suitable donors for a bone marrow
transplant. A gene transplant was the only option.

   Within weeks of gene therapy, the number of white blood cells - lymphocytes -
in her blood had risen dramatically. The toxic products in her blood, which
would normally kill the lymphocytes, had declined.

   Salsabil went home within a month. Nearly two years after the gene therapy,
her blood cells were functioning normally. Four ADA children have now been
treated by the team and all have done well.
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2003


                             612 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            June 28, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: British team discovers gene lifeline for children

BYLINE: Reports by Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
A BRITISH team of doctors is about to pass another medical milestone by treating
children with an inherited disorder of the immune system using gene therapy.

   The plan to transplant genes into five children is significant because it
marks a renewed attempt to treat ADA deficiency, called bubble baby syndrome
because victims must be protected in a sterile environment. The syndrome was
targeted in the world's first gene therapy trials, all of which failed.

   The team, from Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, is one of only three
worldwide to have reported success with the therapy, among hundreds of failed
attempts, after it used gene transplants to treat four children who had another
form of immune deficiency. Despite concerns, raised when gene therapy was linked
to two cases of leukaemia, Prof Adrian Thrasher and Dr Bobby Gaspar remain
confident about the future of transplanting "healthy" genes to replace defective
DNA.

   Compared with the first organ transplants, the first gene transplants have
been highly regulated and proved remarkably safe - more so than alternative
treatments available to these seriously ill children, they said.

   Boys and girls who have the bubble baby disease lack the gene for an enzyme
called adenosine deaminase (ADA) so they suffer abnormalities of the immune
system, a "severe combined immunodeficiency" or SCID.

   In the wake of success by Italian doctors, the London team is to launch an
ADA trial on children who cannot find a bone marrow donor with a good tissue
match and who do not respond well to PEG-ADA, a drug used to replace the missing
enzyme.

   Boys and girls have yet to be recruited for the trial, in which bone marrow
will be extracted and mingled in sterile blood bags with a genetically
engineered mouse virus containing a normal copy of the ADA gene.

   Before the doctors transfuse the modified bone marrow back into each child,
they will take a radical step, neglected in earlier attempts, now thought
crucial: they will end treatment with PEG-ADA and subject the children to mild
chemotherapy to suppress defective bone marrow cells and, in effect, "create
space" for the transfused GM cells to multiply.

   Because of the leukaemia problem, the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee has
insisted that approval must be sought for each of the five children.

   All had their immune systems wrecked by a defect in, or lack of, the "gamma
c" gene. The first transplant patient, Rhys Evans, remains healthy with no signs
of the inherited disorder that had confined him to an antiseptic room.

   However, problems have been identified by Prof Alain Fischer of the Necker
Hospital, Paris, who has used a similar approach on 11 X-SCID children. Two
developed leukaemia, a known risk given that the virus used for gene therapy can
disrupt genes by inserting a new one.

   However, the two children are now in remission and gene therapy still
provides a safer alternative to bone marrow transplants from a parent or
mismatched unrelated donor, said Prof Thrasher.

   "We would have expected four or five deaths if we had taken that approach,"
he said. "Gene therapy is not a tragedy at all but an incredible new treatment.
We know there are problems but, as with any new therapy, we will learn how to
rectify them."

   Although the trial follows a cash boost announced this week in a White Paper,
it will still mostly be funded by charities, notably the Jeans for Genes appeal.
The Government has given some support to the ADA study but allocated only pounds
3 million for all 4,000 of what are called "single gene" disorders.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2003


                             615 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            June 25, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 09

LENGTH: 586 words

HEADLINE: Reid raises prospect of DNA test for all babies

BYLINE: By David Derbyshire Science Correspondent

BODY:
JOHN REID, the new Health Secretary, has asked the Government's genetics
watchdog to "consider the case" for DNA screening of every newborn baby.

   The Human Genetics Commission is to investigate the ethical, scientific and
economic implications of starting a national database of genetic profiles.

   The information would be stored on electronic patient records and used to
identify those whose genes increased their risk of contracting diseases such as
cancer, heart disease and Alzheimer's.

   This would one day enable doctors to identify the most suitable drugs for
patients.

   The proposal is contained in a Department of Health White Paper on genetics
and gene therapy, a new and highly experimental branch of medicine which tackles
disease by repairing or replacing faulty genes.

   Presenting the White Paper to the House of Commons, Mr Reid said that
legislation would be introduced to make it an offence to test a person's DNA
without consent.

   He also announced an additional pounds 50 million for genetic science in
England over three years and said he would consider new laws against
discrimination on genetic grounds.

   "We are standing on the threshold of a revolution in health care," he said.
"I believe that genetics can deliver real and lasting benefits for everyone."

   A DNA screening programme for all newborn babies would be a very
controversial move. The White Paper said the information could be used to give
patients "tailored treatment" according to their genetic make-up, but added that
the proposal "clearly raises a wide range of ethical and social concerns which
would need to be fully explored".

   The new law of DNA theft is intended to stop people from secretly collecting
genetic material from "dental floss in dustbins" or from hair on a comb.

   It will protect celebrities and those involved in unwelcome paternity tests.

   The additional money includes pounds 18 million for upgrading health service
genetics laboratories and more than pounds 7 million for developing genetics
services in surgeries and hospitals.

   Over the next three years the Government will also give pounds 4 million to
research on gene-based treatments, pounds 2.5 million for research into cystic
fibrosis, pounds 3 million for research into other single gene disorders and
pounds 4 million for gene therapy facilities.

   Dr Liam Fox, the shadow health secretary, welcomed the extra money for cystic
fibrosis and the legislation against DNA theft.

   "But we must not overhype what genetics can do," he said. "The technologies
are at a very early stage."

   Dr Adrian Thrasher, of the Institute of Child Health, London, and head of the
team that conducted Britain's first successful gene therapy trials, said the
money was not enough.

   "We are pleased to see this initiative," he said. "But to get this on track
the Government will have to invest a lot, lot more."

   Dr Tom Shakespeare, an expert on genetics at the University of Newcastle,
said: "The open question is whether either gene therapy or pharmaco-genetics
will ever fulfil the huge hopes and expectations of researchers and scientists.

   "Early hype proved premature. Turning DNA research into genetic health
benefits is much harder than anyone ever imagined."

   Alistair Kent, the director the Genetics Interest Group, said that pounds 50
million was a drop in the ocean.

   He added: "It is an important drop that can help provide the infrastructure
that will allow the health service to determine which people can benefit most
from these new therapies."

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2003


                             623 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             June 23, 2003, Monday

SECTION: Pg. 05

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: Gene to halt ovarian cancer found

BYLINE: By David Derbyshire Science Correspondent

BODY:
A GENE that has the power to stop ovarian cancer developing has been discovered
by researchers.

   Scientists at Cancer Research UK's oncology unit in Edinburgh found the gene
was not working properly in nine out of 10 ovarian cancer tissue samples.

   When healthy copies of the gene were inserted back into human cancer cells,
the gene suppressed ovarian tumour growth.

   The scientists hope the discovery could lead to new ways of treating the
disease, which will affect nearly one woman in every 50. Dr Hani Gabra, who led
the research team, said: "This is a very important discovery in identifying what
seems to be a key tumour suppressor gene in ovarian cancer.

   "We have found that these genes are frequently switched off at very early
stages of the disease and fail to make essential proteins. But when we switch
these genes back on, the cancer cell tumours are suppressed."

   Ovarian cancer is one of the most dangerous forms of cancer for women. There
are more than 6,000 diagnosed cases in this country each year and more than
4,000 deaths.

   The body has an arsenal of weapons at its disposal to carry out repairs when
abnormal cells appear. But when some of these fail - or are dismantled by cancer
cells - tumours can develop.

   The team led by Dr Gabra, who reports the findings today in the journal
Nature Genetics, believes the gene, OPCML, prevents ovarian cells becoming
cancerous and that mutations in the gene pave the way for the disease.

   The team hopes to find a way to turn the gene back on in ovarian tumours, or
to find a drug that mimics its effect.

   Dr Gabra said: "It takes us further in the urgent quest to find a method for
earlier diagnosis and treatment of ovarian cancer. We now need to work on
understanding more about this gene and exactly how it works and what makes it
switch off."

   Because ovarian cancer has no obvious side effects in its earliest stages, it
is difficult to detect. Unlike bowel and cervical cancer, there is no effective
screening technique for pre-cancerous cells.

   Dr John Toy, the medical director of Cancer Research UK, said: "It is always
heartening to make headway when investigating a cancer, like ovarian cancer,
which is difficult to treat entirely successfully unless caught early on.

   "This work still has a long way to go in the laboratory before patients could
benefit, but the results so far are promising."

   The five-year survival rate after diagnosis of ovarian cancer in England,
Wales and Scotland is around 29 per cent. In Northern Ireland it is around 27
per cent.

   In Sweden, however, 45 per cent of women survive for at least five years
following the discovery of the disease.

   The Government is expected to unveil plans to promote research into gene
therapy - techniques that repair and replace faulty DNA - this week. A White
Paper on genetics is also likely to propose making the theft of DNA from an
individual an offence.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2003


                             643 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           April 16, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1375 words

HEADLINE: DNA: more questions than answers Gene therapy and designer babies? We
might have sequenced the human genome, but we are far from being able to perform
miracles. Steve Jones reports

BYLINE: By STEVE JONES

BODY:
In my first term at university (less than 50 years ago but closer to that magic
figure than I might prefer) I was directed to the library and told to find the
most important scientific paper of the past decade. It was easy; one volume of
the journal Nature, number 171, was uniquely battered, and two of its pages were
darkened and torn by the impress of hundreds of fingers. In just a few
paragraphs, the Watson and Crick paper brought the double helix to an astonished
world and provided one of the icons of the 20th century.

   This week that icon has been polished with the finest rouge: the announcement
that the genome has been sequenced with greater than 99.9 per cent accuracy
brings to an end the greatest co-operative effort in biology. It also raises a
host of questions: just what is a gene, what turns them on and off - and,
endlessly, does the double helix alter our view of the meaning of life and what
it is to be human? A glance over the past half century shows strange shifts in
public attitudes, while a look to the future by some of the most eminent of
today's geneticists (see below) reveals a certain scientific caution.

   I once met a policeman who did not know the difference between DNA and DOA
(dead on arrival), but that was in the Sixties and perhaps he was having me on.
Nowadays, everyone recognises the famous image, most people have some idea how
it works, and many see the double helix as a threat as dangerous as its twin
symbol, the mushroom cloud.

   The authors of the famous Nature paper that began it all were well aware of
the importance of their work. They did not disguise the fact from their
competitors (as his book The Double Helix shows, where Newton stood on the
shoulders of giants, Watson preferred to stand on their toes). In this
anniversary year, every scientist agrees; Rosalind Franklin, who took the
crucial X-ray but missed its significance, was wrong but romantic, while Crick
and Watson were right but repulsive. Their discovery marked the beginning of
modern biology.

   Only one newspaper, the now extinct News Chronicle, mentioned it at the time
("Discovering how these chemical cards are shuffled and paired will keep the
scientists busy for the next 50 years"). The media's failure mirrored that of
the 19th-century president of the Linnean Society, who commented on Darwin's
paper that his year had "not been marked by any of those striking discoveries
which at once revolutionise, so to speak, the department of science on which
they bear". In 1953, the world was much less stirred by the new genetics than it
should have been.

   Now it is shaken. The grand agitation began in the 1970s. A glance at a BBC
Horizon of 20 years ago catches the flavour. Slippery slopes abound as
scientists play God to the sound of doom-laden music. Gene therapy, we were
assured, was almost here - but how far should it go? In the film, two parents
engineer a child to be artistic but outgoing (the ethics people balk at the
ambition gene) as the presenter intones that "we are the cruelest and most
ruthless species that has ever walked the earth" (try telling that to a malaria
parasite). The next step is to engineer out the gene for war and, failing that,
science might, he says - in a nod to the dinner parties of the time - even
insert an orange gene into a duck.

   All this was silly then and looks even sillier now. Gene therapy is still
little more than a hope, we know no genes for art, and as for controlling
warfare, a decent system of international law (or even compulsory castration)
would be easier. Even so, science has moved on since that programme was made.
The 1981 Horizon suggested it would take 6,000 scientists 40 years to sequence
human DNA. That was too pessimistic; the job was done far faster and more
cheaply than anyone expected. Cloning is here, human genes work in sheep and -
if it was not so unfashionable - citrus-enhanced poultry could soon be on the
shelves.

   Ethics, though, has stayed oddly unmoved. The most recent Horizon on the
topic dealt with the late and lamented Dolly. It highlighted lots of good
biology but, once again, felt impelled to make vague threats about the future
("Now, six pieces of Al's mother are frozen in a vat, somewhere in America!").
In the face of such relentless pessimism, it's worth reminding ourselves in this
historic month for biology that the double helix has been bigger on promises
than on delivery. We do not have reliable gene therapy or designer babies
(whatever they might be) and human cloning has not happened. Last week's
reported failure to clone a monkey suggests that, for purely technical reasons,
it probably never will.

   Because it seems to be close to ancient questions about identity, about right
and wrong, and about what it means to be human, many expect too much of
genetics. In the end, though, it is just a science. What do the experts think
about its future, half a century on? They must be sick of being asked. Physics
has brought us the bomb and chemistry the ozone hole, but chemists and
physicists do not spend all their time predicting, or even apologising.
Undeterred, I asked three Nobel prize-winners about their hopes for the next
half century. All were cautious; no designer babies or cancer cures, but a sober
realisation, as knowledge increases, of how far we have to go.

   The beautiful simplicity of 1953 has become clouded. Genetics looks rather
like physics in 1900, when many assumed that the science was done and dusted.
The atom, the solar system and the universe were the same things on different
scales and all that remained was to tidy up the details and to invent some
better steam engines. Then came a discovery; certain elements glowed with
definite colours when heated. That was the first step to quantum theory and,
quite soon, the austere Newtonian edifice collapsed, to be replaced by a world
of uncertainty (and, in the end, by the mushroom cloud).

   Genetics has not quite come to that, but it might. The first hint came from
the shortage of genes - not a million, as the 1982 Horizon predicted, but only
about 30,000; little more than in a simple plant. Worse, what once seemed like
single genes can be cut and spliced to produce scores of products - but others
can be knocked out altogether with no effect. Why, we know not; but it reminds
us that we stand among questions and not answers.

   Molecular biology is anatomy plus dollars. Watson and Crick were the
intellectual successors of the 16th-century Italian Vesalius, who began the
great dissection just completed by the human genome project. The first heart
transplant had to wait for 400 years from his day and even the circulation of
the blood took a century. To understand the molecular machinery (let alone
manipulate it) might not take as long - but it will not happen tomorrow.

   Even so, it is fun to speculate. Sir Paul Nurse, 2001's Nobelist, hopes that
soon we will discover how each cell receives a complete set of genes when it is
formed and - a more daring prediction - that we will even know how cells (which,
unlike DNA, can reproduce without help) actually work. That's a real ambition,
as it might help to understand cancer. Tim Hunt, who shared that year's award,
hopes that "omics", whether gene-, or proteo-, will disappear (thoughtless hype,
he says), while Sydney Brenner, a pioneer of the helix (and winner of the 2002
prize) feels that by 2053 we might even understand how genes co-operate to build
complex creatures from a simple chemical - and that we will then be in the era
of synthetic biology, when animals will be made to order.

   Tim Hunt agrees. He hopes that one day there might be a computer program that
will take any DNA sequence and calculate the size, shape and physiology of the
creature involved. It would then, he says, be a short step to the resurrection
of the Dodo.

   However, Dr Hunt is of the Vesalian school, for he predicts that this will
take not 50 years but 1,000. With luck, orange-flavoured ducks, if not dodos,
will have come home to roost before then, we will be used to what genetics can
and cannot do, and the human race will find something different to worry about.

   Steve Jones is professor of genetics at University College London
[PS]Features [ES]

   Science:

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2003


                             645 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 12, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 27

LENGTH: 159 words

HEADLINE: Live life to the full

BODY:
SIR - I was doing my paediatric training in the early 1960s and nursed many
children with cystic fibrosis, so it was with horror that, 10 years later, I saw
that my new-born son had the familiar symptoms.

   I am dismayed that, 30 years on, diagnosis still can be as slow as Helen
Stevenson writes (Health, April 9). It took me six months to convince GPs and
the paediatrician that I knew what was wrong, while being told I was a fussy
mother.

   Our son has progressed through full schooling, played hockey for England at
under-16 level, obtained a university degree, works full-time with some
difficulty and is to be married to a wonderful young lady this July.

   My advice to Helen Stevenson is always maintain a strict treatment regime,
encourage plenty of exercise and Clara will bring her many blessings. We all
pray gene therapy will happen sooner rather than later.

   Margaret Wotton

   Southampton
[PS]Features [ES]

   Letter to the Editor:

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2003


                             646 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           April 09, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 264 words

HEADLINE: Faulty gene is the cause of this incurable disease

BYLINE: BY CATALINA STOGDON

BODY:
What is cystic fibrosis?

   Five babies are born every week with cystic fibrosis, an inherited genetic
disease which clogs the lungs and pancreas with thick, sticky mucus, making it
difficult to breathe and digest food. Symptoms include a heavy cough, repeated
chest infections, prolonged diarrhoea and poor weight gain. Currently affecting
more than 7,500 children and young adults, it is one of the UK's most common
life-threatening diseases. The average life expectancy is 31, and three young
people die of cystic fibrosis each week.

   How is the disease managed?

   Sufferers require physiotherapy, daily medication, a special diet and
exercise. Chest physiotherapy helps prevent the sticky lung secretions from
blocking the air tubes. CF patients take medication to aid digestion, and are
encouraged to eat fatty foods in order to retain their weight. As symptoms
worsen, frequent hospital visits are needed for courses of intravenous
antibiotics to clear infections.

   Are there any treatments or cures?

   At present, there is no cure for CF but the faulty gene carried by both
parents of a CF sufferer has been identified. The Cystic Fibrosis Trust is
funding research into ways of repairing and replacing this gene. There are two
new approaches in gene therapy (replacing the faulty CF gene with a healthy
copy) and protein repair (repairing the faulty protein created by the defective
gene).  pounds 11.5 million is needed for further research.

   For more information or to make a donation, call the Cystic Fibrosis Trust
helpline on 020 8464 7211, or see www.cftrust.org.uk

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2003


                             654 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            March 04, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 31

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: Royal & Sun faces up to a final curtain in the FTSE 100

BYLINE: By YVETTE ESSEN

BODY:
WORRIES that Royal & Sun Alliance will pass its final dividend and fall out of
the FTSE 100 made the insurer one of the leading blue-chip casualties yesterday.

   The group, which is already trading at its 1983 low, fell 1 to 70 1/2 p ahead
of its full-year results on Thursday. Roman Cizdyn, insurance analyst at
Commerzbank, said: "Why should it waste money on paying out a final dividend
which will help push it out of the FTSE 100?"

   R&SA paid an interim dividend of 4p but traders are worried about its pension
deficit. The insurer is now in danger of falling out of the index of leading
shares when it is reshuffled on March 12.

   In the wider market, volumes were low as investors were cautious ahead of a
raft of economic data from the US. Wall Street initially rallied after spending
in the construction industry during January rose but investors later became
nervous after figures showed manufacturing declined more than expected and
consumers were buying less. As the FTSE 100 closed up 29.1 at 3684.7, the Dow
Jones was showing a 7 point gain.

   Rexam, the world's number-one can maker, was one of the leading blue-chip
risers, improving 15 1/4 to 338p ahead of its full-year results on Thursday. UBS
Warburg repeated its buy recommendation.

   AstraZeneca advanced 39p to pounds 20.87 after the launch of its cholesterol
drug Crestor in Holland. The company plans to enter other EU markets over the
next few months.

   Support services group Hays ticked up 1 to 73p on hopes it will unveil a
restructuring at today's interim results.

   Traders noted it has been trading around its 1994 low and they said the stock
has been oversold.

   Invensys was among the blue-chip casualties, retreating 3/4 to 15 1/4 p,
despite speculation that Kidde is eyeing the engineering group's smoke alarms
business. Traders said it fell on profit-taking after a brief surge at the end
of last week.

   Football club Manchester United was at the top of the second-tier risers. It
climbed 8 to 121 1/2 p following revelations that John de Mol, the man behind
the Big Brother television show, and Malcolm Glazer, owner of American football
club Tampa Bay Buccaneers, had both built up stakes of just under 3pc.

   SSL International, the corn-plasters-to-condoms group, was 12 firmer at 218
1/2 p as it launched a new product - a range of women's flight socks to help
improve blood flow.

   Davis Service Group was 12 1/2 better at 334p as the support services group
confirmed it has received unsolicited approaches from parties interested in
acquiring its tool hire business.

   Nestor Healthcare, the health personnel and services company, advanced 7 1/2
to 200p after posting a steep rise in profits.

   Chairman Antony Beevor said that although targets for 2003 are "challenging",
the group anticipates satisfactory full-year results.

   Meanwhile, iSoft, the supplier of software applications to hospitals and
healthcare companies, fell 10 to 206 1/2 p as General Atlantic Partners invested
around pounds 34.2m in the company.

   Elsewhere, vehicle tracking company Minorplanet was lifted 4 1/2 to 78p from
its 1999 low.

   Traders noted further activity in health club operator Fitness First. The
stock continued to gain ground, 10 1/2 higher at 155p.

   British Polythene Industries rose 17 to 266p as Europe's largest producer of
polythene bags posted better-than-expected results. Pre-tax profit for the 12
months ending December 2002 was pounds 10.2m, compared with pounds 16m the
previous year.

   Oxford Biomedica rose 0.62 to 7.12p on heavy volumes ahead of the drug
developer's final results today. It has received ethical approval from the UK
Gene Therapy Advisory Committee for its cancer vaccine TroVax to enter phase II
clinical trials.

   Big Food Group eased 3 to 53p despite the Icelandic retailer Baugur buying 2m
shares, increasing its holding to 75.9m, or 22.1pc.

   On Aim, Concurrent Technologies climbed 3 1/2 to 14 1/2 p as the manufacturer
of computer boards for the defence sector paid a final dividend of 0.35p for
2002. Last year, it passed the final dividend. Chairman Michael Collins picked
up 10,000 shares at 13p each but traders gossiped he had put an order in to buy
up to a further 250,000 and three other executive directors also hope to make
purchases in the next few days.
[PS]City: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2003


                             657 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           February 28, 2003, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1146 words

HEADLINE: DNA pioneers: the rivalry, the discovery, the future Watson 'Honest
Jim' tells Roger Highfield about his hopes for human genetic enhancement

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
James Watson is one of the most passionate advocates of DNA manipulation, not
just of plants and animals but of people, too. Even though no one knows the
final destination of the DNA revolution, he wants us all to get there double
quick.

   The youngest of the double helix Nobel laureates, Watson remains the most
influential and will be feted in April at an anniversary dinner in London, at
which the Prime Minister and other luminaries have been invited to toast the
1953 breakthrough.

   Watson's artless candour long ago earned him the nickname "Honest Jim". He
made headlines for inviting Posh and Becks to the dinner, and for suggesting
that plump black people have better sex lives than the model Kate Moss. Of his
work as a fundraiser, he said: "I really like rich people"; and, describing his
colleague, remarked: "I have never seen Francis Crick in a modest mood."

   As a schoolboy growing up in Chicago, Watson was small, unathletic, and shy.
He was also unpopular, and often bullied. His consolation lay in books and he
was one of the junior geniuses who wrestled with brain twisters on The Quiz
Kids, a half-hour radio show.

   In 1940, at the age of 12, he was confirmed. But, disillusioned by the war
and how religious explanations seemed to be "myths from the past", he gave up
mass to go bird-watching: "I came to the conclusion that the Church was just a
bunch of fascists that supported Franco. I stopped going on Sunday mornings and
watched the birds with my father instead."

   His interest in ornithology would evolve, through a fascination with the then
mystery of migration, into science. Like the other DNA pioneers, he was also
deeply influenced as a teenager by Erwin Schrodinger's book What is Life?, which
suggested the idea of a molecular code that carried genetic information.

   Even though Watson entered the University of Chicago precociously, as a
15-year-old, his search for a graduate school almost came to nothing. Caltech
turned him down. Harvard accepted him, though with no financial help. But he did
make it to Indiana, which was strong in genetics.

   He moved to Sir Lawrence Bragg's biophysics unit of the Cavendish Laboratory
in Cambridge in 1951. After the triumphant discovery with Crick, Watson did not
rest on his DNA laurels. He decided to leave Cambridge, despite its overwhelming
influence on biology at that time. "Francis being such a dominant person, I had
to. My own career demanded I separate from Francis."

   He would become an intellectual impresario, turning Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory on the East Coast of America, where he is now president, into one of
the world's principal centres of biology and leading the effort to read the
human genetic code.

   Today, Watson believes in designer babies because he has faith in human genes
- in particular, those that underpin our ability to care for one another. He
argues that much of the public paranoia surrounding human genetic manipulation
is inspired by a legitimate recognition of our selfish side, where one person
benefits at the expense of others.

   But this is only half the story: humans do not only compete, they co-operate
and care for each other. In his new book, DNA: The Secret of Life, he goes
further: "So fundamental is it to human nature that I am sure that the capacity
to love is inscribed in our DNA - a secular Paul would say that love is the
greatest gift of our genes to humanity."

   The constellation of genes that makes us love one another will protect us.
"Love, that impulse which promotes our caring for one another, is what has
permitted our survival and success on the planet. It is this impulse that I
believe will safeguard our future as we venture into uncharted genetic
territory."

   By uncharted territory, he means the use of genetic manipulation to alter
plants, animals and even people. "If, some day, the genes linked with love could
be enhanced by our science, to defeat petty hatreds and violence, in what sense
would our humanity be diminished?"

   Watson is dismayed by the angst over GM technology, spurred by pressure
groups "who raise money by raising fears". But even many of his peers are
convinced that scientists should never attempt germ-line gene therapy, where the
consequences of GM are passed to future generations. "Whether based in ethics or
unfounded fears of the unknown, such arguments are ultimately not compelling, in
my judgment. Germ line therapy is, in principle, simply putting right what
chance has put horribly wrong."

   Germ line gene therapy has the potential for making humans resistant to the
ravages of HIV. Some say we should focus on education about the dangers of
promiscuous sex. "I find such a moralistic response to be profoundly immoral,"
Watson says. "Education has proven a powerful but hopelessly insufficient weapon
in our war."

   Indeed, Watson goes further, advocating genetic enhancement. "Having
identified the relevant genes, would we want to exercise a future power to
transform slow learners into fast ones, before they are even born? We are not
dealing in science fiction: we can already give mice better memories. Is there a
reason why our goal shouldn't be to do the same for humans?

   "All parents want to enhance their kids. I think you can be against it only
because we can do it." Is that influenced in any way by anguish over his own
son, Rufus, who has a mental disorder? "I am very much wanting people to have
healthy children." And he is passionate that this kind of decision should be
down to the individual, not the state. Despite being pro germ line therapy, he
is not in favour of cloning. "You want a law. You don't want 50 people looking
like Gwyneth Paltrow."

   One field that fascinates him is neuroscience, as it does Crick. The big
question he would like answered is: "How a telephone number is stored in my
brain."

   Another fascination is cancer. Even though Rosalind Franklin died of cancer,
his sister died of liver failure related to chemotherapy, and his father died of
lung cancer due to a "two packs of Camel a day habit," this interest was and has
always been driven by his intellectual curiosity.

   In 1998, Watson made headlines when he said that the research of Judah
Folkman at Harvard Medical School, which had shown promise in mice, would cure
cancer within two years. The throwaway comment at a dinner party - typical of
"Honest Jim" - would get him into hot water, as has happened many times.

   The problem with conventional approaches to cancer is that tumours contain
many cell types, so that some always survive attack by a drug to launch a new
invasion of the body. That is why Folkman's approach - cutting off with drugs
the tumour's blood supply, a stable target - is so promising. "I still see a lot
of Judah," he says.

   "We are no longer satisfied by understanding cancer, as we were for a long
time. We will only be satisfied if we stop cancer."

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2003


                             663 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          February 12, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1124 words

HEADLINE: Can you capture nature's secrets? There are cash prizes of pounds
8,500 in the 2003 Daily Telegraph/Novartis Visions of Science awards, says Adam
Hart-Davis

BYLINE: By ADAM HART-DAVIS

BODY:
Science is lovely stuff - it's the best way we have of examining the universe
and trying to work out the secrets of nature. The ideas of science are often
beautiful, and so is nature itself, from quarks to woodlice and from galaxies to
DNA. Photography is an excellent way to bring out that inherent beauty, and
Visions of Science provides an opportunity for scientists and photographers to
delight the public and win cash prizes.

   The event began three years ago, and was originally a photography
competition, but now we have widened the field to include photographs that have
been digitally manipulated, and images generated entirely by computer. In 2002,
several winning images were computer-generated, including some sumptuous pollen
grains - imaginary visions of science.

   Run by Novartis, the pharmaceutical company, and supported by The Daily
Telegraph, the contest receives wide publicity. The Science Photo Library is
providing cash prizes in all categories and many of the winners will be
published in The Daily Telegraph. This year for the first time, Nesta - the
National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts - has joined the event
with a generous supporting grant.

   This is great news, because it will allow the organisers to take the
exhibition of winning photographs on a wider circuit, and show them to a far
broader spectrum of the public, as well as provide a series of lectures across
Britain based on the awards. What better way could there be of inspiring people
to take a scientific look at the world?

   People need to know about science; how else can we all argue sensibly about
global warming, or genetic modification of food or of animals?

   A recent YouGov poll revealed that people do not trust politicians on
scientific issues, but prefer to listen to environmental pressure groups. How
much better if they could listen to the evidence and make up their own minds.

   I am delighted to be involved with Visions of Science, since I am both a
scientist and a photographer. Most of the winning images are ones that I wish I
had had the skill to take myself.

   Anyone can enter this competition. You do not have to be a professional
scientist, nor a professional photographer. You do not need an electron
microscope or any other high-tech equipment; some of the winning images have
been taken with simple point-and-shoot cameras; others with digital cameras; and
some have been generated entirely by computer. This year there are five main
categories, to cater for and encourage various types of images. In each
category, the winner will get pounds 1,000 and the runner-up pounds 400.

   Action: capture a moment in time, perhaps a time-lapse sequence of a flower
opening, a volcano erupting or an explosion. Last year's image of a trickle of
liquid not quite making the trip to a wine glass delighted us with its
black-and-white graphic starkness.

   Close-up: this is the section for images that show nature in a way that
cannot be seen with the naked eye. It's for thermography, X-rays, satellite,
astronomical, magnetic resonance imaging and kirlian pictures, and those
exquisite electron micrographs.

   Ever since Robert Hooke published his drawing of a flea in 1665 we have been
fascinated and horrified by these vastly magnified pictures of the microscopic
world. Last year's overall winner showed cells from the brain that looked like a
regiment of matchsticks.

   People: scientists in action, or people directly affected by science,
technology or medicine. In previous years, there have been few powerful images
in this area; so your chances of winning a prize in this category may be high.
We're interested in single images, or documentary photography as a feature
portfolio of up to six images.

   Concepts: the ideas of science embodied in pictures. Gravity, geomorphology,
gene therapy - a rich field if you can find a strong idea. The 2002
computer-generated image of a louse-like machine injecting a red blood cell
elegantly embodies the idea of nanotechnology. These pictures can be manipulated
or entirely computer-generated.

   Art: many science photographs are just beautiful; the winners will be the
ones we would most like to hang on our walls. But they still have to be
scientific; the judges will reject stunning landscapes or sunsets.

   We also have some special awards.

   DNA: 2003 is the 50th anniversary of the discovery of the structure of DNA,
and this award is to celebrate that milestone in genetics and molecular biology.
Sponsored by the Medical Research Council, the best image will get pounds 500.

   Healthcare: the impact of science and medicine on people's lives. Not an easy
subject; we have seen too many operating theatres and glamorous doctors.
Sponsored by the British Medical Journal, the prize is pounds 500.

   Veterinary award: for the best image showing veterinary science - any
animals, any treatment, but compelling photography. The pounds 500 prize is
provided by Novartis Animal Health.

   Young photographer: open to students in full-time education; one prize for
under 17 years and one for under 19.

   This field is wide open; we have had few strong entries; so if you are a
teenager and can use a camera or generate strong computer images you may have a
good chance. Kodak is providing an EasyShare Zoom digital camera for each
winner. Each of the winners will get pounds 500 to spend on science equipment,
supported by Nesta's education programme.

   This competition demands and generates a mixture of art and science. C P Snow
famously wrote about "the two cultures", but here is one place where they are
brought together, and in the most graphic way.

   As one of the judges, I thoroughly enjoy the fierce arguments we have had
over whether a particular entry is scientific - and whether another is artistic.
The competition is tough, but the winning entries are those that make you want
to look at the world with a scientific eye.

   The panel of judges

   THIS year's judges are a mix of broadcasters, writers, photographers and
scientists.

   They include: Dr Adam Hart-Davis, author and broadcaster; Prof Kathy Sykes,
of Bristol University; Dr Simon Singh, author and broadcaster; Prof Frank Close,
Oxford University physicist; Dr Mark Lythgoe, University College London
neurophysiologist; Sandra Lousada, Association of Photographers; Prof Raymond
Clark, the Royal Photographic Society; Dr

   J Harris, Novartis; Bob Bodman, picture editor, The Daily Telegraph; Adam
Goff, picture editor, New Scientist, and David Derbyshire, science
correspondent, The Daily Telegraph.

   For an application form see the website www.visions-of-science.co.uk, write
to Visions of Science, PO Box 29670, London E2 8TZ or telephone 020 7613 5577.

   The closing date for entries is May 30.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2003


                             667 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          January 22, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 13

LENGTH: 150 words

HEADLINE: Single jab to alter cells brings hope on diabetes

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
A NOVEL way to treat diabetes by using a single injection to change the identity
of cells in the body has been discovered by British scientists.

   A team at the University of Bath has used this form of gene therapy to
convert liver cells into pancreas cells in a study that could pave the way,
within a decade, for a new treatment for millions of diabetics.

   Diabetes occurs when the pancreas contains defective cells that do not
produce sufficient insulin.

   A shortage of insulin means cells do not absorb enough glucose to provide
fuel and this leaves excessive amounts of glucose in the bloodstream.

   The novel approach, described today in the journal Current Biology, used
transdifferentiation, which converts one cell type into another.

   About 150 million people suffer from diabetes worldwide and it is predicted
that this number will double over the next 20 years.
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003


                             671 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          December 26, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 148 words

HEADLINE: New hope to block wasting disease

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
ANIMAL research has revealed a new way to block the muscle-wasting caused by
muscular dystrophy.

   Blocking the activity of a protein called myostatin could be an attractive
strategy for scientists attempting to halt muscle degeneration, while
circumventing problems associated with conventional gene therapy.

   A study was carried out by Dr Tejvir Khurana, of the University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine and Pennsylvania Muscle Institute, Philadelphia,
and colleagues. They found that blocking the activity of the protein in a mouse
model of Duchenne's muscular dystrophy signalled pre-existing muscle
"progenitor" cells to make more functional muscle, significantly increasing
muscle size and strength, while reducing degeneration.

   The find has been backed by studies at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore,
Maryland, reported in Annals of Neurology.
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2002


                             674 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           October 26, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 2991 words

HEADLINE: Ever felt patronised? The world is becoming more complicated, yet the
messages sent out by the Government, businesses and broadcasters get more
condescending. Why won't they trust us to think for ourselves, asks John Morrish

BYLINE: By JOHN MORRISH

BODY:
We live in patronising times. But don't worry your little head about it. It
happens to us all. Take the leaflets you pick up at your local library or in the
doctor's surgery. "Not sure what to do when you feel ill?" asks one. "Let us
point you in the right direction." And there's a little drawing of a signpost,
pointing to "GP's surgery", "Pharmacist", "A & E/999", "NHS Direct" and so on.

   Here's another, headed "Information and help for older people", with four
colour pictures on the front. Above "Money & benefits", there's a little purse,
with a clasp and a pile of small change. Above "Care & support", there's a nice
cup of tea and a biscuit.

   And here's a gem called "A Parent's Guide to Video Classification", produced
by the video trade. "Mum, can I watch a video?" To which comes the answer: "It's
a very simple question and one this guide is designed to help you answer."

   How kind, how thoughtful - how insulting. The NHS tries to reroute us around
its crumbling services by blaming us for not knowing what to do when we're ill.
Care Direct, a government helpline, presents us with a patronising caricature of
old age. And the video trade tries to explain its classification system by
reassuring us that it's so simple even parents can manage it.

   Strangely, we rarely notice when we are all treated as idiots. But, as
individuals, we hate being patronised. In employment tribunals and marriage
counselling, the p-word is a common source of strife. The Midland Bank, now
HSBC, made history of a sort a few years ago when its youngest female manager, a
mere 21, was found to have demeaned, insulted and patronised a colleague. If
she'd done this to a customer, no one would have noticed.

   Historically, to patronise was a good thing. It just meant giving someone
your support. It only turned bad in the 19th century, when it was associated
with "behaving like a patron". A patron supports someone weaker, usually an
artist or a charity case, and no one is happy about it. The rich person
"condescends" to the weak person, who takes the money, but resents it.

   The classical roots of the word are even more revealing. In Rome, a patronus
was a man who had released his slave, but still had the right to certain
services from him. And that's the nub of it. When we are patronised, we are not
treated as an equal.

   Consider our dealings with the professional classes. When we have an
appointment with a hospital consultant, we are not equals in medical matters.
But we are equal in decisions about our own health and our own way of life. Some
professionals have found that a difficult distinction to make - but some
patients reject all authority on principle.

   These days, doctors, teachers and other professionals try not to patronise
patients and parents, who can be sensitive to the point of violence. Indeed, the
patronising often happens in reverse. A teacher told me that, during a parents'
evening, she asked a couple to help with their child's bad behaviour, only for
the mother to sneer: "Have you tried moving him to a different seat?"

   I remember a doctor coming across an injured cyclist suffering a fit on the
pavement and shyly owning up to his profession. "Doctor of what?" demanded
another onlooker, before reluctantly letting him through.

   Such personal encounters are beside the point. The real issue is mass
condescension, from business, advertising, broadcasters and the state. Look
around. Every day, the messages get simpler, the sentences shorter and the
pictures bigger.

   At school, everyone has plans for you. If you're a girl, you will be a
white-coated scientist, like the capable women in your textbooks, whatever you
might want. If you're a boy, you are a nuisance, you're expected to be slow,
troublesome, a drop-out, unless you make it as a footballer. Still, you can
always go to university: just don't expect it to bear much resemblance to the
universities the Cabinet attended.

   Newly graduated, you are a commercial gold mine. If you're female, you are
only
interested in gossip, celebrities, hair, make-up, chocolate, cars and male
models, at least in the world seen in advertisements. If you are a man, you're
an idiot. You can't cook, you can't work a mop, you look like a slob, and you
are mocked and outsmarted by clever, sexy women.

   Even in ads aimed at men, you can no longer manage masculine things. You even
have to get Halfords to fit your car radio.

   Sadly, some take these advertising caricatures at face value. This year, the
Department of Education decided to teach men how to be fathers. "Dads & Sons", a
pamphlet and website, takes the art of patronising to new heights.

   "You can help!" it says. "It takes an awful lot to be a 21st-century dad.
There's just the problem of finding enough hours in the day to do everything."

   So what should poor overstretched Dad do? Here's a fun educational project to
try with your son: "Get him to fill in forms himself - whether it's to join a
club, subscribe to a magazine or to register online - it'll help him with all
those forms he'll have to complete later on in life." And they wonder why boys
are turned off education.

   No age is safe. In December, there's a conference on "Marketing to the
Over-50s Life Stages", whatever that means. Here's an extract from the
publicity: "Achieving clarity without patronising the silver market is extremely
problematic, but HeadlightVision [a brand consultancy] will analyse how to
implement the best language and attitude for pulling on the mature consumer's
heart-strings."

   Got that? We're going to call old people euphemistic names and play on their
emotions, bypassing their addled brains altogether. But we're not going to
patronise them. Oh no, that's one thing no one ever admits to. The Government -
home of the Department of the Bleedin' Obvious - gives civil servants regular
lectures on non-patronising writing.

   Meanwhile, the BBC, formerly "Auntie", can't make up its mind. Is it
patronising to educate and improve people? Or is it patronising to say people
only like soaps and celebrities, so let's give them that? The argument is that
if you give people "educational" or "uplifting" programmes, it insults them
because it implies they're lacking something. Whereas if you give them Ground
Force, What Not to Wear and similar chewing-gum for the mind, you're respecting
their right to switch it off. Although, of course, you hope they won't.

   The same argument, incidentally, is employed by campaigners for smoking,
drinking and, in the US, open access to powerful assault rifles. Gambling, too,
although the National Lottery, of course, is the most patronising institution of
our day. Satirised as a device to get Wayne and Waynetta Slob to buy a new opera
house for David Mellor, it has become something more grotesque. It takes money
from gamblers to give to unpopular causes selected by people who are strangers
to the word "scratchcard".

   The only people with no conscience about patronising people are those who do
it most. Advertising makes everyone a target and patronising them follows from
that. Murray Partridge was once the creative director of the huge agency TBWA,
which gave us the "Hello Boys" bra ads. Now he has his own creative shop,
Brainchild. "I don't think I ever heard anybody even getting close to worrying
about it," he says. "I don't think I ever heard the word 'patronised' used. We
talked about 'getting inside the consumer's head'."

   That means generalising. And as William Blake said: "To generalise is to be
an idiot." If you are a Tesco shopper, you must like Prunella Scales pretending
to be an old woman. If you are a Sainsbury's person, you must identify with
Jamie Oliver and his tediously glamorous friends. And television drama targets
as obviously as advertising. Witness the recent wife-battering epic Falling
Apart: men playing squash; women drinking in wine bars; dinner parties where
people argue about schools.

   Television is inherently patronising. It chooses to show, not to explain.
Andrew Marr must stand outside 10 Downing Street, in all weathers, just in case
we have forgotten who he is since yesterday. Dodgy re-enactments ensure we never
have to imagine what it's like to be garrotted by the lodger or carried off by a
Viking. Delia Smith explains, in detail, how to boil an egg.

   For business, simplicity means a wide audience. For government, it is a short
cut to being "inclusive", serving all cultures and abilities. That means
horrible "gremlins" terrifying people who can't read and a desperate succession
of cartoon characters, sitcom personalities and quirky television presenters to
make us fill in our tax forms. It means leaflets that read like Ladybird books.

   Interestingly, the BBC used a realistic Ladybird book to explain the
internet, which was either brilliant irony or deeply patronising. The BBC takes
a great deal of trouble to clarify its external communications, even releasing a
simplified English version of its annual report this year for those with reading
problems. And yet, according to John Lister of the Plain English Campaign, which
encourages simple, but non-patronising business communication, it remains the
campaign's single biggest source of anonymously submitted management
gobbledegook.

   We should not be surprised. Inside business, government and corporations,
things are more complicated all the time and so is the language used to discuss
them. It's only for public consumption that things are reduced to pictures of
signposts and nice cups of tea. It's the contrast between a smiling child and
the slogan "It's an Equitable Life, Henry", twinkingly delivered by

   Radio 4's Margaret Howard, and the chaos as that great institution quietly
unravelled.

   Financial institutions and products have never been more complex. Financial
advertising, on the other hand, has never been more simple-minded. We have had
little children and animals and attractive widows. Now we have singing bank
clerks promising to give us Xtra, their cheerful faces only slightly obscured by
the reams of small print fulfilling their legal obligation to say something real
about the product.

   Phil Evans of the Consumers' Association agrees that there is a whole lot of
patronising going on. "When you are dealing with financial services, it's an
unnecessarily complex product," he says. "It's designed to be complex to confuse
people." Complexity discourages competition on price, freeing money to build a
brand. When they face a complex decision, says Evans, consumers go by the brand.
So those singing bank clerks aren't only patronising you, they're costing you
money.

   Governments are to blame for this confusion. They introduced us to PEPs and
TESSAs and ISAs and Mini-ISAs and Maxi-ISAs and TESSA-only ISAs, and the rest of
the alphabet soup. Even these have hidden complexity. Behind the tame domestic
ISA lurks the "Exotic ISA", which may conceal "hedge funds" and "derivatives",
financial products too complex to be understood even by those selling them.

   Even the boring old current account has become complex. Mine offers Premier
Banking, a Classic Account, a Select Current Account, a Gold Service Current
Account, a Platinum Current Account and four special accounts for students and
young people. To choose between them, you have to weigh up the relative value of
free travel facilities and AA roadside assistance, when all you really want is a
cheque book and a plastic card.

   My free current account recently began accruing bank charges. Naturally, my
call to the branch was automatically rerouted to a call centre somewhere. Then,
because I couldn't remember my phone banking password (not the same as my
internet banking password, naturally), I had to re-register. It eventually
emerged that the bank had quietly "upgraded" the account, increasing the balance
required for free banking. I couldn't have it the way it was when I opened it,
but I could have a different account, with a "personal manager". What I couldn't
have was an account that would let me talk to my branch about routine things.

   Somewhere along the line, society ticked the box for "more choice" and now
we're suffering the consequences. That and the box that said "something new".
New has always been the most powerful word in advertising. Eve tries it on Adam
in Paradise Lost, when she's peddling a new soft fruit that promises: "Life
augmented, opened eyes, new hopes, new joys." They don't get those, of course.
They get new labour.

   Although new often means worse, we are always told it's better. It's like
shopping at IKEA. Not only do we have to find our own furniture, queue up, load
it into our cars, build it ourselves and then bring it back when there are bits
missing, we also have to read endless placards and leaflets telling us what an
improvement this is over conventional shops, with things such as staff and
delivery vans.

   This week, for instance, the Government began edging towards the idea that
untrained classroom assistants are the best people to teach our children, rather
than scarce, expensive teachers. Soon, the best thing for us will be to replace
our television sets. Not because anyone wants more digital channels, but because
otherwise there will be no television for us, the Treasury having sold the
wavebands.

   In fairness, difficult decisions are having to be made all the time and we
are less and less equipped to make them. Before the Second World War, educated
people could understand most things: mortgages, blood transfusions, wireless.
But who understands gene therapy, or prions, or hedge funds, or cloning? In both
the BSE and foot and mouth disasters, the experts did not trust the public to
understand and, in consequence, the public did not trust the experts. In the
case of MMR, the health establishment wanted one jab, but did not trust parents
to go through the individual vaccine sequence. But no one tackled the distrust.
Instead, we had televised gestures, politicians feeding their children
hamburgers, Prince Charles spending a night in a b & b in the Lake District and
a principled stand on little Leo's vaccination status.

   When there is a gap between policy-makers and people, that's a problem for
democracy. Democracy is not a patronising system. The votes of City traders and
call-centre workers are equal. But the Government seems to prefer
"consultation", an idea from market research.

   The most recent example is the "citizens council", which will advise the
National Institute of Clinical Excellence on new treatments. There will be 30 of
them, hand-picked by a private company to exclude anyone with relevant knowledge
or experience. In the words of the woman who recruited them, they need only
"fresh and enquiring minds and, above all, good common-sense values". Let us
hope "common-sense values" are useful when evaluating leukaemia drugs.

   Some hint as to the prospects for this quango emerge from studying a New
Labour debacle called the "People's Panel". This was a 5,000-strong team,
selected by MORI to be representative of the population, and offered to every
Whitehall department as a kind of giant test-bed for its policies. It was
created in 1998. In 1999, it was declared "an integral part in the process of
modernising government". And then, in March this year, it was closed down, at a
cost of pounds 1,408,365.

   What went wrong? These panel members were there to represent the great
unwashed, just like people stopped in the street and asked about chocolate bars.
Whitehall would try out its ideas and, if they liked them, they would become
public policy.

   Unfortunately, the 5,000 punters didn't behave like that. First, 31 per cent
made themselves scarce. A further 30 per cent refused to take part or asked to
leave. The result was an unfortunate bias in the sample: it became "white",
"professional", "middle class" and "activist", which is not what the Government
wanted.

   Worse, there was a trend towards "conditioning". Instead of simply lapping up
what it was given, the panel insisted on becoming interested and knowledgeable
and finding out more about public services. The result was that, in the survey,
they duly declared that nursery schools, secondary schools, NHS hospitals, fire
and ambulance services, the police, local councils and trains had all got worse.
Which was not in the script. By the time the report was published, the panel had
been dismissed.

   Politicians all over the world seem reluctant to trust the public with
serious matters. A year ago, the Irish were asked whether they wanted the
European Union to expand. Just over a third thought it worth answering the
question, but a clear majority of those said no. Some people, however, won't
take no for an answer, among them Bertie Ahern, the Taoiseach. The referendum
was duly rerun and this time the answer was yes.

   Is that a precedent for the British Government in its forthcoming referendum
on the euro? At the moment, it seems to be banking on our coming to love the
single currency once we've held it in our hands and used it to buy a round of
drinks and a bottle of suntan oil. There's no point, is there, trying to explain
the long-term implications of inextricably linking our currency with an
ever-expanding union of countries, each with its own economic imperatives? We
just won't understand.

   If that's how the Government sees us, it's no wonder it is hell-bent on
abolishing jury trials, especially in complicated fraud cases. We know it's
going to be difficult, but we would like to be given the chance to try to
understand it. Difficulty, again, is both the problem and the excuse. But it
doesn't justify putting such matters on a high shelf where ordinary people can't
touch them.

   The real answer is to explain without patronising, but that's hard. Those
producing leaflets and government hand-outs should note this piece of advice,
attributed to Albert Einstein: "Everything should be made as simple as possible,
but no simpler."

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2002


                             681 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            October 04, 2002, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 08

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy treatment continues despite child leukaemia scare

BYLINE: By David Derbyshire Science Correspondent

BODY:
GENE therapy trials are to continue in Britain even though a French child
undergoing the same experimental treatment has developed leukaemia.

   The Government's gene therapy watchdog said the benefits of the treatment for
"bubble babies" born without immune systems outweighed the risks. However, it
called for tighter monitoring of two similar experiments at Great Ormond Street
Hospital, London.

   French authorities halted their gene therapy tests after a boy, apparently
cured of the potentially fatal disease, went on to develop leukaemia.

   Prof Norman Nevin, chairman of the UK Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC),
said the treatment had been used on 15 patients in Britain and France. If they
had been given conventional treatments, five would probably have died by now.

   "We accepted that there was a safety risk," he said. "However, because the
treatment options are so limited for these children, we have decided that
approval should continue."

   The unnamed child was one of 11 boys suffering from inherited severe combined
immunodeficiency syndrome, or X-SCID, being treated at the Necker hospital in
Paris.

   The condition is caused by a single gene mutation on the X chromosome in bone
marrow cells. Babies with the condition are unable to fight infections and must
live in sterile environments. Without treatment, most die before their first
birthday.

   Until recently the only cure was a bone marrow transplant, which worked well
only if donors were close family members. Gene therapy offered a safer
alternative: a way of repairing the baby's faulty genes by inserting a healthy
copy of the mutated gene into the baby's bone marrow cells. However, there is no
way of controlling where the healthy gene is inserted.

   Prof Nevin said: "Tests showed that the retrovirus appears to have been
inserted close to a gene that has been implicated with leukaemia. All the
evidence suggests that the retrovirus has contributed to the leukaemia."

   However, other factors may have been involved in the child's condition, he
added.

   In Britain there are 14 gene therapy trials involving 160 patients. In April,
doctors at Great Ormond Street reported a major success after treating
18-month-old Rhys Evans using gene therapy.

   His mother, Marie Evans, supported the decision to continue the trials. "When
Rhys was admitted to Great Ormond Street Hospital, he was a very sick little boy
who could barely lift his head," she said.

   "Gene therapy was our only real hope. It has saved Rhys's life - he is a
happy, healthy toddler now. We've just celebrated his second birthday, which is
a miracle.

   "Last year, we thought he may not even reach his first. I would not hesitate
to make exactly the same choice again."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             700 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             July 09, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1445 words

HEADLINE: High cholesterol - at 10 years old Up to 10,000 lives a year could be
saved if more people at high risk of heart disease or strokes were given the
cholesterol-reducing drugs known as statins. The recent landmark Heart
Protection Study of 20,000 people with heart disease, stroke or diabetes has
shown that many more could benefit from a prescription of statins than had been
thought. The findings have prompted calls to rewrite the official guidelines on
their use. Yet statins are not the answer for everyone, as Adam Barrett found.
He inherited a dangerously high cholesterol level and is one of only 21 people
in the country on a life-saving form of treatment that could help up to 1,000.
Christine Doyle reports

BYLINE: By Christine Doyle

BODY:
It is Monday, so Adam Barrett, a mathematics student at Birmingham university,
is having his blood "laundered" to remove excess levels of harmful cholesterol.

   It is a laborious process, known as apheresis - "removal" - and it takes
about two hours, on top of the time spent travelling to and from Tipton Dialysis
Centre in the West Midlands. Blood flows out through a needle in Adam's arm,
into a sophisticated filtering system and back into his limb.

   Adam, 20, has been having the treatment weekly for two years and is likely to
continue for the foreseeable future. He is a cheerful man and puts up with it
all as philosophically as he can. "There's not much else I can do," he says.

   He has familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH), which affects about one in 500
people. A defective gene, inherited from one or both parents - it can skip
generations - leads to damage of the liver's system for getting rid of excess
fats, including cholesterol lipoproteins.

   Without effective lowering of fat levels, FH sufferers are at particularly
high risk of early heart disease. For many, the first symptom is angina, or a
heart attack. Often, a diagnosis is made only when someone has a premature heart
attack. For some, the coronary arteries are so blocked that the only solution is
a bypass operation - in extreme cases, this has been performed on children as
young as six.

   Treatment is chiefly with statins, the familiar and increasingly widely
prescribed cholesterol lowering drugs. However, for up to 1,000 people with
dangerously high levels of cholesterol, statins and other drugs have little
impact or can cause intolerable side effects.

   Heart specialists advise that everyone should aim for a blood cholesterol
level under five units per litre, but even though Adam's level reaches that
after apheresis, it creeps back to about 12 units shortly before the next
session. "It always rises again, even though I exercise and eat a low-fat diet -
lean meat or fish, vegetables and no ice-cream, chips, crisps, butter or
chocolate," he says.

   Dr Anthony Wierzbicki, consultant lipidologist at St Thomas' Hospital,
London, says that, unless patients such as Adam are rigorously controlled, they
have a one in two chance of a major heart attack during the next five years and
a one in three chance of this proving fatal. "For such people, apheresis is a
last resort, but a life-saving one."

   Dr Wierzbicki supports the work of the Family Heart Association (FHA), which
is stepping up its campaign for more use of apheresis. "The treatment can make a
dramatic change to patients who cannot take drugs and are so affected by their
condition with angina and narrowing arteries that they are virtually cardiac
cripples.

   "Some can scarcely walk more than 20 yards. Not surprisingly, they are
acutely anxious. They worry about giving up their jobs and what the future
holds."

   The treatment should, he thinks, be available at about 15 centres in the UK.
At present, there are only six and not all patients are funded to receive the
treatment.

   Many such patients, he thinks, fall through the gaps in the way the new
primary care trusts are organised. Although closer to the immediate needs of
patients, local "lead" trusts are less successful, Dr Wierzbicki thinks, in
co-ordinating specialist services across a wider area. It could be a case for
"banging management heads" together. The FHA says the trusts would have more
incentive to offer apheresis if the treatment had been included in the
Government's National Service Framework for heart disease.

   Wales has taken the lead. A similar framework published by the Welsh Office
last year recommended that apheresis should be provided for the patients who
need it.

   Adam strongly supports that advice. "I am lucky, so I think I should speak up
for others. For me, it has meant a normal life as a student."

   We are, according to the FHA, not keeping up with other European countries'
use of apheresis, although we have one of the highest rates of heart disease.
Germany already treats about 900 patients. Another major problem, says the FHA,
is early detection and treatment of the disease.

   Adam counts himself lucky in being diagnosed when he was 10. "My grandad died
of a heart attack in his forties. My aunt went for a cholesterol check and
suggested my Dad went for one, too. The GP - a smart guy - thought he would test
me as well."

   The result was a shock. His blood cholesterol level was 18 units per litre of
blood, almost four times the advised adult maximum. Adam also had xanthoma -
fatty nodules on his knees and on the back of his retinas - as well as milky
coloured rings, or "arcus", in the iris of both eyes. These are classic signs of
FH and very high cholesterol levels.

   Statins and other cumbersome and painful treatments, including plasma
exchange, were either ineffective or of short-term use only. While Adam finds
the apheresis stressful, he is optimistic. "My hope is that the weekly sessions
will keep me going until a cure can be found - gene therapy, perhaps."

   So far, gene therapy experiments have proved unsuccessful, says Dr
Wierzbicki. "But in the pipeline are new versions of statins, as well as newer
types of cholesterol reducing drugs that are more tolerable and effective. We
might find that combinations of drugs and apheresis will prove the answer for
some. Those going weekly or every other week might be able to have fewer
apheresis sessions."

   Meanwhile, the FHA urges those who suspect they might be at risk to take
action. Julie Foxton, senior nurse adviser, says: "Anyone, male or female, with
a family history of heart disease - especially premature heart disease before
the age of 45, should have their heart risks, including cholesterol, assessed."

   The British Hyperlipidaemia Association recommends that children in families
with a dominant pattern of inherited high cholesterol should be checked before
10.

   Adam believes the serendipitous check as a child may have saved his life. The
treatment is tough, but he rewards himself occasionally with an "illicit" piece
of chocolate or a few chips just before his Monday night visits. "At least I am
able to have some alcohol without worrying," he says, with a smile.

   Family Heart Association 01628 628638 www.familyheart.org

   British Hyperlipidaemia Association. www.bhaonline.org.uk

   Boots over-the-counter cholesterol tests: pounds 8.50

   Who should take statins to lower cholesterol?

   THE Heart Protection Study, the details of which were published last week,
showed that deaths among those at high risk and on statins were reduced by 18
per cent. Overall, strokes and heart attacks were down by 25 per cent. The
benefits were visible irrespective of age, sex and existing cholesterol levels.

   Professor Sir Charles George, medical director of the British Heart
Foundation, says: "There is a clear message from the results. If you are at high
risk, because you have had a heart attack or stroke, suffer angina or have
diabetes or other arterial disease, statins are advisable, whatever your
cholesterol level."

   At present, they might be recommended only if the cholesterol level is above
five units per litre. Dr Graham Jackson, consultant cardiologist at St Thomas'
Hospital, London, says: "For years, I have told patients with heart disease or
diabetes or those who have had a bypass that whatever their cholesterol level,
it is too high for them."

   The study is also seen as carrying a strong message for people who have not
had heart disease or a stroke, but who want to try to avoid a first attack.

   Professor Patrick Vallance, who helped to pioneer the cardiovascular heart
risk assessment clinic at University College and Middlesex Hospitals, London,
says: "The issue is knowing your absolute risk. Say it is one in 1,000 over 10
years, then taking statins to reduce such a low risk by 18 per cent would
probably not seem worthwhile. If, however, you had a 30 per cent risk over the
next 10 years - perhaps because of such risks as raised blood pressure, high
cholesterol level, excess weight, or a family history of a stroke, that might
seem a very good reason to take statins - and to do everything possible to
reduce your risks."

   Dr Jackson adds: "Age might influence your decision. If you are 40, with a
15-30 per cent risk of heart attack by 50, that is a high risk in anybody's
book."

   Nowadays, GPs increasingly focus on patients with heart risks. However, a
Good Housekeeping survey has found that as many as 72 per cent of 1,300 women
questioned said their GPs had never discussed cholesterol and its risks or
suggested a heart health check.
[PS]Features: [ES]

   Health & Wellbeing:

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2002


                             701 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            June 29, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 09

LENGTH: 428 words

HEADLINE: Palestinian girl saved by Israeli doctor brings hope of Aids cure

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
A GIRL has been saved from a life of confinement in a sterile environment after
a pioneering cure for immune deficiency using gene therapy.

   Salsabil, a Palestinian, was born into a family where immune system
weaknesses had already killed one child and afflicted another. She lacked an
enzyme called adenosine draminase (ADA), one essential for a working immune
system.

   Her case has given hope of finding a cure for Aids using gene therapy. "The
trial is already approved by the Italian authorities and is expected to start in
mid-July," said Prof Claudio Bordignon, of the San Raffaele Institute for Gene
Therapy, in Milan.

   It also has the potential to cure other genetic diseases, such as Gaucher's,
and diseases caused by enzyme deficiency.

   The success in treating Salsabil, whose surname has not been released, was
down to a method of transferring the ADA gene into cells, and a way to "make
space" in her bone marrow for these cells, report Prof Borignon and Prof Shimon
Slavin of the Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Centre, Jerusalem, in the
journal Science. Her bone marrow was transformed from what doctors called an
"immune cell desert" into a breeding ground for infection-fighting cells.

   At seven months old, Salsabil, named after the river of paradise in the
Koran, received a mild treatment to suppress her abnormal cells, providing a
biological advantage for the genetically corrected cells. Then, the team used a
GM virus to introduce the missing ADA gene into stem cells, parent cells that
had been purified from her bone marrow, before reintroducing them.

   Within a few weeks the number of white blood cells - lymphocytes - in the
blood had risen dramatically and the toxic products in the blood, which would
normally kill the lymphocytes, had declined.

   Within a month, Salsabil was out of isolation and went home.

   Nearly two years after the gene therapy, her blood cells are functioning
normally. Even after exposure to chicken pox, Salsabil's antibodies developed
spontaneously and she did not develop any sign of the disease.

   Since this first-of-a-kind procedure was performed, two other children have
received a similar protocol from the Italian team, apparently with a similar
success rate.

   Earlier American attempts to treat ADA deficiency were "scientifically
successful" but did not have a notable impact on the patient's condition because
only a minute fraction of the genetically abnormal bone marrow was repaired,
Prof Slavin said.

   The US patients still required expensive treatment with an ADA replacement to
survive.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2002


                             710 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            May 22, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: How Britain can lead the world

BYLINE: By David King

BODY:
Tony Blair will tomorrow make a major speech on science, engineering and
technology and its role for the future of Britain. He will set out why we are
now so well positioned to benefit from exciting new developments and he will
demonstrate that public concerns about some aspects of current developments in
biotechnology should be met through a robust, reasoned, engaging dialogue.

   Openness, transparency and honesty are the key words. We need to establish
trust and confidence in the way that science can demonstrate new opportunities,
and offer solutions or methods to mitigate risks. We need to explain, for
example, that we have one of the world's strongest, most regulated regimes for
animal experimentation and that alternatives, where feasible, are actively
sought.

   Why is Britain so well placed to exploit the advantages that science can
offer? In one sense, nothing is new. For hundreds of years we have punched above
our weight in developing new frontiers. It is a key national asset. In the list
of Nobel prize winners in the past century we are second only to America: 44
Nobel Laureates in the past 50 years alone. Measured in any way, we emerge near
the top of the premier league and we give the best value for money invested in
research worldwide.

   But in a second league table we are also doing well - and this is new.
Spin-out companies are becoming increasingly commonplace around our
universities. Some of these high-tech firms - perhaps developing the disruptive
technologies that will challenge new global markets - could make significant
contributions to the economy. And our current rate of forming spin-out companies
is, at least on one measure, well ahead of America - one such company here is
generated for every pounds 8 million invested in research, compared with one for
pounds 50 million in America.

   The biotech industry is a big player in these developments: the market in
Europe alone is expected to be worth about pounds 70 billion by 2005, and we
lead in Europe. But we have strengths in many other new market developments,
such as nanotechnology and new plastic products and plastic light-emitting
screens (invented in Cambridge).

   Yet, we face two potential problems which could limit developments. First,
the level of trust in scientists, and in what science can offer, is not as high
as it should be. In particular, the public dislike having risks imposed on them
when they see no benefits. It is, therefore, easy to contrast the reaction to GM
foods, where they see no benefit, and to gene therapy (the "boy in the bubble"),
where benefits are obvious.

   The second limitation is the potential loss of skills needed to sustain
high-tech developments. The recent Roberts Report on our skills base highlights
the problem. As in most other G7 countries, registrations for degrees in the
physical sciences, engineering and mathematics are falling, with alarming
potential consequences. Ironically, career opportunities in these areas are good
and new companies emerging from our high-tech revolution are providing exciting
- and often very well rewarded - positions for graduates.

   So, Mr Blair will not only be speaking out for science and scientists
tomorrow, he will also be speaking out for the future health and prosperity of
the country.

   Professor King is the Government's chief scientific adviser
[PS]Features: [ES]

   Science:

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002


                             711 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             May 16, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 862 words

HEADLINE: Academia split over boycott of Israel More research bodies are
severing links because of the Middle East conflict. Peter Foster reports

BYLINE: By PETER FOSTER

BODY:
THE request for co-operation between respected research scientists was routine;
it had been granted several times before. Could the Norwegian Veterinary School
send a DNA clone sample to be used in gene therapy research at the Goldyne Savad
Institute in Jerusalem?

   It was the reply that caused shock and surprise. Unfortunately, due to
Israeli military action on the West Bank and the closure of several Palestinian
universities, the department head in Oslo felt unable to co-operate.

   After spelling out these reasons, Prof Ingrid Harbitz politely concluded in
an e-mail on April 22: "On this background I find it impossible for me to
deliver any material to an Israelitic [sic] University."

   It is a story indicative of an increasingly heated and divisive debate within
international academia about the most appropriate way to respond to the crisis
in the Middle East.

   A growing number of academics are calling for a boycott of research and
cultural links with Israel.

   The idea was first floated in an open letter to the Guardian last month,
signed by 120 university academics from 13 countries. The letter called for a
suspension of European Union funding for Israeli institutions until the Sharon
government agreed to "abide by UN resolutions and open serious peace
negotiations with the Palestinians".

   The petition, organised by Hilary and Steven Rose, professors at the City and
the Open universities, proved the kindling for a debate that quickly took on the
proportions of a wildfire.

   The opposing camps set out their stalls on the internet, asking academics to
sign rival petitions for and against a boycott. Passions on the issue have run
high, with supporters of the boycott reporting that they have been bombarded
with hate mail.

   Prof Steven Rose, a Jew who lost family members in the Holocaust, said his
uninvited correspondents had called him a "self-hating Jew", anti-Semite and
even "sonderkommando", the name given to concentration camp inmates who
collaborated with the Nazis.

   Proponents of a boycott, such as Colin Blakemore, the Oxford professor who
has twice been targeted by animal rights terrorists because of his research,
argue that it has become a "moral" necessity.

   "It is a symbolic gesture that says that if Israel wants to remain a part of
the discourse of the civilised world then it must behave in accordance with the
norms of that world," he said.

   "I signed reluctantly, always fearful that it might counter-productive. But
recent events make me more and more confident that I was right."

   Prof Hilary Rose compares an academic boycott of Israel with the sporting
boycott of South Africa during the apartheid era. "Sporting isolation hurt South
Africa and ultimately contributed to the end of that regime. I don't think
Israel values sport but it does value science and high culture.

   "The reason we did this was because we had become so exhausted by the horror
of what is going on in Israel and occupied territories. It is a means of civil
society expressing its disquiet."

   Opponents of the boycott are equally certain of their ground. A rival
petition, signed by an equally distinguished and international list of
academics, sets out a six-point rebuttal of the boycott. Organised by Dr Aaron
Benavot at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, it argues that a boycott would be
a blunt instrument, "castigating" the very people - Israeli academics - who have
worked to foster co-operation with the Palestinian people through joint
scientific projects.

   It would also run contrary to the "concept of freedom" on which academic
dialogue is based and "unfairly" identifies Israel as the only party responsible
for the current escalation of violence.

   Some notable figures have been persuaded by such arguments, which were
supported by an editorial this month in the periodical Nature.

   Richard Dawkins, the Oxford professor for the public understanding of
science, said he now "regretted" signing the Guardian letter.

   "While I remain opposed to Israel's actions, I have had second thoughts about
whether a boycott is the right way to censure Israel. The fear is that it would
be counter-productive," he said.

   Philippe Busquin, the EU commissioner for research, has also rejected a
boycott, arguing that a "continuous dialogue", not sanctions, is the best way to
bring the parties to the negotiating table.

   However, there is growing evidence that many academics are pressing ahead at
an unofficial level.

   Prof Steven Rose told The Daily Telegraph: "Individuals may choose to act in
a way that makes their moral repugnance at Israel's behaviour clear."

   In Jerusalem, Dr Benavot said there was increasing anecdotal evidence of an
unofficial boycott.

   "Two colleagues in the geography department, for example, received a letter
from the section editor of an international journal who said he was unable to
consider their papers because he was a signatory to the boycott.

   "Another Israeli scholar in London was told by his co-ordinator that he could
'foresee problems' with colleagues in Europe if he joined an EU-funded research
team.

   "It is a real problem - how widespread I cannot say - but I expect it will
continue."

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2002


                             713 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 30, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 32

LENGTH: 193 words

HEADLINE: ML Labs' Cobra to join Aim

BYLINE: By Philip Aldrick

BODY:
BIOTECHNOLOGY company ML Laboratories yesterday revealed plans to float its gene
trials business on the Alternative Investment Market as part of a strategy to
focus on cancer therapies.

   Cobra Therapeutics, which makes DNA for gene therapy trials, will be reversed
into the shell company Buyers Guide, a dotcom flop which has about pounds 4m in
cash. ML will hold on to 60pc of the new company, which is expected to be valued
at pounds 15m- pounds 20m.

   After Cobra is backed into Buyers Guide there will be a placing of shares,
underwritten by broker Collins Stewart, to raise working capital and pay back
about pounds 5m of inter-company debt.

   Buyers Guide, which was listed at the height of the dotcom frenzy at
32p-a-share, has signed an agreement to sell its business back to the founding
directors, brother and sister team John and Lucy Bowden, for a nominal amount -
"virtually nothing", a spokesman said.

   The founders made "a couple of hundred thousand" from the sale of the
business, which was set up to offer transparent tendering for local authority
contracts. Its shares are now 3 1/4 p.

   ML shares fell 4 1/2 to 43p.
[PS]City: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2002


                             716 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 06, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 246 words

HEADLINE: Enable GM to deliver its full benefits

BODY:
SIR - GM technology has received two major boosts, with the completion of the
rice genome sequencing project and the withdrawal of scientific approval by
Nature for a published paper, widely quoted by opponents of GM, that purported
to show environmental contamination by GM crops.

   This follows the heart-warming story earlier this week of a young child
successfully treated by gene therapy for a life-threatening disease. It is an
appropriate time for the public to reassess their attitudes towards
biotechnology and genetic modification.

   GM foods have been grown and eaten for almost 10 years in North America, yet
there has not been one case of illness or disease associated with these foods.
Can the same be said for other accepted food production technologies, including
the organic movement? It is time for people to assess the facts available, and
not let the fear of "what might happen" dominate their thoughts.

   Aside from GM foods, there are enormous medical benefits to be gained from GM
technology. Indeed, many people are already protected from diabetes and
hepatitis by medicines produced in GM organisms. In turn, GM plants have the
potential to deliver a new generation of medicines and vaccines to the First and
Third Worlds. But the scientific community must be supported in its research and
development efforts.

   Dr Julian Ma

   Consultant in Immunology and Oral Immunotherapy

   Guy's Hospital

   London SE1
[PS]Features: [ES]

   Letter to the Editor:

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2002


                             719 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 04, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 58 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy cures baby

BODY:
A boy who lived as a "bubble baby", kept alive on a ventilator after repeated
infections made him too weak to lift his head, has been cured as a result of the
first successful gene therapy in Britain.

   Rhys Evans, who almost died last year of pneumonia, is now described by his
parents as mischievous and bouncy.
[PS]News: [ES]

   In Brief:

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                             720 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            April 04, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 03

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy saves life of boy in a bubble In the first operation of
its kind in Britain, doctors have turned a desperately sick child with no
immunity to illness into a bouncy toddler, reports Roger Highfield

BYLINE: By ROGER HIGHFIELD

BODY:
A MOTHER and father described yesterday how their baby, who had no immunity
against infection, has been brought back from the brink of death and turned into
a normal boisterous toddler.

   Rhys Evans was born in September 2000 and soon lived as a "bubble baby", kept
alive on a ventilator, after repeated infections made him so skeletal that he
was too weak to lift his head. He almost died last year of pneumonia.

   But today, after the first successful gene therapy in Britain, Rhys's parents
describe him as mischievous and bouncy.

   "He's catching up so quickly. His progress seems nothing short of a miracle,"
said his mother, Marie, a 31-year-old teacher at a primary school near Cardiff.

   "We can now do all the things that other families do - go on holiday, play in
the park, get together with family - things which would have been impossible
before. Rhys is potentially a normal toddler now."

   His father, Mark, 40, who says Rhys is his "golden boy," gave up his work for
a gas company, which meant spending long periods away from home, so he could
help treat his son. It also helped him to cope with his own anxiety and
depression.

   Rhys showed no signs of ill-health when he was born in South Wales after a
normal delivery. But he began to weaken and fell ill with repeated chest
infections at around four months when his mother stopped breast-feeding and Rhys
began to lose his maternal immunity.

   The disease is often called bubble baby syndrome, a reference to how
sufferers must be imprisoned in sterile conditions to survive. But Severe
Combined Immuno-deficiency Disorder, SCID, is so rare, affecting one in 50,000
to 100,000 live births, that it took a while for doctors to realise the
underlying cause of his pneumonia. Antibiotics prescribed for his recurring
chest infections did not seem to work. "We were devastated," said Mrs Evans.
Doctors were baffled by Rhys's sudden illness and he was described as a
"mystery". On his third visit to the hospital, she said, "he fell off the edge
of the cliff".

   His condition deteriorated rapidly. "He went downhill so quickly he
practically died. They ventilated him and he stopped breathing overnight," said
Mr Evans, who was working away from home as the drama unfolded.

   The disease made Rhys lose weight so fast that by the time he was four and a
half months old he was 2lb lighter than he had been at birth.

   "He was skin and bone. He was too weak to hold his head up," said Mr Evans.
"He could do nothing."

   The boy spent more than three weeks in an intensive care unit. "We were
waiting and hoping," said Mr Evans. Then came the diagnosis of SCID.

   "It was an incredible shock when we first found out that Rhys had a genetic
condition, which if left untreated, could have killed him before his first
birthday," Mrs Evans said.

   He recovered sufficiently to be moved to Great Ormond Street Hospital on May
10, 2001, where he once again spent two weeks in isolation, unable to leave and
with strict controls on visitors. SCID is usually treated by bone marrow
transplantation, a procedure which was pioneered in bubble babies three decades
ago and has a high success rate when a brother or sister is a donor, and a
modest success rate when a mother or father are donors.

   But only a third of children have a really suitable donor and it is for the
remainder, such as Rhys who has no brother or sister, that gene therapy offers
hope. After a tense wait of two months, when "life was a rollercoaster ride," an
American donor was eventually found, said Mrs Evans. The next day Mr and Mrs
Evans were told that Rhys was the first child in the UK who could potentially
benefit from the gene therapy work at Great Ormond Street.

   They decided to go ahead. Treatment began in July, when Rhys was 10 months
old. Mrs Evans said yesterday that the treatment was surprisingly quick -
consisting of one hour under general anaesthetic and, a week later, a
transfusion of genetically-modified bone marrow cells containing the corrected
gene.

   Rhys returned home on Oct 10. By last Christmas, he showed huge signs of
improvement.

   In an home video, recorded on Dec 19, the family sent Christmas greetings to
Dr Adrian Thrasher and nursing staff. Rhys managed a few faltering steps towards
the camera, accompanied by cheers from his parents.

   In February, Rhys's blood was almost normal and he no longer needed hour-long
injections of immunoglobulin, which plays a role in the immune system. Although
he remained on antibiotics he was allowed to start mixing with other children
for the first time and playing outdoors.

   At the end of February, he went on his first family holiday, two weeks in
Tenerife, the first taken by his parents since he was born. "Now we live at home
like a normal family," said Mrs Evans.

   "He has been to the park today to play in the sand and getting into
mischief."

   "It is still early days," added Mr Evans who is anxious about the results of
forthcoming blood tests on Rhys. "But we are proud to have our son back.

   "We are really happy. We have been enjoying ourselves now. We can't do enough
quickly enough with him."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                             733 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            March 23, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 1273 words

HEADLINE: Lifeguards of the gene pool As Britain reels from another doping
scandal, genetic misuse in sport is back on the agenda

BYLINE: By SEBASTIAN COE

BODY:
NEW YORK was in the grip of rain this week. So much so that I wimped out and
decided to run on the treadmill and not around Central Park. As is now
commonplace, the treadmill had a built-in television so that those who cannot
stand a moment without electronic intrusion can take their minds off the pain
or, in some cases, boredom.

   Good Morning America has been the American flagship breakfast television show
for more than 20 years, though here it was the adverts, rather than the
programme's content, that caught my eye. If adverts point to the chemistry of a
country, the trace elements left after an hour were disturbing, to say the
least. When they were not promoting drugs and medicines to deal with
21st-century ailments, most related to sedentary lifestyles. They were pushing
fast food and, in turn, anti-cholesterol preparations to counter the fast food.
One advert for an over-the-counter painkiller felt duty-bound to devote
three-quarters of its message to warning about the side-effects and then proudly
announce it was an official supplier to the United States Olympic Committee. Am
I missing something here?

   Perhaps that was a question more personally put this week to Alain Baxter,
who inevitably lost his medal because he, and even the team doctor, did not read
the small print on the back of an over-the-counter nasal decongestant.

   At the end of my hamster-like performance on the treadmill, I returned to the
New York Athletic Club where the Laureus World Sports Academy were closing three
days of deliberations to decide the nominations for their annual awards. The
academy can boast 42 of the world's leading names in sport, but they don't all
meet at the same time; even so, Boris Becker, Daley Thompson, Sir Bobby Charlton
and Hugo Porta, among others, was not a bad turnout. All are winners in the
genetic lottery of life.

   Unbeknown to them, only 50 yards further down 59th Street a group of men and
women held a press conference to talk about their own deliberations. This was an
interesting group of people. Men like Dr Theodore Friedman, professor of
paediatrics at San Diego University's Centre for Molecular Genetics, and Dr
Joseph Glorioso, the director of the Pittsburgh Human Gene Therapy Centre. They
had been assembled by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) and the chairman, Dick
Pound QC from Canada, an International Olympic Committee vice-president and
one-time Olympic swimmer, and Dr Arne Ljungqvist, from Sweden, chairman of
WADA's health and medical research committee, a vice-president of the
International Association of Athletics Federations and one of the world's
leading cancer experts.

   Both Pound and Ljungqvist were of clear purpose. Much has been written and
said about the potential to enhance human performance by the use of genetic
manipulation. Some of it is frighteningly near the mark, some of it misleadingly
off target. Pound and Ljungqvist are keen to find the genetically modified beef.
"Our task is to make sure that in sport we understand the difference between
genetic treatment and genetic enhancement and to distinguish between genuine
advancement of the human condition and practices that may lead to the perversion
of that condition," Pound said.

   As Ljungqvist put it: "These were the most fascinating and intellectually
challenging discussions I've been involved in over the 40 years since I first
qualified."

   But in the wrong hands a demonic landscape? "Without doubt, and that is why
we're going to move fast to enshrine into the anti-doping code of WADA the
science and language of genetic manipulation."

   Pound also has gene transfer technology in his sights. "The same kind of
people who cheat in sport today will probably try to find ways to misuse
genetics tomorrow," he said.  'Dial a basketball team', designer babies and 300
Daley Thompsons? "Designer babies are a red herring," Friedman said. "We're
focusing on single gene replacement rather than multiple gene research. But
while single gene replacement has huge potential for disease elimination, it
also has huge potential for performance-enhancement in sport and it's the right
time for the sport and science communities to be working out how to prevent a
possible misuse of these methods."

   So if it's not designer babies, what are we talking about? In essence, it is
the introduction of a gene into an athlete that could promote everything from
muscle bulk, height enhancement, oxygen-carrying capacity, the blockage of pain,
even manipulated combinations of fast and slow "twitch" muscle fibres that
separate the sprinters from the marathon runners.

   "I never want to be in the game of catch-up again," Ljungqvist said. "I've
spent too much of my career doing that with designer drugs. One of my criticisms
of the International Olympic Committee was that I told Juan Antonio Samaranch
[the previous president] in 1987 I needed a research fund to combat the EPO
problem. None of them grasped the enormity of the problem and, when they did, it
was too late. We lost 15 years in the battle. We know that research is being
carried out all over the world and we've got five years in order to do something
about it but, in sport, five years is tomorrow."

   Paradoxically, one of the upsides of the research being done in Gene Transfer
Technology (GTT) in over 500 medical and scientific centres around the world is
its use in detecting rogue levels of substances, like EPO, in humans.

   But he also wants the World Anti-Doping Code - planned for implementation by
the 2004 Olympics in Athens - to include language prohibiting the use of GTT in
performance enhancement, wants research funding set aside by governments for the
eradication of genetic misuse and to treat breaches of genetic research and its
misuse in sport in the same way that breaches in the regulatory framework
elsewhere would be treated in civil and criminal law.

   "I'm sure we can regulate and detect," Ljungqvist said. "But we must also
keep at bay the lawyers who have caused so many problems in our fight against
drug abuse."

   Here Ljungqvist speaks with feeling. In 1991 he was at the wrong end of a $27
million ( pounds 19 million) court judgment in the United States when Butch
Reynolds, the 400 metres world record holder, was banned after a positive test.
It was overturned on appeal but still colours Ljungqvist's view of sport and the
legal profession.

   It was one of the "low points" in the former Swedish high-jump champion's
career. Chairing the committee who banned Sweden's Linda Hogland, who finished
fourth in the 100m in the Moscow Games in 1980, was the lowest. "I was
intellectually capable of making the judgment, I just wasn't prepared for it.
It's always so difficult when it's your own country. Nobody likes to face the
problem so close to home. It's understandable that people will be upset about
Alain Baxter's problem in the UK but wouldn't question it if it was in China."

   By the time Ben Johnson failed his dope test in Seoul in 1988, Ljungqvist had
"become hardened to it", even though "it was very sad for my sport". He said: "I
just want to return to a time when our first response to unexpected and
exceptional performance is excitement and applause, not suspicion - what made me
love sport in the first place."

   It may be that Ljungqvist and Pound's pow-wow with the world of science this
week has made the Swede's dream a little more achievable and done more to shore
up the foundations of sport than anyone has yet realised.

   As Pound said at the end of the summit: "Sport should be designed by people
for people; not people being designed by sport."
[PS]Sport: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2002


                             735 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           March 06, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1357 words

HEADLINE: Where you can live for ever Controversial plans for an embryo cell
bank, reported first in this newspaper, could give Britain a significant
advantage, reports Roger Highfield

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
A unique bank will open next year to offer a select group of individuals the
prospect of immortality. So long as the bank exists, their genetic identity will
live on. Stranger still, all these individuals are human.

   This is one of the peculiar implications of Britain's plans to set up the
world's first bank of cells from early human embryos. Medical researchers
believe the bank will put us ahead of the rest of world in the race to develop
new treatments for a broad spectrum of diseases. Equally, the plans are greeted
with revulsion by "pro-life" activists.

   There are thought to be around 37 lines of human embryo cells worldwide, of
which a dozen are already of sufficient quality to freeze in the bank. The cells
in question are "stem cells" which have the potential to turn into any of the
200 different types in the body, offering huge potential to repair a patient who
has been damaged by illness, accident or disease.

   Once warmed and grown at blood temperature in nutrients and growth factors,
the stem cells will be initially used to find ways to reliably turn embryonic
stem cells into the desired cell type.

   After the science is perfected, a single cell could fill freezers with
ready-to-use immune, brain, heart or liver cells. Turning them into tissues and
organs remains a distant prospect but these cells alone could revolutionise the
treatment of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease, stroke, spinal cord injuries,
heart disease and diabetes.

   The immortal nature of the cells does, however, raise "distinct problems"
according to a House of Lords select committee on stem cells, which gave a
qualified green light to embryo research last week.

   The Lords recommend that parents should be asked for permission that places
no limits on how embryos are used, given that no one can imagine the potential
applications. One team that has started to wrestle with these issues is based at
the University of Sheffield. For the past three years, under the previous -
tighter - regulations, professors Peter Andrews and Harry Moore have been taking
surplus embryos from test-tube baby treatments and studying their stem cells to
shed light on developmental problems. The alternative is to destroy these
embryos.

   For their experiments, they need permission from the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Authority (HFEA) and, most important, the fully-informed consent of
the parents, who must waive any rights to treatments that may arise from the
cells. "The reaction of parents is amazingly positive," said Prof Moore. "The
women who come forward for IVF treatment know that their treatment depended on
research in the past. And a lot of those patients have family members or friends
who could benefit from stem cells."

   The embryo in question is smaller than the full stop at the end of this
sentence. Just visible to the naked eye, it is a far cry from the popular image
of an embryo, depicted as a comma, and certainly nothing like a foetus, which
only begins to develop after the embryo implants in a woman's uterus.

   Given the technical name of a blastocyst, it consists of 100 cells: around 75
are destined to become the placenta, and the remainder, the "inner cell mass",
the embryo. The latter are the embryonic stem cells: they can turn into any cell
from the body but, once removed from their sister cells, lack the crucial cues
and signals to develop into a foetus.

   The cells of the inner cell mass, which exist for about seven days, have
another curious property. They can expand without limit. One reason is that the
telomeres - caps at the end of chromosomes - do not "wear down" as in ordinary
cells, though Prof Andrews thinks there is more to cellular immortality than
that.

   Andrews and Moore were the first to start studying them in Britain, using a
human embryonic stem cell line derived in 1998, after six years of trying, by a
team at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.

   Now, with other groups, they are using surplus IVF embryos to create their
own stem cell lines, the culmination of a "long haul" that has involved legal,
ethical and consent issues.

   The immortal nature of the cells is one key scientific issue. How do they
differ from cancer cells, which can also multiply indefinitely? If a stem cell
runs wild, a special type of cancer called a teratocarcinoma can result, a
mixture of gut, muscle, nerves, teeth, tufts of hair - even grotesque facsimiles
of fingers and legs.

   Prof Andrews, among others, studies teratocarcinomas to find out more about
the origins of birth defects and the wider issue of how a stem cell can stay
immortal without being cancerous, perhaps because they still respond to signals
from surrounding cells.

   When the Sheffield team begins to derive lines of human stem cells, it will
donate them to the national bank planned by the Medical Research Council (MRC),
where ampoules of cells will be stored in liquid nitrogen. The location of the
bank has yet to be decided: proposals have to be submitted by March 25.

   The bank is "critical to breaking the current monopoly of private companies
and to enable the best scientists in Europe to work on understanding these
cells", said Prof Austin Smith, director of the Centre for Genome Research,
University of Edinburgh, who is attempting to establish embryonic stem cell
lines along with another team in London.

   The MRC also plans to obtain embryonic cells from other groups and companies,
including one line imported from a "reverse brain drainer" - Prof Roger
Pedersen, who left the University of California, San Francisco, to work at
Cambridge University.

   The repository should ensure that every embryo counts. "We have got to do it
properly. We cannot afford to get this wrong," said Sir George Radda, MRC chief
executive.

   Because UK regulations are the most liberal, Sir George expects the bank to
mark a reverse brain drain of young talent to Britain, notably from America,
where the research is under a cloud. "We would certainly have a world lead,"
said Sir George.

   Most of the embryos used to derive cells from the bank will be surplus IVF
embryos, with those fertilised for the purpose, or created by cloning, requiring
special justification. The bank will also include stem cells isolated from
adults, which also show potential. "It is important that there is research on
both," said Sir George, aware of how the pro-life lobby has argued that adult
cells are an ethical alternative to embryonic stem cells.

   Use of the cells will be heavily regulated: in addition to the HFEA, there is
the Medicines Control Agency, the Medical Devices Agency and owners of any
patents on processes used to create the cell line.

   In parallel to efforts to reliably grow stem cells into brain, nerve, muscle
or cells of any desired type there will be a shift towards growing embryonic
cells under conditions of "good manufacturing practice" so that they can be used
to treat patients, either by matching the tissue with that of a recipient or by
using drugs to prevent rejection.

   However, mindful of how gene therapy was oversold, Sir George stressed: "This
is not a short-term programme. The timescale is of the order of 10 years for the
first sorts of applications."

   While medical charities warmly welcome the move by the MRC, there is unease
about the limits of embryo research. In recognition of these concerns, the
council is to launch a public consultation exercise.

   Because of the opposition of pro-life groups, security will be among the many
considerations taken into account when selecting the host laboratory. Some, such
as Dr Robin Lovell-Badge, of the National Institute for Medical Research,
London, are concerned by the reaction of those frustrated at losing the
political and legal arguments over stem cell research.

   These fears were echoed by Prof Jack Scarisbrick, national chairman of the
anti abortion group Life, who finds an embryonic stem cell bank a "horrible,
horrible" prospect. "The more the courts turn us down, the more we are faced
with stitch-ups like the select committee in the House of Lords, the more
difficult it is to control the hot-heads."
[PS]Features: [ES]

   Science:

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2002


                             744 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           February 12, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 873 words

HEADLINE: Thanks for the miracles Great Ormond Street Hospital is celebrating
its 150th anniversary. Christine Doyle reports

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE DOYLE

BODY:
Great Ormond Street Hospital is recognised around the world for its treatment of
severely sick children. As soon as it became known last week that conjoined
twins Natasha and Courtney share a heart, the assumption was that any operation
to separate them would take place in the hospital's cardiac centre.

   The headlines that mark such stories - tales of "miracle surgery" and mercy
dashes - are synonymous in the public mind with this inspirational hospital, and
have been since it opened 150 years ago with only 10 beds. This week, the
hospital celebrates its long history of excellence in the care of children.

   Yet, operations that might cause challenging ethical debate are rare at the
hospital. The fact is that, every day, Great Ormond Street performs "miracles".
Last week, I watched a six-year-old girl have brain surgery, which could
transform her life in a similar manner to that of Jemma Mitchell (below). The
girl was suffering 30 epileptic seizures a day and her parents feared she would
have learning disabilities and never be independent.

   The meticulous care and brilliance of the neurosurgeon William Harkness and
his team are impressive. So, too, is the array of up-to-the-minute technology.
Mr Harkness explained how the probe he placed on the child's frontal cortex
showed him exactly where he is in relation to the pre-operative tests and scans.
This "image guidance system" is just one of the hugely expensive resources of
which the NHS is so short.

   As Mr Harkness pointed out, the cost of theatre equipment can run into
hundreds of thousands of pounds. Much of it is funded by hospital appeals - as
is the newest equipment in many NHS hospitals. "We are obliged to talk in terms
of cost effectiveness," he says. "It can be difficult to assess in neurosurgery.
But if we can transform a child, whose only prospect is long-term care, into an
independent person, then Mr Blair may have another taxpayer in the future."

   Mr Harkness wants Great Ormond Street to be the first hospital in Britain to
install an image guidance system that incorporates a live MRI (Magnetic
Resonance Imaging) scan of the brain during operations. "It is the next logical
step in neurosurgery, which is being pioneered in other European centres."

   When neurosurgery started in the 1880s, localising damaged tissue was
difficult and depended on the patients' physical symptoms. CT (Computerized
Tomography) scans were a Seventies breakthrough, while the quantum leap was the
development of MRI scans.

   Even so, Mr Harkness says: "This still means you are operating on images
obtained yesterday. In today's case, that does not matter very much, but there
are cases where you would like the live image during the operation.

   "The aim always is to limit the chance of harming normal tissue and to give
the patient the best possible physical and cognitive function." To share such a
system with their neighbour, the National Hospital for Neurology, would cost
pounds 2.5 million. Mr Harkness is already fund-raising: he started with a
sponsored trek in Nepal last year.

   Great Ormond Street is home to the largest unit for treating children's brain
tumours and performs 100 operations every year. Other research achievements
include improving the success rate for bone marrow transplants and further
understanding of cancer and genetic disorders. A gene therapy laboratory was
opened last year, and ground-breaking clinical trials on the treatment of
children with severe immunological disorders have begun.

   In addition to this expensive research, the hospital also provides
accommodation for up to 1,000 parents a week, a hospital school for long-term
patients and a play centre for sick children and their siblings, as well as a
joint fund-raising venture with the National Centre for Young People with
Epilepsy for a chair in paediatric epilepsy. None of these commitments comes
cheap.

   The most celebrated Great Ormond Street donor was J M Barrie, author of Peter
Pan, who gave the hospital the rights to the play. Nigel Clark, chairman of the
Gosh Fund, aims to raise at least pounds 12- pounds 14 million a year. As
chairman of Collett, Dickenson and Pearce, the advertising agency, he worked as
a consultant on the Wishing Well Appeal, launched in 1987, which raised pounds
43 million for a new hospital building to replace the Victorian original. Now,
more of the outdated structure is due for replacement.

   Other charities complained that their funds fell during the 12-month,
high-profile Wishing Well Appeal. The hospital learnt from that and now focuses
on charity events and sophisticated direct marketing to build up a donor
database. One priority, says Mr Clark, is to identify previous patients. "They
often feel deeply grateful and are prepared to help. We would very much like to
hear from more of them."

   Every year, he looks ahead and hopes the public will be "wonderfully
generous". And each year, they are.

   For medical information, events or to make a donation, log on to
www.gosh.nhs.uk.

   Donations line: 020 7916 5678

   National Centre for Young People with Epilepsy: 01342 832243

   National Society for Epilepsy helpline: 01494 601400.  www.epilepsynse.org.uk

[PS]Features: [ES]

   Health & Wellbeing:

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                             745 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           February 08, 2002, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: Babies need a sound start Some 850 children a year in Britain are born
profoundly deaf, but only half are diagnosed, says Christine Doyle

BYLINE: By Christine Doyle

BODY:
Two-day-old Joe Jacquest sleeps peacefully as tiny earphones are placed over his
head. Then sounds, about as loud as a passing car, are played to him. Each time,
he responds with a "startle" - a little jump, wave of the hands or twist of the
head.

   Connected to the earphones is what looks like a briefcase with a cradle in
the base, which is programmed to respond to the baby's breathing, head movement
and body activity.

   As all babies move at least once every two minutes, the machine waits until
the baby has been still for five seconds before sending in another sound. Within
minutes, the monitor on the machine signals "pass" or "refer" - the newborn's
first exam result. An infant receiving two "refer" results will be tested
further in a children's diagnostic unit.

   Baby Joe passes with flying colours and his parents, Julie and Geoff, who are
watching their firstborn's hearing test at the Newborn Hearing Centre at
Hillingdon Hospital, Middlesex, relax.

   "It is so reassuring to know he is fine," says Julie. Thanks to pioneering
research by Dr Sam Tucker, who set up a newborn hearing foundation, every baby
born at Hillingdon during the past 10 years has had a hearing test within 48
hours of birth.

   The rest of the nation's babies are not so fortunate. At present, 850 babies
each year - one to two in every thousand - are born profoundly deaf or with
moderate to severe hearing impairment. Only half have their conditions detected
at birth because, until recently, government policy had been to screen only
babies at risk of deafness, perhaps because of a family history.

   Other parents have to wait for a distraction test from a health visitor - who
makes noises behind the baby's back - which takes place at about seven months.
However, this test is largely discredited as an efficient way of picking up
hearing loss.

   Dr Tucker says: "Research shows that the late identification of permanent
hearing loss in children has devastating long-term effects on speech, language
development, behaviour and school performance. For the best results,
rehabilitation should start within six months."

   A major difficulty is that children with severe impairment can appear normal
for a long time. Even when desperate parents suspect something is seriously
wrong, they can be fobbed off with the catchall diagnosis that their child is
merely "a slow developer".

   Most new parents are unaware that government policy on early hearing tests
has changed. Following a government review by a national screening expert
committee and a report by the Medical Research Council, newborn hearing
screening is now recommended for all babies within 48 hours of birth. But, as
with so many government health policies, babies will have to wait.

   Twenty English health authorities will start to pilot a universal newborn
hearing test over the next year. The programme should have started last year.
Full implementation in more than 200 health authorities is unlikely before 2005.

   By contrast, the Welsh Assembly announced a week ago that, by the end of this
year, all newborns in Wales will be tested. The Royal National Institute for the
Deaf, which represents 8.7 million deaf and hard-of-hearing Britons, is
demanding equal implementation in England.

   James Strachan, the RNID's chief executive, asks: "Why is the Government
dragging its heels? Testing is neither complex nor expensive - it costs only
pounds 16."

   In America, where early tests have been introduced, the average diagnosis
time has been reduced to 15 months. Here, the average is 20 months, and two to
three years is not unusual. Dr Tucker says: "Babies can be fitted with tiny
hearing aids before three months and we can advise parents on the best
programmes to encourage speech recognition and communication. Even speaking
loudly is helpful."

   Signing and lip-reading and early specialist support are other possibilities.
For those with severe to profound deafness, cochlea implants might be a
solution: the earlier the diagnosis, the sooner this becomes an option. One day,
gene therapy may reduce abnormalities that lead to hearing loss in some people.
Almost 85 per cent of childhood hearing problems are present at birth.

   There are several types of tests. The 20 pilot centres will use the
"otoacoustic emission test". The baby sits on the mother's knee and the
instrument sends a sound into the baby's ear. An audiologist measures the level
of returned sound from the ear, including the cochlea, which transmits sounds to
the brain. The test is widely held to be reliable.

   The cradle test, developed by Dr Tucker, is called the Portable Auditory
Response Cradle and is fully automated. "It is," he says, "the only technique
that establishes that the whole of the auditory pathway up to the cortex of the
brain is working correctly. It is 98 per cent accurate and does not lead to the
false positive results possible with other techniques. It is also cheaper. We
have tested the equipment on 35,000 babies."

   Dr Tucker wants to produce enough of the foundation's updated equipment to
establish his results independently in baby units in other hospitals. "For that,
we need funding and the backing of a major sound equipment company."

   A number of celebrities are lending their services to his cause. Andre Previn
will play the piano accompanied by David Finck on bass in "An Afternoon of Jazz"
at the Wigmore Hall in London on Sunday, February 17, which will help raise
funds. Other supporters include Dame Judi Dench and Dame Norma Major.

   Tickets for 'An Afternoon of Jazz' are available from the Box Office, Wigmore
Hall; 020 7935 2141. Price: pounds 6 plus pounds 1 admin charge,
www.wigmore-hall.org.uk

   Royal National Institute for the Deaf: Helpline 0808 808 0123, textphone 0808
808 9000
[PS]Features: [ES]

   Health & Wellbeing:

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2002


                             756 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           January 12, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 03

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: A shot in the arm - but not for the faint-hearted Healthcare funds can
pep up your portfolio. Just look out for the sting, says Alison Steed

BYLINE: By ALISON STEED

BODY:
HEALTHCARE and biotechnology funds are being tipped for growth over the next
five years, but if you invest, be prepared for a rocky ride.

   The sector can achieve stellar performance on the back of good news relating
to gene therapy or a new way of delivering drugs. But equally impressive falls
are often seen on bad news, so it is not an investment for the faint-hearted.

   For an example, see the chart (far right), showing Therapeutics' share price
over the past year, including the week when it announced the cloning of five
"knock-out" piglets. But by buying into a pooled fund such as a unit or
investment trust rather than individual stocks, you can shelter yourself from
the misfortunes of a single company, making it a less risky way to invest in a
high-risk sector.

   The long-term growth prospects for the healthcare and biotechnology funds
look good, said Sue Whitbread of independent financial adviser Chartwell
Investment Management. They are unlikely to make up a large part of your
portfolio, but if you are prepared to take a risk, they may just provide the
shot in the arm your portfolio needs. So, should you follow these piggies to
market, or should your money stay at home?

   Ms Whitbread said: "Whatever the state of the economy, people are going to
need healthcare products, and spending in this area is not going to fall. We
would argue that a healthcare or biotechnology fund should be a part of your
portfolio, because the prognosis is good.

   "The 1990s were a very strong development period. They had the funding and
backing to develop products at great expense. A significant number of companies
have gone through that, and drugs are coming onto the market in the next five
years to realise money for those companies. These are really the first ones in a
long time that are being transferred into profit. All of the hard work has been
done."

   Over the past year, biotech and healthcare funds have both fallen in value,
along with most other types of equity investment. But that could now provide you
with an opportunity to buy. If the funds are cheaper than they were, you get
more for your money. Against that, on some traditional means of valuation, these
shares still look very expensive. Hopes for future growth account for much of
the price today.

   According to figures from fund statisticians Standard & Poor's, the average
fall in UK healthcare unit trusts was just under 20pc last year, but that rises
to between 35pc and 40pc for biotechnology and healthcare investment trusts.

   Mark Bolland of independent financial adviser Chamberlain de Broe said: "3i
Bioscience Investment Trust is trading at an 11pc discount at the moment, and
Finsbury Life Sciences is trading at an 80pc discount. That is a hefty
discount."

   The top-performing UK unit trust over three and five years in the healthcare
unit trust sector is City Financial's Bio-tech Fund, but it did not have much
competition. It is not cheap in terms of management charges, with a 6pc initial
and 2pc annual charge, according to Standard & Poor's. But over five years,
pounds 1,000 invested would have increased to pounds 3,230.

   One of the best-known funds is Framlington Health, which has a 5.5pc initial
charge and 1.5pc annual management charge. It did not fare quite so well, but
you would still have turned pounds 1,000 into pounds 2,586 over the same period.

   However, the Framlington Health & Income Investment Trust has done very
badly, coming last in its sector. If you had put in pounds 1,000 a year ago, you
would have lost more than three-quarters of your investment.

   Ben Lloyd of Framlington said that this trust, which is a split capital
trust, was not marketed to retail investors. But he added: "It is highly geared
and that will affect its performance in a rising, and unfortunately a falling
market.

   "It has the objective of investing in smaller biotechnology companies, and
their share price is more volatile in the short term. But in the long term we
believe it is a positive sector."

   Framlington also launched a Biotech Fund in November last year, but it has
not been around long enough for its performance to be included in these tables.

   Deane Donigan, a member of the healthcare team at Framlington Investment
Management, said: "We went to the management here on September 20 and said it
would be a great time to launch a fund, as these stocks were low after September
11. But it takes time to go through regulation and to get approval, and the
stocks had had a run from those lows. But at the end of the year, it was still
above the offer price."

   For healthcare investment trusts, the best performer by a long way is the
Finsbury Worldwide Pharma Trust. If you had invested pounds 1,000 here five
years ago, it would be worth pounds 3,754 now. It has also lost the least over
one year.

   A spokesman for Close Finsbury Asset Management, which manages the Finsbury
trusts, said: "Whereas a society can stop buying new cars when times are hard,
they cannot choose to suspend medical treatments. All sectors are dependent on
the economic cycle, but history shows that the pharmaceutical sector is less
dependent than most."

   Ms Whitbread tipped Finsbury Life Sciences Investment Trust and the 3i
Bioscience Trust for growth. She said: "In the biotech arena, liquidity is an
issue if they see a run on the fund. A closed end fund, such as an investment
trust, would have structural advantages. But this is definitely not for cautious
investors."

   Mr Bolland recommended the Framlington Health Fund, and also the Finsbury
Life Sciences Trust and the 3i Biosciences Trust.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2002


                             757 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            January 04, 2002, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 04

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: Tests begin for cancer virus

BYLINE: By David Derbyshire Science Correspondent

BODY:
BRITISH doctors are about to start clinical trials of a new genetically modified
virus that destroys cancers without the unpleasant side-effects of chemotherapy
and radiotherapy.

   The GM virus, which has been developed by cancer charities, hunts down a
mutation found in 95 per cent of tumour cells but ignores healthy cells.

   Once inside, it hijacks the cell's machinery to replicate itself, destroys
the cell and then spreads around the body.

   The virus, which has so far only been tested on animals, is thought to be far
more effective than previous attempts at gene therapy.

   Doctors behind the pioneering treatment believe it could one day be used
against a range of tumours, including cancers of the breast, pancreas and lung.

   Initial safety trials are being carried out at Hammersmith Hospital, London,
on 30 seriously ill patients for whom other treatments have failed.

   The tests are still at an early stage and doctors are keen not to raise
expectations. During the initial "phase one" trials, they will attempt to
establish a safe dose of the virus.

   Dr David Kirn, head of the viral and genetic therapy programme at the
Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Hammersmith Hospital, describes the new approach
in the journal Lancet Oncology.

   GM viruses have been used to target solid tumours in animal models for some
years. But applying the same approach to people has proved difficult. The
process of engineering a virus to specifically target cancer cells usually
weakens the virus's ability to kill tumours.

   But for some unknown reason, the new virus replicates far more effectively
than earlier versions.

   The first tests on people with liver cancer should begin around Easter. The
sudden arrival of a virus can also prime the immune system and trigger a
response against cancerous cells, making the treatment even more effective.

   "Viruses have evolved over millions of years to express many of the qualities
required for the ideal anti-cancer weapon," said Dr Kirn.

   "Viruses will target and infect very specific types of cell, multiply, cause
cell death and release more viral particles to go on and infect other target
cells."
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2002


                             762 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           December 04, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: Cheats 'could inject genes to beat system'

BYLINE: By Sam Wallace in Lausanne

BODY:
THE Olympic official leading the worldwide battle against drugs in sport has
warned that the potential for gene-altering drugs will make the methods of
today's steroid cheats look "ancient" in comparison.

   Dick Pound, who was re-elected yesterday as chairman of the World Anti-Doping
Agency (WADA), said that sport would have to follow the project to map human
genes stride by stride if it was to prevent athletes from using the scientific
advances to illegally improve performances.

   When the American-based research, known as the Human Genome Project, is
completed athletes will have the potential to re-programme their bodies. Human
performance will be taken to unimaginable levels, the record books will be torn
up.

   Pound told Telegraph Sport: "A hundred years from today we will look back on
Ben Johnson with his Stanozolol [anabolic steroid] and say that's like an
ancient rock painting in a cave compared to what we face now. It's a serious
issue and we have to be proactive rather than reactive.

   "What may happen in time is that there will be athletes developed from birth.
Like a mail-order catalogue, where parents can say: 'How about a basketball
player?'

   "If you identify certain kinds of characteristics and muscle groups and
manipulate what would ordinarily be a biological result then you have genetic
manipulation which is really a social problem as well."

   Pound, an influential International Olympic Committee member, authorised a
pounds 3.5 million WADA grant in June for research into the detection of steroid
and erythropoietin (EPO) abuse. Gene manipulation could render new testing
procedures obsolete.

   EPO, the synthetic hormone that increases the number of oxygen-carrying red
blood cells, was detected in Russia's 5,000 metres runner Olga Yegorova at a
Golden League meeting in Paris this year. She was allowed to run in the World
Athletics Championships in Edmonton after being cleared on a procedural
technicality.

   Now, instead of injecting EPO directly, athletes could potentially inject the
gene responsible for the hormone directly into the muscle where it would enhance
the body's natural production of EPO.

   Prof Arne Ljungqvist, an IOC member and an expert on doping in sport, said:
"The gene responsible for EPO has already been identified by the Human Genome
Project and could, theoretically, be injected into the muscle. An EPO gene will
promote the body's production of EPO and some people will say this can never be
detected. There may be other parameters we could identify that tell us whether a
person has injected this gene."

   Although gene-manipulation has the potential to revolutionise treatment for
diseases like cancer, Ljungqvist, a WADA board member, warned that detection of
these processes would have to be a priority for sport.

   "You can identify two broad areas where gene manipulation could be used:
endurance capacity and body strength," he said. "In theory we can manipulate the
muscular strength and the muscular volume and change from fast to slow-twitch
fibres.

   "All I say is that medical science is equally interested in finding ways of
monitoring people who need gene therapy, so therefore there is a great drive to
find ways of following the effect of it. For decades there has been no
international research fund available for finding ways to detect doping. Now we
have it at WADA. We are ready, we have the knowledge. We will not be taken by
surprise."
[PS]Sport: [ES]

   Cricket:

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2001


                             763 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           December 04, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 06

LENGTH: 1552 words

HEADLINE: Gene genie casts ominous shadow SPECIAL REPORT Latest advances in
science carry health warning for sport's upcoming generation

BYLINE: By Peter Hamlyn

BODY:
A WEEK ago the world learnt that a human cell had been cloned for the first time
in an American laboratory.

   The news threw up all sorts of fantastic possibilities but, a few days later
in London, a conference entitled Genes in Sport was told of a dark side to this
science. Before we produce the next generation's atom bomb we must digest the
ethical and political questions this science poses . . .

   The conference focused on the genes beneficial to sporting achievement, and
the evidence for a genetic component to sporting achievement is immediately
apparent when you consider that families of winners have been seen in several
sports. Football produced Jack and Bobby Charlton and tennis has the Williams
sisters. Twins abound: cricket with the Waughs, football has the de Boers,
tennis produced the Gulliksons.

   In addition, particular ethnic groups seem to have an edge in some events.
The presence of Mike Boit, the former 800 metres world record holder, served to
emphasise the remarkable achievements of a small nation with so little resource
that is today's Kenya. Forty per cent of the current top 50 marathon runners are
Kenyan. They all stem from two tribes who have an ancestry of running. Their
achievements have highlighted the complex interaction between genes and the
environment; the question of how much of sporting achievement is nature and how
much nurture. Clearly both factors are essential. In 1990, of those marathon
runners capable of putting up times of less than 2hr 20min, 65 were from the US,
54 from the UK and 12 from Kenya. By the year 2000, the figures were 16, seven
and 222 respectively. Here is proof beyond doubt that effort produces results
and the lack of it the reverse.

   The Danes have put a lot of effort into finding out how it is the Kenyans do
so well. Prof Bengt Saltin told of their work comparing Danish runners with
Kenyan village boys. They discovered there were only slight differences in their
ability to take oxygen - in other words, to burn energy.

   There were modest differences in the time they could maintain energy
consumption close to its maximum before their metabolic efficiency dropped off.
Both differences were in favour of the Kenyans. However, the biggest difference
was in the efficiency with which this energy was converted into forward motion.

   Why? Well, the answer appears simple. The Kenyans have beautiful legs - a
fact Mike Boit seemed only too pleased with when I pointed it out to him. The
Danes proved what, to you or I, might seem obvious. Compared with the Danish
runners they had longer, thinner legs, particularly below the knees. The fact
that the Danish champion had relatively heavy calf muscles meant he had to shift
the extra weight back and forwards with each stride. Hence, he came third in the
race with the village boys.

   Sir Roger Bannister was also at the conference. Watching Boit and he in
conversation I was struck by how alike were their physiques - both are tall and
thin with long legs. The similarity does not end there. Bannister is an eminent
neurologist, contributing much to sport's medicine, and it was he who first
emphasised the importance of lower-limb anatomy to running ability.

   A group from St Thomas' Hospital, London, headed by Dr Alex MacGregor, have
established a registry of more than 1,500 pairs of twins, to study the 'nurture
versus nature' question. Looking at tennis, swimming and running, they have
found that both identical and non-identical twins tend to play the same sports -
which is evidence of nurture. But it is only in the identical pairs that they
have commonly seen both twins achieve high levels of success - suggesting the
influence of nature.

   Horse racing remains an area of interest for geneticists as all of the
500,000 thoroughbreds in the world today originated from just four horses
selected in Britain during the mid-18th century.

   An almost complete record of their breeding exists and, from those four
stallions, stems a third of the genetic make-up of the existing horses.
Selection for breeding was strict from the very start, so that 80 per cent of
the genes now derive from the first 21 ancestors.

   Like the human genome project, the mapping of horse genes is now 90 per cent
complete. The conference was informed that the comparative price of stallion
brothers would soon be determined by the closeness of their genes to those of a
successful ancestor lineage. The Victorian habit of making ashtrays from the
hooves of successful rides will achieve a lucrative, contemporary pertinence.
The DNA of that ancestral winner can now be unravelled from these toe clippings.

   These studies showed that 35 per cent of a horse's performance was
genetically determined - that leaves 65 per cent to nurture, so no threat to the
trainers as yet.

   So, what of the dark side to genetic research? The announcement from
Massachusetts of the human cloning was made not by a scientist but by the chief
executive of the company who own the cells. Chilling, especially when you think
that Philip Morris, the cigarette manufacturers, own much of the rights to the
genes likely to be of use in treating lung cancer. The Icelandic people have
worked out their entire family tree and genome only to see part of the
information sold on to a drug company whose turnover dwarfs that of many
nations.

   As a medic, I am entirely used to drug companies protecting their investment
with patents. It means drugs can be developed faster than by other means.
However, I can't help feeling we might all be better to wait a little longer
when it comes to genetic development.

   If international law were to outlaw the patenting of genetic knowledge, the
rate of investment and, therefore, advance would slow dramatically.

   I am not necessarily recommending this, but simply saying to those who
suggest that the progress of knowledge is unstoppable that it is, in this
instance, materially retardable.

   The upside of genetic research in sport is that we may be able to identify
those among us who are likely to develop complications. The Appo E gene is
important in determining those whose brains are particularly susceptible to
developing the punch-drunk syndrome of dementia when exposed to the repeated
head injuries intrinsic to boxing, jump jockeying and rugby. Other genes will
help identify those whose joints will suffer disabling arthritis in middle age.

   The downside is that, with genetic therapy for disease, will come genetic
doping in sport. Dr Peter Scherling, a senior researcher from Copenhagen, warned
the conference of the awesome potential for "gene cheats".

   When it comes to muscle, there are two ways of getting an advantageous gene
in: it can be directly injected into the targeted muscle or delivered to all
muscles by a tame virus - nature's gene therapist.

   The injections are a technical possibility. You could take a tall, skinny
marathon runner and inject the leg muscles so as to put him or her on an
invincible pair of sprinting legs. The only way to tell if it had been done
would be to cut out pieces of the muscle and compare it with the uninjected
muscles.

   What athlete would rightly consent to that kind of dope test? Peeing in a pot
is one thing, but having your legs cut open is another.

   Injections will always be a painful transient and potentially hazardous
method of getting ahead genetically. It will always require expensive laboratory
and medical support. The viral method is of more concern.

   Genes to increase the number of red blood cells and thus the carriage of
oxygen to the muscles have successfully been implanted with viruses into
monkeys. Two different genes have been infected into mice, each of which
produces major muscle growth. Yet another gets rid of surplus body fat.

   As yet, the technology is extremely risky. The genes cannot be turned off and
usually prove lethal. But this remains the single obstacle to gene therapy
becoming widespread - Scherling predicted that the solution was probably only 10
years away.

   The risks will put off all but the most determined for some time, though the
morals which lead coaches to give gymnasts in their early teens anabolic
steroids might rise to the task. When it comes to horse racing, the hazards are
not likely to prove such an impediment.

   The prospect of turning an old farmyard nag's offspring into a Derby winner
worth millions will be in the minds of many. The technology means that a yard
could achieve in a few years what has taken the thoroughbred business 2 1/2
centuries.

   Gene doping by the viral mechanism will, by any practical means, be
untraceable. The genetic sequences are all entirely natural and could be hidden
anywhere in the DNA sequence. The virus will infect every cell and a piece of
dandruff could be used for the analysis. However, for each contestant the task
would be as big as the Human Genome Project itself. It would be akin to looking
for a needle disguised as hay in a haystack the size of the universe.

   Finally, Prof Steven Jones, one of the world's most accomplished geneticists,
quoted to the conference the US Attorney General, who recently admitted: "I wish
genetics had never been invented".

   Sport may yet come to join him in this view.

   Peter Hamlyn is a consultant neurosurgeon at St Bartholomew's and the Royal
London Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2001


                             768 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           October 30, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: Stars in their eyes Doctor's Diary

BYLINE: By James Le Fanu

BODY:
If it were possible to build a spaceship that could travel at the speed of
light, one could, theoretically, travel to a neighbouring galaxy and back within
a single lifetime - but by the time you return to Earth, 30,000 years would have
elapsed. This would seem to rule out long distance space travel: were it not
that, as Stephen Hawking says, manoeuvring your spaceship into a "wormhole"
would permit you to traverse the universe and be back in time for dinner - or
indeed return before you set out.

   Hawking's observations are in line with a more generalised crisis of
credibility that now seems to affect both science and medicine. Last week, for
example, a standard crop of improbable research findings emerged. We learnt that
"one day", thanks to biotechnology, electricity will grow on trees and that "one
day" it will be possible to eliminate genetic defects by creating genetically
modified "designer sperm". Few people are sufficiently well versed in
biotechnology or gene therapy to know whether such promises are remotely
realistic.

   It is, however, a reliable rule of thumb, as with all the other current
scientific fads, such as cloning and stem cell therapy, that they are not. So,
for those wondering whether to bequeath their millions to medical research or
medical missions, the missions should win every time.

   This week, we have a brace of curious mysteries. Mr C A from London, aged 75,
is not surprised to find that he is two inches shorter than when he was a lad -
which naturally he assumed must be due to compression of the disc spaces between
vertebrae of the spinal column. But when he was recently measured by his tailor
for shortening a pair of trousers, he found he had lost one inch on his inside
leg. "How does this come about?" he asks.

   Next, Mr B W from Kent says that, when writing, he can form all the letters
normally except "W" - which induces a "form of self-paralysis". This is
obviously a problem when signing his name.

   Finally, a couple of "matters arising": first, ears again. Jeremy Davis from
the Medway Hospital in Kent reports that, astonishingly, 10 per cent of his
patients have problems arising from trying to rid their ears of wax with cotton
buds, soap and water, power showers, paper clips and even knitting needles.
Regrettably, removing the ear wax causes itching, which calls for a further
round of scraping the insides of the ear canal. "This compounds the problem by
removing the fledgling ear wax which is trying to return to the outer part of
the ear canal." So the solution is: don't.

   There have also been a couple of suggestions for Mr W L of Manchester, much
affected by excess hair growth in the ear. He should either consult a
traditional barber or purchase a device called Easitrim, which is specially
designed to remove excess ear (and nostril) hair.

   Meanwhile, Mr T R from Bucks has a suggestion for those finding it difficult
to detect high frequency sounds. "My remedy is to make cardboard ear pieces -
each about the size and shape of a cupped hand, supported on a piece of garden
wire. The difference is amazing," he writes. "They are so lightweight I once
answered the doorbell wearing them to find a bemused postman wondering why I had
pieces of cardboard with Haddock Fillets printed on them over my ears. But I
heard every word he said."

   Next, Jane Griffiths from London has provided a further selection of
lachrymose films and music to add to The Railway Children for those who have
difficulty in obtaining emotional release from crying. They include (music)
Runaway Train by Soul Asylum, Lifted by the Lighthouse Family, Love Changes
Everything by Michael Ball and the Israeli national anthem and (films) Georgy
Girl, Goodbye Mr Chips and The Old Maid.

   Meanwhile, does any reader have advice for Mrs B G from Essex who has the
reverse problem? "Whenever I hear of anything the least bit sad, tears spring to
my eyes," she writes.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2001


                             769 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           October 23, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 13

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: 'Designer sperm' can weed out gene defects

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
SCIENTISTS announce today that they can create designer sperm, making it easier
to conduct genetic modification that can affect future generations.

   Gene therapy has been conducted for the past decade on various cells in the
body and, in the past year or two, shown the first signs of success in treating
children who lack an immune system.

   Today's announcement concerns germline gene therapy that could cross the
generation barrier.

   This refers to efforts to genetically reprogramme patients' "germline" cells
- their eggs or sperm - so that they can prune unwanted genes from their family
trees, offering a permanent solution to genetic diseases.

   Altering the genetic makeup of unborn descendants has been of concern because
genes interact in complicated ways. The eradication of certain so-called disease
genes could have unexpected side effects and errors could wreak havoc in a
person's genetic legacy.

   The work reported today by Prof Ralph Brinster and colleagues in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences involved a "reporter gene" - one
designed to be easily detected - being introduced into sperm-producing cells in
mice and passed to future generations.

   Yesterday, Prof Brinster said: "These cells are thought by some to provide
the best approach should human germline gene therapy be undertaken in the
future."

   In the short term, Prof Brinster's work will aid efforts to understand sperm
production, and it could make it easier to modify animals genetically, whether
to provide more accurate models of human diseases, produce drugs in their milk,
or improve disease resistance.

   It might also make it easier to carry out germline gene therapy. The sperm
producing "spermatogonial" stem cells are the only cells in the body that both
undergo self-renewal after birth and contribute genes to subsequent generations.

   Attempts to alter this unique type of stem cell genetically by infecting them
with retroviruses "fitted" with foreign genes have met with little success so
far.

   Now, however, Prof Brinster's team has used a retrovirus to insert foreign
genes into 20 per cent of mouse spermatogonial stem cells in laboratory
experiments, representing a 10-fold improvement over previous attempts.

   The inserted foreign genes appear in approximately 4.5 per cent of the
offspring of mice transplanted with the altered stem cells. Furthermore, the
mice transmit their foreign genes for at least three generations.

   These results indicate that there is no intrinsic barrier to the genetic
engineering of spermatogonial stem cells using retroviruses.

   To ensure that a devastating genetic disease is not passed on, human sperm
cell precursors could be removed from the testes of a man, "fixed" by the
addition of a curative gene, then re-implanted into the man, where they would
generate repaired sperm. Children conceived with such sperm would not have their
father's disease, nor would their offspring.

   To ensure that genetic modification has been successful, Prof Brinster could
call on an earlier development when he transplanted the sperm-producing cells
from rats into the testes of mice, showing that male infertility could one day
be treated by growing human sperm in mice.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2001


                             774 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                         September 26, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 14

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy trials bring hope for 'bubble babies'

BYLINE: By David Derbyshire Science Correspondent

BODY:
A PIONEERING form of gene therapy that reprogrammes the faulty immune systems of
dangerously sick children is offering new hope to the parents of "babies in
bubbles".

   In the first trial of its kind in Britain, 10 babies with two types of
potentially fatal immune system disease will be given the treatment.

   If the therapy is a success, it could soon be extended to other genetic
diseases and could one day bring an end to bone marrow transplants.

   Five of the babies in the tests suffer from a form of SCID, or severe
combined immunodeficiency.

   These "babies in bubbles" produce no lymphocytes and have no defence against
infection. They must be isolated from the outside world and are likely to die
within a year without a bone marrow transplant.

   The version of the disease being treated, called X-SCID, affects only boys
and is caused by a single faulty gene.

   The other babies suffer from X linked Chronic Granulomatous Disorder, or X-
CGD, another single gene disease caused by faulty bone marrow. These children
produce faulty phagocytes, cells that normally engulf bacteria or fungal
infections.

   The treatment is taking place at a new pounds 150,000 laboratory at Great
Ormond Street Hospital in London, partly funded by the Jeans for Genes charity
and the Institute for Child Health.

   Last year a team in Paris successfully modified the genes of babies with
SCID, restoring the immune system of four out of five children.

   The London team will use a similar technique - removing bone marrow from the
babies and isolating the stem cells that make all the other cells in blood.

   Using a genetically modified retrovirus, similar to the cold virus, they will
insert healthy versions of the genes into the bone marrow stem cells. The
repaired bone marrow will then be transfused back into the babies.

   Once inside the body, the healthy bone marrow stem cells will soon outnumber
the faulty versions.

   Dr Adrian Thrasher, who is leading the trial, said he was "very happy" with
the first results. He believes that a single treatment will provide a life long
cure.

   Around one in 50,000 babies are born with SCID, while one in 200,000 has CGD.
The success rate of bone marrow transplants can be as low as 60 per cent,
compared to 80 per cent when gene therapy was tested in Paris.

   Patient groups saw the trials as a milestone. Fiona Sandford, from the
Primary Immunodeficiency Association, said: "It gives tremendous hope to these
families."

   Suzanne Drew, whose daughter Aimee died five years ago from a rare form of
SCID, said her condition was undiagnosed until she reached the age of five. But
by then it was too late and a bone marrow transplant failed to restore her
immune system.

   Mrs Drew, of Stockport, Cheshire - a fundraiser for the Primary
Immunodeficiency Association and Jeans for Genes - believes the new treatment
could have saved her daughter's life.

   "This therapy is wonderful," she said. "But almost as important as gene
therapy is diagnosing this condition. Too many children are dying without this
being recognised."
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2001


                             781 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                         September 05, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 09

LENGTH: 289 words

HEADLINE: Heart gene therapy can stop angina pain

BYLINE: By Celia Hall Medical Editor

BODY:
PATIENTS with severe heart disease who were given gene therapy directly into
their heart muscles were able to stop taking drugs for their chest pain,
research has found.

   Heart specialists at the European Society of Cardiology meeting in Stockholm
heard yesterday how the first trial of its kind in Europe had had "dramatic"
results.

   Following the radical treatment, the patients also had fewer attacks of
angina and experienced a much improved quality of life.

   Prof Christer Sylven, professor of cardiology at Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden, is now working to develop an easier method of delivering the
genes to the heart. A multi-centre trial called Euroinject One is being set up
in four countries, including Britain.

   In the trial, patients who were very ill and no longer candidates for bypass
surgery were taking up to 40 tablets a week to combat the pain of angina. At the
end of the 12-month follow-up, they had stopped taking their angina pills
altogether.

   The treatment is based on using a gene therapy designed to stimulate the
formation of new blood vessels.

   By getting the body to make an excess of the protein that stimulates the
growth of new blood vessels, scientists have been able to counter the effects of
angina.

   The early trials involved surgery to expose the heart before a parcel of
genetically engineered material, called a plasmid, could be injected. The
plasmid was coded for vascular endothelial growth factor. This was directed to
areas of heart muscle that were damaged and starved of oxygen.

   "This is the first study with a 12-month follow-up to demonstrate that this
therapy is safe and showed signs of a sustained and dramatic treatment effect,"
Prof Sylven said.
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2001


                             784 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           August 22, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 04

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: 'The fight against drugs is a long, sorry story of false dawns and
dreadful days'

BYLINE: By Mihir Bose

BODY:
SPORTS administrators and scientists will meet in New York next month to discuss
the next dark frontier of drugs in sport: gene therapy. According to Professor
Arne Ljungqvist, a leading medical member of the International Olympic Committee
and the International Association of Athletics Federations, this will be the
first chance for sports to be pro-active rather than always reacting to new
forms of cheating.

   I hope Ljungqvist's confidence is born out, for the fight against drugs is a
long, sorry story of false dawns which turn into absolutely dreadful days. The
last two days in Tallinn, where the World Anti-Doping Agency have been meeting,
has demonstrated this vividly.

   Yesterday WADA spent a good deal of time discussing the latest fiasco over
EPO, a substance particularly useful for boosting the performance of endurance
athletes. This time last year, with weeks to go before the Olympic Games, the
IOC made much of the fact that they had finally approved a test which would
detect the use of EPO.

   However, in Tallinn we learned that the much-vaunted Sydney test did not
amount to much and a year on there is no agreement between the various sports
federations as to how they should test for EPO.

   Prince Alexander de Merode, the chairman of the IOC medical commission,
admitted that the test for Sydney was approved under pressure from the
Australian government, who wanted a bold announcement on drugs before the Games.

   The EPO test consists of two parts: a blood test, which indicates the rise in
red blood cells, then a urine test to actually detect the amount of EPO used.
The simplest solution would be to just have the urine test but the IOC feel that
legally this may not stand up to the challenge by the athletes.

   Yet yesterday two sports administrators, Hein Verbruggen, president of UCI,
the international cycling federation, and Andres Besseberg, president of the
International Biathlon Union, urged their fellow members of WADA to forget the
legal consequences and just carry out the urine tests to detect the cheats.

   Sitting opposite them the grim-looking Mustapha Larfaoui, president of FINA,
the swimming body, rejected this saying he could not test swimmers for EPO
unless he was sure of his ground legally.

   Cycling has been under great pressure since the drugs scandals of the Tour de
France three years ago and Verbruggen may be prepared to take risks - he is
willing to produce scientists who back him and legal experts who comfort him -
but there is another huge problem. There is a total lack of co-ordination
between governments over drug testing.

   After the EPO discussion, the WADA meeting voted on their new permanent
headquarters and after four rounds of voting chose Montreal ahead of

   Lausanne, where the temporary headquarters are at present, by two votes.

   The bidding for the WADA headquarters received nothing like the publicity
that the recent Beijing bid for the 2008 Games did but it was very intense with
the Canadian government and their combative sports minister, Denis

   Coderre, leading a campaign which saw him unite the governments of the
Americas, Asia and Africa against Europe.

   European nations wanted it in Lausanne and the vote in favour of Montreal,
which is going to provide pounds 11 million to the agency, showed the split
between governments and within WADA.

   In the end everyone left the meeting expressing great optimism that a uniform
drugs policy would come about by the time of the Athens Games in 2004. Nobody
who was in Tallinn can share that optimism.
[PS]Sport: [ES]

   Rowing:

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2001


                             785 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           August 02, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 32

LENGTH: 267 words

HEADLINE: The gene genie is out of the bottle

BYLINE: Edited by Rosie Murray-West

BODY:
THE technology slump has not just hit manufacturers of mobile phones,
semiconductors and computers.

   The biotechnology industry, which is developing the next generation of whizzy
pharmaceuticals, has been affected as well.

   Companies such as Oxford Biomedica, which reported six-month figures
yesterday, rose to crazy heights on the back of the human genome project, only
to fall back as investors reassessed the risks.

   Neither the rise nor the tumbles were entirely justified. Oxford Biomedica is
a leader in gene therapy, and managed a successful fundraising in choppy
markets.

   It has some good products, the most advanced being MetXia, which is designed
to enhance a cancer remedy now on the market. It is in Phase I/II clinical
trials.

   Yesterday's six-month figures were in line with expectations. The company
posted an increased loss of pounds 3.6m, compared with pounds 2.6m last year,
for the six months to June 30. Turnover was flat at pounds 0.3m.

   The increased losses were expected. Oxford Biomedica has stepped up
investment, setting up a business in the States.

   The problem with Biomedica is that everything is at such an early stage. Gene
therapy is a technology of the future and the company is not predicted to break
even for several years.

   When gene therapy does make it big, Biomedica will be in a very good
position, but it is going to be a very long time. The shares, up 3 1/2 yesterday
at 33 1/2 p, are well off their year high of 84p. However, this is only for
those with a seriously long-term view. Watch out for a bumpy ride.
[PS]City: [ES]

   Questor Column:

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                             786 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           August 02, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 59 words

HEADLINE: Biomedica hope

BODY:
OXFORD Biomedica, the gene therapy company which posted increased first-half
losses of pounds 3.6m against pounds 2.6m last year on turnover flat at pounds
300,000, hopes to sign more deals with partners in the next half. The company,
which recently raised pounds 35.5m, has pounds 39.9m in cash. The shares rose 3
1/2 to 33 1/2 p.
[PS]City: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                             795 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            June 27, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 593 words

HEADLINE: Cancer trial to give men genetically altered virus

BYLINE: By Celia Hall Medical Editor

BODY:
MEN in Birmingham will be given a genetically modified virus in an attempt to
cure their prostate cancer, scientists said yesterday.

   The new trial, which begins next month, is the first in the world to see if a
genetically engineered virus can turn prostate cancer cells into targets for
anti-cancer drugs. Potentially, it promises treatment for men with early forms
of the disease.

   First they will be injected with a common cold virus which has been
genetically modified to carry a gene called nitroreductase. This will produce a
protein molecule in the prostate cells capable of activating the anti-cancer
drug which will be delivered later.

   But because the men will receive a genetically modified virus, under health
and safety regulations they will become, in effect, genetically modified
organisms.

   For about two days they will be treated in isolation in special rooms and be
seen only by doctors and nurses wearing masks and protective clothing. Dr Nick
James, reader in oncology at Birmingham University said yesterday: "There are a
lot of concerns about GMOs. The steps we are taking are quite draconian. The
research involves a whole raft of regulations that we would normally have to
follow."

   Dr James said his team had sought the approval of the Government's Genetic
Therapy Advisory Committee.

   He said the measures were a precaution, because although the virus is not
activated, regulations still rule that it is a genetically modified organism.

   Unlike conventional chemotherapy, gene therapy can be targeted to a tumour,
avoiding damage to healthy tissues. Scientists have already developed
"pro-drugs" which are usually harmless but are converted into toxic forms in the
presence of a chemical trigger. By genetically engineering cancer cells with the
trigger, they can mark out the tumours for attack.

   The new trial, which will take place in two stages, will see if this approach
works in early prostate cancer. Men with prostate cancer who will have surgery
anyway will be given the virus and then the pro-drug CB1954, originally derived
from mustard, which has been developed by the Cancer Research Campaign.

   Samples of their prostate tissue will be analysed after surgery. These men
will have no benefit from the treatment but their results will help doctors move
to the second stage and also help them to decide how much virus they need to put
into the prostate.

   In the second stage, men with early prostate cancer will go through the same
process with the expectation that the treatment will be effective. Up to 30 men
will be treated in this way.

   The announcement was made at the Third Global Conference for Cancer
Organisations in Brighton this week.

   Dr James said: "We are keen that men with early-stage prostate cancer should
put themselves forward for the trial, which could open up an entirely fresh
approach to treating the disease. We're optimistic that gene therapy will fulfil
its enormous potential by saving the lives of many patients."

   Professor Gordon McVie, director general of the CRC said: "There's no doubt
that gene therapy has the potential to become one of the most exciting
technologies available to cancer specialists.

   "For the first time in the UK this trial will determine whether gene therapy
can be made to work for prostate cancer in the here and now by having real
benefits for today's cancer patients."

   About 21,000 men are diagnosed annually with prostate cancer in Britain and
about half will eventually die from the disease. It is the second commonest
cancer in men after lung cancer.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                             803 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            May 30, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1321 words

HEADLINE: Meet the baby with three parents A treatment for infertility which
combines the DNA of a donor and both parents is raising medical and ethical
fears, reports Roger Highfield

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield

BODY:
The recent revelation that babies had been genetically altered as a side effect
of an infertility treatment should please those who support medical progress and
profoundly trouble those who believe that such progress should happen only after
public consultation.

   The goal of cytoplasmic transfer, also known as ooplasmic transplantation, is
to provide infertile women with a way of having their own baby - in terms of
genetic makeup - and offer an alternative to adoption, or in vitro fertilisation
using an egg donated by another woman.

   The technique involves the injection of a small amount of cytoplasm - the
jelly that surrounds the nucleus of an egg - from a donor egg directly into the
egg of an infertile woman to "rejuvenate" it.

   The new cytoplasm is thought to replace the missing or abnormally functioning
components of the recipient egg, notably the power packs (mitochondria) which
fuel development. The mother's genetic recipe in the nucleus of the egg is
retained. However, because cellular power packs carry their own genetic
sequence, the resulting babies have a mixture of DNA from the two women and the
man who provided sperm to fertilise the rejuvenated egg: technically they have
three parents.

   The study emphasises how, in the rapidly evolving field of reproductive
medicine, the line between promising treatments and ethically questionable
genetic manipulations is becoming blurred.

   Because the mixture of mitochondrial genes is likely to be passed down the
maternal line to future generations, the study marks the first example of
germline genetic modification, technically breaking a genetic taboo. The
germline is no longer sacrosanct.

   Germline therapy is banned in Britain because of the risks of meddling with
genetic material and introducing possible side effects that will be passed on to
subsequent generations. There are also ethical and moral concerns about altering
human DNA to improve a family's genetic stock, raising the spectre of eugenics.

   But the germline gene therapy debate has traditionally focused on what most
scientists and lay people understand as direct genetic manipulation: the
alteration of DNA in the nucleus of cells, the DNA that shapes appearance,
intellect and susceptibility to disease.

   This technique introduced new mitochondria into an egg as part of the overall
process to transfer cytoplasm, which contains many other components. While this
indirect gene transfer may have only subtle effects on cellular metabolism,
since donor and recipient mitochondria do not seem to differ much in significant
genetic regions, technically it alters the DNA of future generations.

   Some 30 children worldwide have been born as a result of the technique. A few
days ago the first evidence of their genetically-mixed mitochondria was reported
by a respected figure in reproductive science, Dr Jacques Cohen of the Institute
for Reproductive Medicine and Science of St Barnabas in New Jersey, where 16
babies have been born after such transplants.

   The St Barnabas team was studying whether donor mitochondria genes were
evident in the cells of the babies' bodies. Genetic fingerprinting, a common
forensic tool, confirmed that two one-year-old children contained additional
mitochondrial DNA not inherited from either parent but from the egg donor. "This
report is the first case of human germline genetic modification resulting in
normal healthy children," concluded Dr Cohen and his team in Human Reproduction.

   This claim, which has caused consternation, was not supposed to be in the
paper, according to team members Dr Carol Brenner and Dr Henry Malter. They
thought that they had deleted it in proof stage because they were worried that
media reports may upset patients. "Unfortunately it got past the galley stage
and we now feel that this statement was ill-chosen," said Dr Brenner. "This was
never an intentional therapeutic aspect of the technique."

   But they confirmed that donor DNA had indeed been taken up so the children
were the product of the genetic code of three people. Whether these are GM
babies, as claimed, is a matter of debate.

   Dr Brenner, who has worked on ooplasmic transplantation for five years,
stressed that intact, normal mitochondria (containing DNA) were added and there
was no modification of the mother or father's nuclear or mitochondrial DNA. "It
is not really modified. It is an addition to the mother's mitochondrial genetic
contribution," she said.

   Nor does the team think the transplant is unnatural. Dr Malter said that
there were spontaneous changes in human mitochondrial DNA that occurred
naturally, so mother and daughter can, on rare occasions, have mitochondrial DNA
that differs. These changes are not harmful and so they argue that the fear that
changes in mitochondrial DNA population could be damaging is "entirely
unfounded".

   Given that the cytoplasm contains all kinds of proteins, enzymes and other
components in addition to the mitochondria, not enough is understood about the
technique to justify it, some argue. Lord Winston of the Hammersmith Hospital
has likened the method to "a transfer of royal jelly" and says insufficient
preparatory work has been done on animals to check for harmful side-effects (the
St Barnabas team disputes this).

   The Washington Post recently reported that the Human Reproduction paper had
given a sanitised account of the success of this technique: the perfect record
of healthy births was attained because they aborted a foetus, one of a pair
developing in the womb, that was found to have a genetic disorder, Turner's
Syndrome, in which an entire chromosome, the X chromosome, is mysteriously
missing.

   Girls with this syndrome are short, do not sexually develop and suffer severe
abnormalities.

   Moreover, another pregnancy resulting from the method ended in miscarriage in
the first trimester and involved a foetus afflicted with the same genetic
disorder. The rate of spontaneous miscarriage in fertility techniques is about
15 per cent and it was not included in the germline paper, said the St Barnabas
team, because such miscarriages are not included in the calculation of
congenital abnormalities. "We now consider that this data probably could have
been included in this publication and we will include a discussion of this data
wherever appropriate in all future publications."

   The team reported a possible link between ooplasmic transplant and unusual
chromosome numbers, called aneuploidy, last year in Human Reproduction. But it
is not a unique problem of this method. Almost three quarters of spontaneous
first trimester miscarriages are associated with chromosomal abnormalities and
Turner's syndrome is the single most common form within this group, with an
incidence of about one quarter.

   The team has studied the possibility that the technique could be associated
with increased risk of Turner's and, since March 1999, has informed patients of
this link. However, with only 16 babies born following the technique, it is too
soon to draw conclusions.

   "We still consider ooplasmic transplantation to be an experimental technique.
Based on the current data, suggesting that there is a relationship between the
technique and an increase in chromosomal abnormalities is premature. This is an
extremely sensitive issue and we will continue to report all pertinent results
in a timely and appropriate fashion. However, we will always put our patients'
needs first."

   But for the child born of ooplasmic transplantation, the work raises
questions of what bloodline and kinship means. Despite criticisms that germline
modification has now taken place through the back door, Dr Brenner said the
important issue is that this experimental technique appears to be successful in
helping these patients and there is no real basis for concern about "potential
negative consequences". The team will continue to cross the germline.
[PS]Features: [ES]

   Science:

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2001


                             808 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             May 08, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1119 words

HEADLINE: A heart-to-heart saves lives The chances of a coronary or stroke can
be predicted - and preventive measures taken. Christine Doyle reports

BYLINE: By Christine Doyle

BODY:
Every three minutes, three people in Britain die from a heart attack, many of
them at the peak of their working lives and with families to care for. Heart
disease is the main killer and a coronary remains the most common form of
premature death. However, the death rate from all forms of cardiovascular
disease - from heart failure and coronaries to strokes - has fallen since the
early Seventies. In the past 10 years, it fell by almost 30 per cent among the
under-75s.

   Part of the reason is the phenomenal progress in treatment. We take more
drugs, especially those to lower blood pressure and cholesterol levels -
prescription of statins has increased 14-fold in 10 years. Having a coronary
artery "bypass" is no longer an unusual operation. At the last count, surgeons
carried out 28,000 in a single year, twice as many as 10 years ago.

   Coronary angioplasty is becoming just as common, with 25,000 operations
performed a year. During this procedure, a "balloon" is threaded through an
artery in the groin, up into the heart and inflated to flatten the fatty plaques
that slow down blood flow and cause the formation of dangerous clots.

   Readers are invited to hear more about the latest medical advances in
repairing the heart and to question the experts at the third "Science Today,
Health Tomorrow" lecture at the Royal Institution in London on May 23. Prof John
Martin from University College London will describe just what happens during a
heart attack. Then Prof Mike Marber of the Raine Institute, St Thomas' Hospital,
will explain how his colleague can be "saved".

   The lecture series is supported by The Daily Telegraph, the Royal College of
Physicians and charities including the British Heart Foundation and British
Cardiac Patients' Association. The sponsor is Novartis, a leading pharmaceutical
company.

   Despite exciting progress, including the possibility of gene therapy to
promote growth of new blood vessels in the heart, Britain's death rate from
heart attacks is still among the highest in the world.

   Readers might be keen to ask the experts what they would do to speed up
access to the latest treatment. Surgeons in Britain carry out fewer bypasses and
angioplasties than in comparable European countries. Meanwhile, waiting lists
are much longer, with some people dying before reaching their turn.

   Furthermore, a recent study of 2,500 patients, funded by the British Heart
Foundation, disclosed that many are not even offered the treatments most likely
to improve their condition. Of 1,353 patients rated appropriate for a bypass,
more than one in four were prescribed medication rather than surgery. Their risk
of dying early was greater than those who had a bypass. Of 908 angina patients
suitable for an angioplasty, one third were given drugs and their angina became
worse.

   Dr Harry Hemingway, who led the research, says: "Doctors are having to make
life and death decisions about treatment without being able to call on external
expert advice. The study recommends that panels of cardiac experts be
established to help doctors decide on the best treatment."

   Although heart disease and heart attacks are common, they are not inevitable.
Reduction in risk from an early age, as well as the latest and best treatment,
is crucial to preventing death and disability. Nowadays, many more people want
to know what they can do to reduce their risk - or if, indeed, they are at high
risk.

   A one-stop cardiovascular risk clinic, such as that developed by Prof Martin
and his colleague Prof Patrick Vallance at University College Hospitals Trust,
could be one solution. Prof Martin says: "We are trying not to focus on any
single risk result, but to consider the overall picture. Risks interact and we
are assessing the cumulative effect during the next 10 years."

   All patients are given a computer printout of their predicted overall risk of
a heart attack or stroke. It is based on data from a large American study of
residents in Framingham near Boston that spanned more than 20 years. The belief
is that advice to stop smoking, eat less animal fat or take a drug to lower
cholesterol or blood pressure carries more force when related to an individually
assessed risk. Most patients are referred by their GPs. Some might have worrying
symptoms, such as mild chest pain or breathlessness. But many of those attending
the clinic, among them Clare Catford, 38, a presenter of BBC London Live's
breakfast show, are anxious that they might be running a higher than normal
risk. She says: "I start work at 4am. The stress of doing a daily show is said
to be like that of having a minor car accident every day." She enjoys a "frank
exchange of views" with a tough interviewee, but adds: "In your late thirties
you cannot rely on natural energy forever. I have been looking generally at life
- diet, exercise, relaxation and stress, anxiety, sleep - and want to maximise
energy levels and reduce health risks.

   "Women today, especially in high-pressure jobs, worry about running the same
risks of heart disease as men. To add to the stress of a new job, I have been
through a divorce and moved house, all within a few years. My grandfather died
in his late forties from a heart attack and there are strokes on my mother's
side. I don't know my cholesterol level or my blood pressure, and feel it is
time I did." Clare is not overweight. She smokes - but not every day - drinks
very little alcohol, has a personal trainer once a week and works out at a gym
twice a week. Recently, she learnt to meditate.

   Our volunteers at the assessment clinic went through a range of tests. These
included: blood cholesterol level, resting and standing blood pressure and an
electrocardiogram to detect abnormalities in the heart's electrical activity.

   They talked to staff nurse Patricia Pilgrim about their personal history of
smoking, exercise, diet and their family history of heart disease and strokes.

   Finally, with their results before them, they had a discussion with Prof
Vallance, who - if necessary - suggested ways they could reduce their risk. If
there are serious symptoms, further investigations might be advised.

   Since the clinic was set up almost four years ago, other hospitals and many
GPs have begun to use similar mathematical predictions. Prof Vallance believes
that this is the right way to proceed.

   One woman in her late fifties attending the clinic had, after a year of
acting on advice, substantially reduced her 10-year risk of a heart attack from
20 per cent to seven per cent, the average for her age.

   "There is no guarantee patients will avoid these conditions, but they can
reduce their risk," says Prof Vallance.
[PS]Features: [ES]

   Health & Wellbeing:

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2001


                             809 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                             May 05, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 01

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: Babies born with two mothers and one father

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
THE first babies carrying DNA from two mothers have been born, to concern from
ethical watchdogs.

   The babies were the result of a controversial method to boost the success
rate of IVF infertility treatment in older women by introducing mitochondria -
the "power packs" of cells - from a younger woman into their eggs.

   However, because cellular power packs carry their own genetic blueprint, the
resulting babies have a mixture of DNA from the two women and the father:
technically they have three parents.

   Because the mixture of genes will be passed down the maternal line to future
generations, it marks the first example of what is called germline gene therapy,
technically breaking a genetic taboo.

   This therapy is outlawed in Britain and many other countries, ostensibly
because of the risks of meddling with genetic material and introducing possible
side-effects that would be passed on to subsequent generations.

   There are also ethical and moral concerns.

   The germline gene therapy debate has focused on what the majority of people
understand as genetic modification, the alteration of DNA in the nucleus of
cells - the DNA that makes us what we are, shaping appearance, intellect and so
on.

   But this new technique, called ooplasmic transplantation, aims to correct
problems within mitochondria and introduce other cellular factors without
changing the genetic blueprint in the nucleus of an egg.

   Although it has a more subtle effect on cellular metabolism, it still alters
the DNA of future generations.

   Some 30 children worldwide have been born using the technique, reports a team
led by Dr Jacques Cohen, from the Institute for Reproductive Medicine and
Science of St Barnabas in New Jersey, a respected figure in reproductive
medicine.

   Genetic fingerprint tests on two one-year-old children confirm that they
contain a small quantity of additional genes not inherited from either parent
but from the egg donor.

   The technique has been criticised by Lord Winston, the infertility pioneer at
Hammersmith Hospital in London.

   He said the work was "disturbing" because ooplasmic transplantation had not
been sufficiently tested on animals to see, for example, whether nuclear and
implanted mitochondrial DNA affect each other.

   Lord Winston doubted that it was a fruitful approach to treating infertility.

   The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, the body that regulates
such work in Britain, was aware of the technique but decided not to allow the
treatment.

   Prof Joe Cummins, of the University of Western Ontario in Canada, said: "Now
is not the time to bring in human germline gene therapy through the back door."

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2001


                             819 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           April 18, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 26

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: All in the genes at Oxford Biomedica

BYLINE: edited by Rosie Murray-West

BODY:
EVERYONE knows that biotechnology companies are risky, and Alan Kingsman, Oxford
Biomedica's chief executive, is making no secret of it.

   His gene therapy company works on introducing into the body genes that attack
diseased cells, including cancer tumours. It has two drugs being tested on
humans, MetXia and TroVax, which are both cancer products.

   Yesterday, the company announced that it has raised pounds 5.49m through an
open offer and share placing, in addition to the pounds 30m raised through a
share placing last year. The company is also moving from the Alternative
Investment Market to the Official List.

   The money Oxford Biomedica has raised through the open offer is shy of the
pounds 10m it was expecting, but given that several biotech groups have been
forced to pull or scale back floats in the past few weeks, the fact that it has
got this away at all is a positive sign.

   It is unlikely that this slug of cash will see Biomedica through to
profitability. The company has ambitious plans in both research and development
and expansion into the United States, and this cash will last it about four
years. It is likely to be profitable in five or six years.

   Biomedica is not a fly-by-night company. It has partnerships with
high-quality drug companies including Astra Zeneca, and close links to the
research department of Oxford University.

   The shares have under-performed London's All Share Pharmaceuticals Index
since March, when Biomedica announced its intention to move to the Official
List.

   Yesterday, they fell 2 1/2 to 54p. The removal of the anxiety surrounding the
fund-raising, and greater coverage by analysts following the move, could push
the shares up further. Risky, but worth a look.
[PS]City: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                             829 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            March 29, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 71

LENGTH: 1067 words

HEADLINE: Taylor turns to Denmark for dual role Movers ans Shakers

BODY:
JOHN Taylor, 53, former chief executive of British Nuclear Fuels and the main
casualty of the management shake-up following the investigation into record
falsification, has joined Borealis, the Danish chemical and plastics company, as
chairman and chief executive.

   CITY Centre Restaurants has appointed Alan Jackson, 57, currently
non-executive chairman of James Bars, the pubs group, as executive chairman. He
succeeds Henry King, non-executive chairman.

   REDSTONE Telecom, sponsors of the Welsh rugby team, have completed top level
changes to reduce costs and focus on broadband services with John Carringon,
non-executive chairman, Glyn Thomas, chief operating officer and Bob Cushing,
strategy and business development director stepping down. Simon Slater-Thomas, a
non-executive director, steps in as temporary chairman and Ian Brown moves up to
become chief operating officer.

   ICL, the Japanese-owned computer services group, has appointed long-serving
John Bennett, currently the company's representative on the board of Camelot,
the lottery operator, as marketing director.

   BACARDI-Martini, the drinks group, claims to have broken new ground with the
appointment of Debbie Kelly, 34, as experiential marketing controller with
responsibility for widening the appeal of the brand to the youth market and
promotion at music festivals.

   RICHARD Eyre, former chief executive of Pearson TV has left RTL, the European
TV group after just 20 months as director of strategy and content. Tony Cohen,
currently Pearson TV chief executive in charge of worldwide production, is
moving to become chief executive of RTL group production business with a
management board seat.

   JOHN Spearman, the first chief executive of Classic FM and an advisory
director with Electra Partners, has been appointed chairman of FrameStore,
Europe's biggest film and TV digital imaging business which was responsible for
"Walking with Dinosaurs" for the BBC.

   YVONNE Rankin, 39, former general manager of the Co-operative Group's
Travelcare business, has been promoted to a new post as chief general manager in
charge of specialist retail brands with responsibility for travel, funeral and
eyecare operations.

   COLLIN Miles, former European retail director for Godiva Chocolatier, has
joined Manhattan Toy Europe to fill the newly created post of managing director.

   TBI and Bechtel Enterprises, the new owners of Luton Airport, have named Paul
Kehoe, former divisional director, European Airports, as Luton's new managing
director.

   RMC group has appointed Bill Alexander, 54, chief executive of Thames Water,
as a non-executive director, succeeding Sir Ian Robinson who has retired.

   PHILLIP Thorpe, director and chief executive of Imro until 1998, is leaving
the Financial Services Authority where he was a managing director, to become
president of the Futures Industry Institute in Washington.

   A NEW management structure at the London Stock Exchange has seen the
appointment of Martin Wheatley, previously director of business development, as
deputy chief executive, Jonathan Howell as finance director, Andrew McStravick
as director of operations and Nick Gammage, currently with the Consumers'
Association, as communications director.

   BRIG Patricia Purves, one of the highest-ranking women in the army where she
is director of educational and training services, has been appointed a member of
the NEBS management board, the specialist management award body.

   JAMES Wilson, a founding partner and managing director of Boston Ventures,
the American private equity business, is joining London Merchant Securities as a
non-executive director.

   ROBOTIC Technology Systems has named Christopher Brown, 47, former chief
executive of specialist engineers David Brown Group, as non-executive chairman,
succeeding Olavi Tupamaki who wants to spend more time on his Finnish business
activities.

   GLOBAL digital printing business Oce has completed changes to its UK board
with the appointment of Jan Dix as chairman, Marcel Nohlmans as finance director
and Teresa McCarthy, director and vice-president of corporate strategy and
planning at Glaxo SmithKline and Tony Withey, former chief executive of Remploy,
as part-time directors.

   DAVID Bloxham, 53, chief executive of Cobra Therapeutics, the gene therapy
business, has joined the board of Profile Therapeutics, the drug delivery
company specialising in "intelligent inhaler" systems.

   WINCANTON, the transport and logistics wing of The Uniq Group, has appointed
Victor Benjamin, former deputy chairman of Tesco and ex-chairman of Beazer
Group, as chairman.

   GRAHAM Maundrell, 49, former human resources director for Europe at United
Distillers and Vintners, is moving to De La Rue, the banknote and security
printer, in a similar role.

   JOHN Kimberley will be succeeded by Ian Yeoman, former finance director at
Ultra Electronics Holdings, when he retires as chairman of Policy Masters Group,
the computer services company changing its name to Sirius.

   FRIENDLY Hotels finance director Ian Rollason has resigned to pursue other
business interests.

   BIOTECHNOLOGY company pSiMedica has appointed Roger Brimblecombe, former
senior Smith Kline & French executive, as chairman.

   CHRIS O'Donnell, chief executive of Smith & Nephew, is joining BOC as a
non-executive director.

   OPTIMAL Communications has appointed Stephen Murphy, formerly managing
director of Racal Trans Communications, as chief executive.

   BRISTOL Business School has appointed Paul Stewart, former senior research
fellow at Cardiff Business School, as professor of sociology of employment.

   DAVID Blockley, a consultant with Craddy Pitchers and a part-time director of
Bristol Water Holdings, is the next president of the Institution of Structural
Engineers.

   INKERMAN, the risk managing and investigative services business, has
appointed Tim Tozer, managing director of Mazda UK, as a non-executive director.

   NICHOLAS Butterworth, a former director of DTZ Debenham Tie Leung in the City
of London where he was responsible for advising the Stock Exchange, has been
appointed chief executive of Jackson-Stops & Staff London, to expand residential
business.

   ROY Brown, president of Unilever's European foods division and Greg Clarke,
chief executive of Ico-Teledesic, and former chief executive of Cable & Wireless
Communications, have been appointed part-time directors of BUPA, the healthcare
group.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2001


                             838 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           February 27, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 07

LENGTH: 173 words

HEADLINE: Gene hope to prevent cancer

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
A SPOONFUL of genes could help to prevent stomach cancer, according to a study
published today.

   The method has produced "stunning results" in experiments on mice,
researchers say.

   The mice were exposed to a carcinogen and all of those who received no gene
treatment developed tumours, while of the group that received a corrective gene
delivered in a virus by mouth only between a third and a half did.

   "We were pretty surprised that it worked so well," said Prof Kay Huebner.

   Prof Carlo Croce of Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, who reports
the work today in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, added: "This
is the first time we can prevent cancer by using gene therapy."

   The technique could have potential use in several human conditions, such as
precancerous lesions in the lung, oesophagus, head, neck, bladder and cervix.

   The researchers say that different techniques will have to be developed to
deliver genes to other areas of the body, such as the lungs, kidneys and liver.
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                             842 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           February 19, 2001, Monday

SECTION: Pg. 09

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Gene trial hope for muscular dystrophy

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
A TRIAL of British gene transplant technology to arrest muscular dystrophy has
started in Paris.

   Boys suffering from the wasting disease are being injected with DNA in the
first test of this approach on humans.

   The "vector" to deliver corrective genetic material was partly developed by
Prof George Dickson of Royal Holloway, University of London. He stressed that,
of the hundreds of gene therapy trials, only a handful have so far been
successful.

   The main form of muscular dystrophy - there are 20 different types - strikes
when there is a "spelling mistake" in a gene responsible for a protein called
dystrophin, which joins the inside of muscle fibres to the outside.

   When defective dystrophin is made, muscles waste away and weakness and
breathing difficulties become life-threatening in early adulthood. But the gene
that describes dystrophin is one of the largest, being some two million
"letters", so transplanting dystrophin into all affected muscle cells, including
those in the heart, is difficult and there is a risk of rejection.

   To overcome this problem, Prof Dickson and Prof Kay Davies of the Medical
Research Council's Functional Genetics Unit, Oxford, made a stripped-down
version of the dystrophin gene and packaged this "mini gene" in a ring of DNA,
called a plasmid, with instructions that can turn the gene on in cells of the
body. This approach is believed to be safer than packaging the gene in a virus.

   In the safety trials led by Prof Michel Fardeau and his team at the Institut
de Myologie, Paris, nine boys with Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy will be
injected with the plasmids to check any immune response produced by the body.

   The boys will be injected one at a time, with preliminary results being
reviewed before any further injections take place.
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2001


                             846 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           February 09, 2001, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: We'll create GM humans by 2020, says researcher

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield, Science Editor, in Lyons

BODY:
MAN will take charge of his own evolution within a few decades, when it will be
possible to produce genetically modified people safely and predictably,
according to the director of the United States National Human Genome Research
Institute.

   Prof Francis Collins said humans are made up of fewer genes than was
previously thought and by 2020 it will be possible to create GM humans with
reasonable safety by "germ line gene therapy".

   Within another decade, this would lead to a "chilling debate" about whether
humans should alter their own biology.

   Prof Collins, one of the senior figures in the global effort to unravel the
secrets of the human genetic code, was addressing senior scientists and
politicians at the World Life Sciences Forum in Lyons.

   He predicted that, within a decade, most common disease genes would be known,
general practitioners would begin to use genetic medicine, and widespread debate
would be triggered by the use of pre-implantation diagnosis - where embryos can
be screened for disease before implantation.

   Prof Collins forecast that by 2020 it would be possible to tailor drugs to
suit an individual's genetic make-up to ensure that they do not cause side-
effects, to design a cancer therapy to combat individual tumours in a patient
and to make big advances in treating mental illness.

   "We are certainly close to understanding hereditary contributions to mental
illness, to schizophrenia, to obsessive compulsive disorder, to autism, in a way
that should lead us at last to a better biological understanding of the vexing
problems and perhaps an opportunity to stop blaming the victims and treat them
as victims of a disease that deserves compassion and better opportunities for
therapy."

   He believes that by 2020 it will be possible to repair genes before they are
passed to the next generation. "I wouldn't be surprised if in another 30 years
some people will begin to argue that we ought to take charge of our own
evolution and should not be satisfied with our current biological status."

   However, he added: "I find this an interesting but somewhat chilling
discussion. I think from my own perspective that is an enterprise that I hope we
would not undertake for a long time, if ever."

   But Prof Collins gave a warning against genetic determinism, the mistaken
belief that all human characteristics can be boiled down to DNA so that people
are merely "robots that are controlled by invisible signals from our DNA
sequences".

   He said: "Understanding the human genome will not take away the concept of
free will. Understanding the human genome will not help us very much to
understand the spiritual side of humankind, or to know who God is or what love
is."

   The professor underlined this by explaining the perils of using genetics to
enhance traits, given the profound influence of environment on behaviour. He
described the example of rich parents who hoped to produce a baby genetically
enhanced to be artistic and musical but ended up with "a sullen adolescent who
smokes marijuana and doesn't talk to them".

   At the same time, computer simulations of human cells would be used in
medical research to replace animal experiments, and the average human lifespan -
in the developed world - would probably stretch to 90.

   There are a "number of significant surprises" in the forthcoming human
genetic code analysis, which will be published in Science and Nature next week
in 36 papers. "We don't have as many genes as we thought we did," he said.

   The analysis will be a "milestone of the highest order", said Prof Collins.
He added that the finished human genetic sequence would be published in 2003.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2001


                             849 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          February 07, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1420 words

HEADLINE: A toast to the new rock 'n' roll It may not have been Glastonbury, but
the mood at the science party of the year was as lively as any showbiz gig, says
Judith Woods

BYLINE: By Judith Woods

BODY:
'Hey, science, it's the new rock 'n' roll," announced Alex James of Blur,
without so much as an atom of irony. "It's exciting, it's glamorous: it's the
methodology for approaching the truth, the same way art is."

   Casting a glance around the room, full of craggy Nobel laureates and
'ologists in natty dicky bows, I could see what he meant. Almost.

   It may not have been Glastonbury - the only downpour was of champagne, and
the pharmaceuticals doing the rounds were of the research fellow variety - but
the buzz was as lively as any showbiz gig.

   Blur's interest in cosmology was applied rather than pure, explained James.
The band have written the call sign for Beagle 2, the British attempt to land on
Mars in 2003.

   Whether or not their sonic doodling is destined to become the Liliburlet of
the space-time continuum, remains to be seen. But it's all part of a growing
body of evidence that suggests science no longer exists in a parallel universe.

   "You know, it never occurred to me to name a species of snail after a rock
star," said genetics whizz Prof Steve Jones, wistfully, at the mention of
Masiakasauras knopfleri, the dinosaur recently christened after Dire Straits
singer Mark Knopfler.

   "I tended to call mine things like 'the little slimey one' or 'the big dark
one'. But if I find another, I think I might give Sergeant Pepper an honourable
mention."

   They had gathered at last week's annual Science meets the Media bash,
organised by The Daily Telegraph and the Royal Society and backed by the
healthcare giant Novartis Pharmaceuticals, represented by chairman Bill
Fullagar.

   The keynote was coaxing lesser spotted scientists out of their shells, "as
part of Novartis's commitment to developing understanding of science," as Mr
Fullagar put it.

   The lure - apart from prodigious amounts of bubbly - was the opportunity to
overcome their primal fears of the predatory press. And, of course, show off a
bit.

   Sir Harry Kroto, of the Vega Science Trust, was a slightly dishevelled Nobel
prizewinner with a Just William twinkle in his eye. On closer interrogation, he
revealed that it was for discovering a soccer-ball shaped carbon molecule. Gosh,
that must come in terribly useful, I ventured.

   "Useful? Of course it's not useful - you don't win the Nobel prize for
something useful!" he cried. "Frankly, if it's useful, the majority of people
will misuse it."

   Lord Jenkin of Roding, of the Lords select committee on science and
technology, was less cynical. Rather than being shielded, the public needed open
and transparent dialogue with scientists if they were to trust them after the
BSE debacle.

   "It's not just telling the public, it's listening to them and exchanging
views. The paradox is that popular science books and television programmes have
never been more popular, but trust in science is at an all time low."

   But despite his calls for rapprochement, it wasn't long before proof was
provided that the curse of genetic modification was upon us. Behind closed
doors, it seemed scientists had, indeed, been tinkering with everything the
nation holds dear.

   Suddenly the lights dimmed, the music swelled and a giant screen revealed the
terrifying gameshow mutation: it was time to play Who Wants to Be the Weakest
Link?

   Holding up coloured cards to denote their answers, boffins were pitted
against hacks in a Darwinian struggle for survival. At stake was a pounds 500
donation from Novartis, which would go to the Telegraph's Christmas charities if
the journalists won, and if they lost to a good cause selected by Sir Robert
May, Royal Society president. But allegations of result-rigging soon emerged.

   The neurologists complained that there was far too much maths. The BBC
pointed out there were hardly any questions on docu-soaps. But with teasers like
'What is an aminoglycoside?' (look it up), the scientists were destined to
outclass the opposition.

   "I'm glad we won, but I wasn't too happy about the formulation of the
questions," mused Dr Polina Bayvel, Royal Society University research fellow at
UCL department of electrical engineering. "They simply weren't precise enough."

   She was engaged in a diverting tete a tete with Professor Edward Pike of
Kings College. He had a money-making scheme destined to render quiz shows
obsolete.

   "We're dreaming of the next generation of quantum computers, for cracking
bank codes, that sort of thing," he explained merrily, before adding that he had
another, rather more legitimate, stratagem on the go.

   "I have a company that just floated on the Stock Exchange - scientists can be
millionaires just like everyone else."

   As the party started to swing, there were a couple of confirmed sightings of
Lord Sainsbury, the science minister, who seemed at extraordinary pains to avoid
mingling with actual (whisper it) scientists. His cameo appearance, in fact, had
a shorter life than the canapes.

   New York literary supremo, John Brockman, whose authors include Richard
Dawkins, Sir Martin Rees and Chris Stringer, showed more appreciation.

   "This is a great party," he said, raising his glass in tribute. "Where else
in the world can you get so many amazing people in one gathering? Certainly not
in the United States."

   Continuing the publishing theme, Lady Brenda Maddox, whose previous subjects
have included WB Yeats and Nora, wife of James Joyce, told me she was working on
a biography of Rosalin Franklin, whom she intriguingly described as "the Sylvia
Plath of molecular biology".

   Conjuring up rather monstrous hybrid of Shakespeare-meets-Watson-and-Crick,
the book's working title is The Dark Lady of DNA. But as proved by Dr Simon
Singh, author of Fermat's Last Theorem and The Code Book, the most unlikely
subjects can make it on to the best-seller lists.

   Dr Singh was in no mood for self-congratulation, however, and confessed that
he found the assembled great minds a rather daunting prospect. Sipping orange
juice, he had dressed for the occasion in what was presumably his party
cardigan. "I'm by far the most boring person here," he said to no one in
particular. "I never normally go out: when I had chicken pox and was in
quarantine, nobody noticed the difference."

   Depression expert Prof Lewis Wolpert, who earlier in the evening was awarded
the prestigious Royal Society Faraday Award for improving the public
understanding of science, was similarly lost in doleful contemplation. "The
public isn't interested in real principles," he sighed. "What people like is
science as magic: the uncertainty principle, chaos theory, Frankenstein images
of genetic engineering."

   As luck would have it, paranormal expert Dr Richard Wiseman from the
University of Hertfordshire happens to be an associate of the Inner Magic
Circle. I pleaded with him to share a few secrets, but he declined.

   "I'm going to Edinburgh to look for ghosts in the castle, with thermal
imaging cameras," he said. How brave, I responded in admiration. "Oh, I'm not
going on my own," he said. "That would be far too scary. I don't believe in
ghosts - but you never know."

   As we spoke, he was joined by his regular poker partner, the ubiquitous
television shrink Dr Raj Persaud and his eye surgeon wife, Dr Francesa Cordeiro,
who was in more confessional mode.

   "I've never longed to appear on Richard and Judy," said Dr Cordeiro, rather
recklessly: I imagine such mutinous talk probably amounts to lese-majesty in her
household. Her field is gene therapy, however, which is probably far too fiddly
to explain on a sofa.

   But who needs television, when they can be entertained by wind-up radio
inventor and patron saint of eccentricity, Trevor Bayliss? Although he was keen
to discuss his lofty dreams of an academy for inventors, a warm front of
glamorous weather forecasters, headed by sultry Sian Lloyd, was more preoccupied
with his electric shoes, a pair of nondescript desert boots, with pockets on the
side and the odd unidentifiable stain on the front.

   "As I walk, I apply a load to my foot and then I'm able to squirt a quantity
of electricity into my mobile phone battery, so when I walk I'm charging my
phone."

   A major drawback seemed to be the fact he had to carry three phones: one in
his pocket and one in each of his shoes, and keep swapping them around.

   "I've had a lot of interest from China, but I'd really like a British backer.
Imagine, this is free power!"

   He stomped his foot with an air of showmanship. His coterie of meteorologists
beamed in delight. Science and rock 'n' roll: perhaps not so very different
after all.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2001


                             858 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                            January 19, 2001, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 36

LENGTH: 183 words

HEADLINE: ML Labs defers Nasdaq spin-off

BYLINE: By Philip Aldrick

BODY:
DRUG development company ML Laboratories has postponed the Nasdaq flotation of
its Innovata Biomed respiratory drugs unit to await the outcome of a strategic
review.

   NM Rothschild is examining how best to improve shareholder value, but the
review will not include taking the company private. A merger, sale or partial
flotation are being considered.

   A spokesman said chairman Kevin Leech does not believe the value of the
company is reflected by the market. The drug developer is worth pounds 163m at
yesterday's closing price of 103 1/2 p, a 9pc fall.

   Its patented UCOE technology, which speeds up examining the human genome, has
just been licensed for pounds 1m to Couter, a US biotechnology company. ML will
share in any royalties from new products.

   The announcement coincided with full-year results that showed turnover up
26pc to pounds 11.9m. The figure included pounds 1.5m from the acquisition of
Cobra Therapeutics, a gene therapy company.

   Losses widened from pounds 6.9m to pounds 11.8m as research and development
costs grew by pounds 4m.
[PS]City: [ES]

   Questor Column:

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2001


                             868 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           December 05, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 28

LENGTH: 648 words

HEADLINE: Coming soon: pre-programming a painless death acid test

BYLINE: By Matt Ridley

BODY:
A man who called a radio station in Sheffield and admitted to injecting his
mother with a lethal dose of morphine is now being investigated by the police.
In Britain, the law may give the police no option but to press charges for
murder. Assuming that he is telling the truth about her suffering at the end, he
may be punished for an act of kindness.

   The recent law legalising euthanasia in the Netherlands would not save him,
because Dutch doctors may only kill their patients who expressly and voluntarily
request death. In Britain, even that is illegal.

   Surely an adult should be free to do anything he or she wishes, so long as it
does no harm to others. Acceding to a request from somebody in pain for a
comfortable death is a wholly victimless crime. To argue that it encourages
murder is plainly nonsense.

   It is extremely improbable that a murderer would ever disguise his crime as
euthanasia: Dr Harold Shipton, after all, needed no encouragement from the law
to use the methods of euthanasia for murder.

   Nor would euthanasia generally "lessen respect for human life", as is
sometimes claimed. These philosophical platitudes have no place in such a
debate.

   A patient who wishes to die may have his or her own reasons. It is not the
state's role to overrule these with some grand epigram, because the state has no
standing in the criminal law except as a proxy for a victim - and there is no
victim.

   So Britain should follow the Dutch lead and carefully define the
circumstances under which voluntary euthanasia is legal. Of course, one form of
euthanasia is, in effect, already practised here. A doctor may kill his patient
if the only way he can alleviate the pain is with a lethal dose of painkiller.
But this "double-effect" doctrine is too ambiguous, and is illogical while
euthanasia remains illegal.

   It does, however, point to a part of the argument that is often forgotten.
The Netherlands is more liberal than Britain in its practice not only of
euthanasia, but also of palliative medicine as well.

   Pain and palliation centres are attached to most hospitals. The development
of palliative care is far more important than euthanasia. If palliative care is
done well, then it reduces the demand for euthanasia. Palliation means killing
the pain, not the patient.

   Many old and ill people are rightly in terror of ending up dying slowly in a
hospital bed, where boredom, lack of dignity and a friendless atmosphere add to
the pain and fear. If there were more and better palliative options, focusing on
the comfort rather than the cure of the patient, then there might be fewer
candidates for euthanasia in the first place.

   Palliative drugs are improving rapidly.

   These death dilemmas are getting worse, because medical research is better at
curing the causes of sudden death than the causes of gradual death. Heart
surgery and antibiotics save people from dying quickly, and increase their
chances of cancer, osteoporosis and Alzheimer's disease.

   There is no sign yet that medicine has found a way to improve the quality of
life in its last few years, even as it pushes those last few years into later
decades.

   A much better cure for cancer, for example - which seems quite likely to
emerge from the Human Genome Project in the next 10 or 20 years - will not even
reduce the rate of cancer incidence.

   Because cancer risk increases exponentially with age, the cured person will
keep getting cancer with rising frequency until he dies of something else.

   A few decades from now, when longevity and debility are even more inevitable
than now, I suspect we will be debating something new: the pre-programming of a
painless death.

   People might be given gene therapy to equip them with a rapid and painless
death at a particular age. They could then choose in advance to die at, say 90,
rather than linger in pain into their 110s. Voluntary advance euthanasia?

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2000


                             870 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          December 02, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 02

LENGTH: 315 words

HEADLINE: Phytopharm is a natural selection the questor column

BYLINE: Edited by Rosie Murray-West

BODY:
CREATING cures based on herbs and plants may sound more like white witchcraft
than business, but Phytopharm has been doing pretty well so far.

   The company, headed by Buddhist scientist Richard Dixey, works on the
principle that there is some truth behind those herbal remedies passed down
through generations.

   It's a truth that has already been proved in several instances, including
digitalis and aspirin (from foxgloves and willows). Phytopharm hopes it can
prove to the market that currently trendy gene therapy is not the only way
forward.

   Phytopharm's products are not health shop fodder, but serious drugs which are
progressing through the same clinical trials as any other treatments.

   The company's leading product, an anti-obesity drug originally made from a
plant used by tribesmen to suppress appetite before hunting, is being developed
in collaboration with Pfizer.

   The American drug giant is best known for Viagra, and is a big name for a
small company to have on side.

   Aside from the anti-obesity drug, which may also have applications for
adult-onset diabetes, Phytopharm is developing drugs for Alzheimer's, canine
eczema and several other diseases. The pipeline looks strong and data for these
drugs is encouraging.

   The company is not profitable, but analysts forecast that it will break even
by 2004. A recent placing raised over pounds 10m, which should be enough to see
the group through to profitability. The fact that the money was raised at a
premium to the share price in current market conditions highlights the high
esteem in which the company is held.

   At 664p this week, the shares aren't cheap. However, some experts are
claiming they could double. If Phytopharm could crack Alzheimer's, it would be
worth billions.

   The company also has several strong products that could come good. A risky
buy.
[PS]City: [ES]

   Your Money - Stock market:

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2000


                             872 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          November 23, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 09

LENGTH: 157 words

HEADLINE: Gene hope over diabetes

BYLINE: By Roger Highfield Science Editor

BODY:
A SINGLE dose of gene therapy can bring about long-term remission of type 1
diabetes in rats, with no detectable adverse effects, paving the way for
clinical trials in humans.

   The disease, which affects 60,000 people in Britain, is the most severe form
of diabetes.

   Diabetics produce insufficient insulin, the hormone-regulating blood sugar
levels. The work reported today by scientists in Korea and Canada marks the
first time an animal with this early onset form of diabetes has been cured and
shows a way to sidestep the underlying process that causes the disease.

   Dr Ji-Won Yoon, of the University of Calgary, along with Dr Hyun Chul Lee and
colleagues at Yonsei University, Seoul, report in the magazine, Nature, that
they can cure rodents of diabetes by using a transplant of a human gene to
enable them to make a form of insulin.

   Dr Yoon said tests on humans could begin in about four to seven years.
[PS]News: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2000


                             878 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                          November 11, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: Pg. 08

LENGTH: 1611 words

HEADLINE: Seeking a gene for sinlessness SCIENCE Just as we are defining what it
is to be human, humans could lose control of their world, says Maggie Gee

BYLINE: BY MAGGIE GEE

BODY:
This year's science books question everything about what it means to be human.
How is our place in the world changed by new knowledge about our genes, about
brain chemistry, and about intelligence - animal, human and artificial?

   The visionary scientist James Lovelock, now in his eighties, has published
his autobiography, Homage to Gaia (Oxford, pounds 19.99). Sometimes lacking in
self-awareness and more frank than literary, it is nevertheless modest, human,
humorous and in the best sense eccentric. It was his novelist friend William
Golding who suggested Gaia as a title for Lovelock's theory that living
organisms are basically symbiotic and together help to achieve global stability
of temperature, so the planet behaves like a self-regulating "super-organism".
The metaphor irritated many scientists but caught on with non-scientists, and
the revolutionary thinking behind it has slowly been absorbed, often uncredited,
into mainstream scientific thinking.

   A joyous chapter tells how finally, in his eighth decade, Lovelock's
independence of mind paid off, when he was garlanded with international prizes.
This chimes with Andrew Brown's wide-ranging The Darwin Wars (Touchstone, pounds
7.99 pbk), which begins and ends with the story of a brilliant scientist, George
Price, whose pioneering equations seemed to prove W D Hamilton's idea that even
altruism can ultimately be explained by Darwinian self-interest. But Price was
torn between his equations and Christian teachings about disinterested goodness;
his self-sacrificing charity to the homeless finally brought him to penury in a
squat, and suicide. Brown takes many sidelong looks at the war between science
and religion in this fascinating study of the conflict between Darwinian
evolutionary psychologists (once known as sociobiologists) and their critics.

   This year the Human Genome Project triumphantly announced a provisional kind
of completion, though, as Lovelock remarks, "with each discovery the extent of
the unknown grows larger, not smaller". Matt Ridley's clear and lively
"whistlestop tour" of the field, Genome: the Autobiography of a Species in 23
Chapters (Fourth Estate, pounds 8.99 pbk), managed to strike both notes: "We
stand on the brink of great new answers but, even more, of great new questions."

   Evolutionary psychologists are gripping story-tellers, but some of their
books are so easy to read that you start to worry about how all the knots of
thought were smoothed out. One such is Dean Hamer and Peter Copeland's Living
with Our Genes (Pan, pounds 6.99 pbk), which illuminates human behaviour with
the cheery light of pop genetic explanation.

   Mark Ridley gave us something more demanding, Mendel's Demon (Weidenfeld,
pounds 20), which explains the rise of sex in complex life forms as a way of
keeping genetic copying errors low; faulty genes may be concentrated in
offspring who die without reproducing. Now, however, Ridley sees human beings at
a genetic crossroads, because medical advances in rich countries mean that for
the first time we are not discarding genetic mutations as fast as they arise.
Ridley believes gene therapy will patch us up. But then, he likes prophecy, both
playful and apocalyptic:

   After fire and brimstone, our descendants will reinvent themselves as
fire-adapted flowers and cover the scorched earth with fresh foliage. And when
the last trump sounds, they will express the gene for sinlessness, and glide
down the rivers of Paradise into eternity.

   This is beautiful but alarming; evolutionary psychologists, always dashing
entrepreneurs of metaphor, are becoming the asset-strippers of religion.

   The philosopher Mary Midgley analyses the fundamentalist religious strain in
evolutionary psychology in her contribution to Hilary and Steven Rose's
stimulating collection of essays, Alas, Poor Darwin (Cape, pounds 17.99), which
anyone interested in this debate must read. Distinguished contributors such as
Stephen Jay Gould and Patrick Bateson insist on the importance of learning and
development and resist the herding of all human behaviour down "a Darwinian
straight and narrow". Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza, the greatest of population
geneticists, links genes to wider, deeper patterns of history and culture in his
beautifully clear and factual chronicle of migrations, Genes, Peoples and
Languages (Allen Lane, pounds 18.99). He tells us that an increase in genetic
diversity (and consequent genetic health) is coming about through the mixing of
populations.

   But not only human populations are mixing. The Biography of a Germ by Arno
Karlen (Gollancz, pounds 16.99) records in elegant, leisured prose the history
of "Bb", Borrelia Burgdorferi, a spiral bacterium four-millionths of an inch
long, which spreads to humans through ticks on mice and deer, giving us the
unpleasant, lingering Lyme disease. He blames the "ecological romanticism" of
those who resist deer culls for the recent success of the bacterium.

   If you muddle up your bacteria and your viruses, Dorothy Crawford's short,
lucid survey, The Invisible Enemy (Oxford, pounds 14.99), will sort you out once
and for all. Viruses are up to 500 times smaller than bacteria, mere fragments
of genetic material that must hi-jack the cells of another organism to survive.
Crawford told me at least one thing I only half-wanted to know - that
raspberry-pickers have sometimes urinated into the barrel of fruit intended for
jam in order to increase its weight, and therefore their wages. Which proves how
intelligent and, alas, how frequently lacking in altruism our species is.

   And yet we are only just beginning to come to grips with the neurochemistry
of our brains. Susan Greenfield's fast, sparkily written The Private Life of the
Brain (Allen Lane, pounds 18.99) looked at the way different states of emotional
and physical arousal affect the strange electrical sludge within our skulls;
surprisingly, in depression there are more neurons firing up there, rather than
fewer.

   Antonio Damasio searches for consciousness in The Feeling of What Happens
(Vintage, pounds 8.99 pbk), a quietly remarkable, subtle book that avoids
Greenfield's division between the intellectual "self/mind" and the rebellious
emotions, managing to seat the internal narrative of the self deep within the
body, where emotion begins.

   Such a definition of consciousness would surely potentially extend it to
animals, which would please Jeffrey Masson, author of The Emperor's Embrace
(Vintage, pounds 7.99 pbk), whose survey of tender fatherhood in, for example,
penguins and wolves convinced him that "animals felt many of the same emotions
as we do, and felt them just as powerfully". Kenan Malik's long, impassioned
Man, Beast and Zombie (Weidenfeld, pounds 20) takes the opposite view:

   No animal possesses either language or a social network like ours. Therefore
it is simply not valid to assume they have inner experiences as we do. From a
scientific point of view, animals are zombies.

   Marc Hauser in Wild Minds (Allen Lane, pounds 18.99) finds himself curiously
divided. He gives a fascinating account of experiments with rhesus monkeys that
prove some will actually do without food if eating means pulling a chain that
may give an electric shock to another monkey, yet he spends pages anxiously
justifying his conviction that animals are morally of a lower order than we are
- doubtful, in view of the nastiness of the experiments.

   Kevin Warwick, Professor of Cybernetics at Reading, insists that the
intelligence of animals and machines is not dissimilar in kind from that of
humans in QI: The Quest for Intelligence (Piatkus, pounds 16.99). Warwick is a
showman with a silicon chip implanted in his left arm, but this reader warmed to
the story of his disastrous attempt to train the first robot to run a
half-marathon. The robot attempted to follow the low sun rather than the
infra-red transmitter on Warwick's back, crashed into the kerb and became
instead the first robot to sustain an athletic injury. Warwick also makes some
excellent points about the human tendency to cheat when defining intelligence,
so that neither machines nor animals can qualify. His conclusion is sobering:

   It is difficult to think of any area of human intelligence . . . in which a
machine will not soon be able to out-perform us. The intelligence of the future
is certainly the intelligence of networks.

   In Peter Menzel and Faith D'Aluisio's stylish picture-book, Robo Sapiens
(MIT, pounds 19.95), Shigeo Hirose, one of the pioneers of Japanese robotics,
criticises the attempt to build robots who look or think like humans:

   The human mind is a product of evolution, but a robot that we make ourselves
should be very different. For humans, being intelligent is easy, but being
unselfish is rather impossible.

   Mark Ward, in Virtual Organisms (Pan, pounds 6.99 pbk) makes a similar point:
we need new, uncentralised computer programmes to run our overstressed telephone
systems, and they are going to be more like ants, collective organisms without
memory or individual agendas, than humans. But Ward warns that if, as seems
likely, we hand over vital systems to more advanced virtual organisms, able to
mutate randomly and reproduce, there will very soon be no way for humans to
retrieve control.

   Which leads me to wonder - just how intelligent are we? Maybe, in the face of
the silicon invasion, we should listen more carefully to James Lovelock, the
sociobiologists, and ordinary gardeners and animal-lovers, who all in their
different ways tell us how much we have in common with our fellow DNA-based life
forms on this planet.
[PS]Art and Books: [ES]

   Books:

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2000


                             880 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Telegraph Group Limited
                          THE DAILY TELEGRAPH(LONDON)

                           November 07, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 36

LENGTH: 180 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy cancer drug is 'a major step forward'

BYLINE: By Rosie Murray-West

BODY:
ALAN Kingsman, chief executive of Oxford Biomedica, said the group's new cancer
drug could be on the shelves in five years time, after the product passed its
latest clinical trials.

   The drug, called MetXia, uses gene therapy to treat tumours. "We are able to
get some indication of the effectiveness of the drug," Professor Kingsman said.

   "In the past, gene therapy has been quite substantially lumbered by not being
able to get the gene into the tumour. Now we have solved some of the key
technical difficulties.

   "This is a major step forward, and in principle, the process could be used to
deliver other drugs."

   Oxford Biomedica aims to develop MetXia as a product in its own right as well
as as part of a combination that induces the immune system to destroy tumours.
The company also wants to release the drug in selected formulations to achieve
tumour targeting.

   "We're not making any great claims yet," Professor Kingsman said. "But the
trials have gone the way that they thought they would."

   Oxford Biomedica shares rose 3 1/2 to 81 1/2 p.
[PS]City: [ES]

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2000
